One of the things that make these forests magical is that the trees are so tall that everything is shaded. The area stays moist and it stays cool. If like me you grew up around trees, you love them. But you also think you know them. A tree is a tree. It has a trunk, branches, and leafy bits or alternatively, piney bits. What else do I need to know? But tree species are wildly diverse. Some produce flowers. Others thrive in salt water. And some are favored by broostine butterflies. Then there are those trees that require superlatives to describe. Will walk among trees that can become some of the oldest in the world. These trees grow really fast. And so even in that period which is just over 100 years that they've been growing, they've been able to achieve these tremendous heights. And that's why when you look up, they look like they just go on and on and on. You can't even see the very tip tops. I'm Molly Bentley and welcome to Big Picture Science. We'll branch out in this episode. Meet some trees, consider our shared future, and ask whether the best things in life are trees. Imagine a world where no plants grew higher than your waste. You could still enjoy strolling through lush grassland or a flowering meadow. But you'd never have the profound pleasure of resting in the shade of a giant. I think one of the truisms about the coast redwood is that it's so big that it really relocates you in space and away. And I remember walking up to one of these really giant redwoods for the very first time and it was like being against the side of a cliff. Because they're so wide that you can't really see the curvature to either side. And so it's very much like something other than a tree I suppose. But of course when you stand back and you see them in the distance, you really then can take in their treeness and their extraordinary size. There are trillions of trees in the world and they're found on every continent except Antarctica. More than a dozen different species may grace your neighborhood. But unless the wind blows, you might not notice them. It's easy to take these silent centuries for granted rather than marvel at what extraordinary examples of adaptation they are. Or consider that the human relationship with trees is ancient, extending all the way back to our primate ancestors who lived in them. Hi, I'm Daniel Lewis. I'm the Dibner Senior Curator for the History of Science and Technology at the Huntington Library Art Museum and Botanical Gardens in Southern California. There's nothing like working at a botanical gardens with 200 acres of gardens and grounds and trees. And I was walking through the Huntington grounds one day and I got to thinking about in terms of trees. I mean I think if we can understand that they need saving, for instance, and we feel a sense of urgency about them, we might see the common ground that we occupy with them. Of the more than 73,000 species of trees in the world, Dan Lewis zeroed in on a handful for his book, 12 trees, the deep roots of our future. And in this episode, we'll meet a few of those species, including the one that towers over them all. We begin and set this episode among redwoods because they both help us understand the plight of all trees and show us what a tree can do when it grows to extremes. Perhaps no other species has inspired as many superlatives, as that which line the coast of California and Southern Oregon. Hi, I'm Kevin Dixon. I'm a naturalist with the East Bay Regional Park District. And where are we? We are in Dr. Aurelia, Reinhardt, Redwood Regional Park. The trails wind through the woods and you're walking on a soft ground that's created by the redwood needles and twigs. This redwood cone here on the ground, it's hard to believe that the tree grows from that tiny thing. Well, yeah, and in fact what it grows from is even tinier. So what we're looking at is a little redwood cone. And if you're thinking of a pine cone, this is much, much smaller of the size of the tip of my thumb, I would say. And then it's got these scales and you can kind of look through it because this one's already opened up. And in between these scales are where it stores its seeds. And so at a certain point the scales open up, releases the seeds and they start on out on that hopeful journey. Well, very few of them will become redwood trees. So from that tiny seed becomes a tree like this one in front of us, which goes up and now scrapes the sky. Yes. First and foremost, the redwood's extraordinary height is one of the most astounding things about it. And it comes up to just shy of 400 feet that tall is known tree. Is this the time when we should look up? This is definitely the time to look up. Yeah. I'm going to steady myself by putting my hand on the bark of this tree and look up. How does it feel? It gives me a little vertigo. They're so tall. Yeah. And one thing that kind of makes it more impressive I think is that as the redwood trees grow, they realize that their lower branches aren't as much used to them anymore. So they just let go of them. So you're looking all the way up into the high branches. But what you can see is the sunlight coming through the needles or they leaves. Well, they're both. And needle is a kind of a leaf. So they just have these small leaves and that helps them to not lose too much water, just like pines. Does it make sense to you from an evolutionary perspective that these trees have gotten so tall? Yes. And one of the things that helps me to make sense of their height, where we are in California and we're in the part of California where you have a Mediterranean climate. So it can be hot and dry in the summertime. And so one thing that these redwoods are able to do is create their own climate. Their own little climate for their own little community here. And they can do that by shading the ground and growing up taller than the other trees. Now, these trees are tall. They can grow even taller. These redwoods. They can grow to three times this height, which is unimaginable. How do they compare with the giant Sequoia? The giant Sequoia is a name that people call this huge related tree, not this tree, that grows up in the Sierra Nevada mountains. And so that one is the biggest tree in the world. So it has the most volume of any tree in the world, whereas this one, the coast redwood, is also very, very huge, not quite as big by volume, but much taller. And so one of the crazy things about California and the diversity of California is that in California, there's the tallest tree in the world. There's the biggest tree in the world and the oldest tree in the world, all here. That's kind of crazy. How old can a redwood get? And what is the tree that is actually older than a redwood? So the coast redwood can clear a thousand years in terms of age. But there's a tree that's five times older than that, the bristle cone pine, pineus longa eva. Its longevity is actually baked into its scientific name. And it grows at high altitude in a band of land in the American West and Southwest. And you'd never guess their age from their size, because they're gnarled survivors. They're twisted, they're stunted, and sometimes, in some cases, they're bent so far over from the winds that they're horizontal to the ground. And they only get to 20 or 30 feet at the very tallest. They're, you know, five, five, the oldest one is just cleared 5,000 years old. Do we understand how these methusolatries, the redwoods, and the bristle cone pine, what the secret is to their longevity? You know, this is perhaps a theory of mine. I think that the fact that they're subjected to stresses is what helps them survive. Because when any organism is subjected to some kind of a stress, it has to figure out how to evolve to manage that stress. And so there are very selective pressures. And the fact that it's really windy up there and cold and that the soil is poor seems to have pushed the bristle cone pine to survive and to keep surviving. And so I think it's perhaps something about the fact that these pressures really, for lack, perhaps, of a better term, keep it busy. And I think the same is probably true to a degree for the coast redwood. They also tend to grow in groves and as a result, they're clustered together in a way that protects them from the wind. They're at least sort of distributes the wind more evenly across a group of trees. And I think that helps them a lot because if they were solo trees all alone, I think you'd find they would fall over much more readily. And of course, they do fall over. And if you're up in a redwood forest, one of the things you're struck by is that a number of them are sort of leaning collegially against other redwoods. So this tree looks like it's fallen or it's leaning? It is leaning. Wow, look at this. The way it's leaning right across the trail. So we have to walk under it. It's kind of at a 45 degree angle and it's leaning on some other trees on the other side of the trail. It's partially uprooted but it certainly has not given up. So what it has decided to do is regrow branches from the base of its trunk. So we're walking under these branches. These branches are actually growing from the trunk. Exactly, but they're growing lower down, which you don't see on any of the other trees. So it's reorienting itself. To the sun? Yes. So it's a little more clever than you might expect. A lot of its roots are out of the ground. Some of them are still in the ground and it's leaning across the trail into a clump of redwood trees on the other side. And branches are coming all out of the trunk. So it's fun. You're walking under a green arch as you come through here. And do you think those trees over there that are helping support it? Mind doing that? No. And if you look around you, you'll see clusters of trees and each tree has a reddish, brownish, soft, furrowed bark. And if you go closer to them and get a better view, you can touch the bark and feel it. And you feel it's kind of soft and this bark will protect the trees when a fire comes through. I mean, this feels like substantial bark. So redwoods have evolved exceptional fire resilience. Their bark is very thick. And so this probably became more and more pronounced over time over the centuries in the millennia. In fact, over tens of thousands of years or hundreds of thousands of years, as the fire regimes in their ranges fluctuated, especially during drier periods. And for instance, redwoods really rely heavily on coastal fog. Kevin, in what ways is the story of the redwood, the story of water? So it gets very hot and dry in California during the summer. It pulls moisture in from the ocean, and especially at night and in the early morning that comes in in the form of fog. And so these redwoods need a lot of water because they have to get the water all the way up to their leaves. They're high in the trees. It can condense on the leaves of the redwoods and their expert at condensing the water on their leaves. And then once it gets to a certain size, it makes a drop and that will drop down to where their roots can get it. So they make their own rain from the fog. So does that mean that a redwood is collecting water from the top, from the sky, and also from the ground? Yeah, that's correct. And one really interesting thing about how this works, how they collect water from the leaves is, I think it's still not fully understood, but it appears that they have a fungal partner that actually lives inside the tree, is not damaging the tree in any way, but is helping them to collect that water through the leaves. I think we could all point out a tree. We know one when we see one. I don't know if we all know what the definition of a tree is. So Dan, what is a tree and what makes a tree a tree and not a shrub? That's such a great question. You might be shocked to hear this, but there is no really solid definition of a tree. And I was told this by Jim Fulsom, who is the director of the Botanical Gardens at the Huntington a few years ago when I started in on this work. There are some characteristics, okay. And so trees are typically taller than, say, shrubs. They have stems. Trees are usually characterized by a single dominant woody stem or a trunk. And then they typically have a crown of some kind, a distinct canopy or a crown, and the branches start higher up from the trunk, whereas shrubs are a little more compact and a little more dense. And then they serve different ecological functions. You know, trees often form the dominant layer of a forest canopy, so they give shade and habitat for lots of things. And shrubs typically are in the understory in a forest. So there's a fuzzy boundary, but you know, I think this is perhaps not very satisfying, but you know a tree when you see one. I think it's safe to say. Here we are. We're standing and looking at the bark of these trees. If I look behind this tree, that's in front of me, the one that I'm touching right now, I see there's a ring of trees with a hollow space in the middle. And if you look up in the ring, it's just a beautiful view of the blue sky, just high above you. And the reason this hollow is there is because there was once a tree present in the hollow at the center of this ring. And we can even see remnants of the original stump. This was cut down to build San Francisco and all the housing here in the San Francisco Bay area, right after the Gold Rush. And then again, after the San Francisco earthquake of 1906. So what we're looking at here are actually the third generation of redwoods. And what is miraculous about that is that if you can imagine when this area was cut all the way down to the ground, all the vegetation was seared by the sun. And if you had looked at it, then you would have thought there was no hope of regeneration. But redwoods are tremendously strong and they have a root system which links them all together. So after they cut these trees down to the short stumps, those roots supplied the young saplings that grew from the old stumps. And they were able to regenerate and create the redwood forest that we see now. So these, the ring of trees around this hollow area are those saplings. And did the mother tree drop the cones that made these saplings? Is that why there's a ring around what used to be the tree? No, in one sense, these trees are the mother tree. But wait, I'm sorry, they are the mother tree? Yes, they are the mother tree because when that stump was cut down, there are buds around the base of that mother tree and they're nursed by that root network that I talked about. And then those little shoots like you can see here that are around the base of these trees now, they grew up to become these big trees that we're leaning against right now. Does that mean that all the, all new trees are the continuation of the old tree? That is true in this park, almost all of them. Occasionally they do come up from seed, but that's a pretty rare occurrence here. Unless they are swaying in the wind, trees often appear inert. They look like they're not moving, but they're actually a hubbub of activity. And I wonder if you could describe the kind of activity that's going on and within trees. There's so much happening with trees, it's so much challenging to summarize, but let me just say first of all, there are processes. So, you know, that are happening with trees. There's photosynthesis, there's growth upward and upward and then downward into the ground. There's the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide and so on. And the redwood is a superb example of how trees are symbiotes, you know, how they really have these ecosystems with a variety of insects and amphibians and the California condors nest in the coast redwood. So, one of the few trees big enough to nest a condor. I'm glad that you're a dryner eye up, you know, where the condors are, but even more than that, there is a whole ecosystem that exists in the canopy of redwoods. Bialogists love to climb trees and you have to have an affinity for being at high altitude to climb a tree and so some botanists have an affinity for climbing trees. And those that are willing to do so have encountered extraordinary things up high in the canopy so they've discovered new species of earthworms, they've discovered grass growing up on high, they've discovered trees growing within. There's a sitka spruce that was discovered growing up 10 feet tall, up in the canopy of the redwood. There's a species of salamander called the wandering salamander that spends almost all of its life up in the canopy. The other thing about the wandering salamander is not only does it live up there, but if it's disturbed and it needs to get away from something it jumps out of the tree and the shape of their body is just such that it creates enough drag that they don't die when they land. There almost like flying squirrels or something. But it takes them a couple minutes to fall from the top of the tall trees as a long time to be airborne, it strikes me. What do you think about that Dan? Do you think you would like to live your life up in a redwood and then when it was time to leave just parachute gently down to the floor? There would be a trap advantage just to living up high in a tree. You certainly say from the rest of the world until someone decides to cut you down then you've got a sort of an existential difficulty. Certainly the coast redwood which used to dominate the west coast or grew much more widely, at least those primordial growth, the old growth are limited to just a few small areas now. One of the things I'll say that's great is the trees really are very well protected now, which is not the case for many other important species of trees. They're mostly on national park land, they're well cared for, they're warts, there's a whole coterie of botanists that tend to them in the sense of they make sure that they're safe. Well Kevin we'd like to turn to you now as someone who spends a lot of time with trees and particularly redwood trees when dances that trees can live up to a thousand years, the bristle cone pine, five thousand years. Do you ever reflect Kevin on the fact that generations of people have been looking at some of these same trees? I absolutely do, it's something that I often reflect on and hundreds of generations, not just since the gold rush and since this place became part of the United States, but hundreds of generations of people have lived here and appreciated these trees and honored them. And the other big question, have you ever had a wandering salamander drop on your head? No, that's something that I look forward to and then I would enjoy watching it start its climb back up the trunk. How long do you think it takes to get back to the top of the tree? Oh my gosh from what I've seen they're pretty slow, a week? I don't know. Coming up how trees first emerged and the swamp species that is helping protect Louisiana wetlands as we continue making the case that the best things in life are trees on big picture science. This episode is brought to you by Audi. The road is calling. Embrace the thrill of the drive with the all new fully electric Audi Q6 e-tron featuring effortless power, serious acceleration, an advanced Audi tech. It's not just a new EV, it's a new way to experience driving. The all new fully electric Audi Q6 e-tron is here. The next chapter of Audi starts now. Trees are remarkable companions. They provide us with timber and shade, sequester carbon and release oxygen and service homes to countless organisms. One such organism was us. Our primate ancestors stopped swaying from trees and started walking on the ground nearly four million years ago. Well we may have left our forest habitats but we haven't stopped walking among trees. We continue our Redwood Forest walk with naturalist Kevin Dixon. We've been talking about Redwoods but what are some of the companion trees in this area? So some of the trees that would be right around us here, maple growing right here along the creek, alders which grow with their toes in the water, oak which cover the hill sides and bay trees are all over the place too. So the bay trees are these really fragrant trees. Another name for the bay tree is the pepper wood because they have a spicy leaves. I do encourage people to hug the trees and even to put their cheek up against the tree, it gives you a different sensation of what it's like to be in a forest because the forest is a very, very quiet place, especially the Redwood. You notice a particular kind of quiet when you're in a Redwood Forest so you kind of stop, you're taking that quiet and you come up to a Redwood tree, you touch it and if you want to get to know it even more intimately, I know it sounds a little silly but it's something that I actually do with people when I go out on walks. You put your cheek up against the tree, you lean against it and you wrap your arms around it and you can still do that with these trees because they're not quite giants yet. Okay, I'm going to do that. So I'm going to wrap my arms around the tree, put my cheek against it. It's so solid. It's so steady, it's actually quite calming. It is, yes. Yeah. I've heard you say in other conversations that you're a tree person and my fellow tree people, what are tree people and can you be a tree person and a people person? Oh, that is such a good question, Molly. Sometimes you feel like you're more of a tree person and sometimes you feel like you're more of a people person, I think is the way it goes. And so lately I think I've been more focused on trees which doesn't mean that I'm ignoring people entirely. Trees emerged on earth long before humans did, of course. Their key adaptations, roots, wood and leaves allowed them to access more sunlight and water. Environmental historian Dan Lewis describes the earliest appearance of trees. Yeah, so trees are old and they really evolved from really early land plants during the Devonian period, which was if you remember your high school or college geology or botany was about 400 million years ago. And the very first tree like plants were, they were probably ferns with woody tissue and they started developing these vascular systems from moving water and nutrients around through this vascular tissue. They started developing actual leaves and leaves are really an essential component for trees because you need a big surface area for photosynthesis and then seeds come along, not much later, say 100 million years later. And then flowers come along and then they start to really diversify and they really start changing ecosystems as a result of that. They start oxygenating the atmosphere. The planet used to be much, much lower percentage of oxygen than it has now. They started to store carbon which led to climate regulation and the formation of coal deposits, soil development and so on. So they really reshaped earth's climate and the atmosphere and their landscapes, which suddenly made them central to life as we know it. Even before humans came along, they really were an essential part of the environment. You know, reading your book, I found myself wondering what the world looked like before humans started cutting trees down. And we have any sense what it would have been like to walk around when trees were not being cut down in the numbers they are by humans. What would the world have been like? I think it would be shocking to people because first of all the amount of stands of forest, old growth forest, really old trees that have gone through long, had long lives dominated the continents to greater or lesser degrees and in North America. You know, they stretched for millions of millions of acres and you wouldn't know it from the ground. But if somehow in the magical way you could lift yourself up in a balloon 5,000 years ago, you would be gobsmacked to see how much the forest extent constituted. It just spread for thousands of miles in some directions and because there was no reason for that not to be the case. You know, they were the dominant species. The other thing I'll say about forests early on in the human experiences, for a lot of people they were terrifying. Big forests because they were not the romantic places we think of forests. Now they were dark, full of unknowns, full of terrifying, dangerous things. So, you know, settlers in North America land and they're these forests and they quickly start cutting them down to make use of them. But there are constant people that talk about how terrifying it was to be out in the middle of these dark forests by themselves. There are many tree species, more than 70,000 I think. In each one has its own way, its own strategy for staying alive and thriving. And while all trees need water, the bald cypress tree thrives with part of its trunk and roots in water. This is the state tree of Louisiana and if anyone's seen one, you know, that they can be quite haunting to look at standing there in the water draped with Spanish moss. I wonder if you could describe for us how the bald cypress is able to survive partly submerged. It's a remarkable adaptation. It's got these buttressed roots and it's been an open question for a couple hundred years just to exactly how they stay afloat. And the buttressed roots are tapered down into the water and it gives it a very solid base. Down are the roots, the buttressed roots the same as the knees, what are called the knees of the cypress. Completely different thing, would you believe? So, let me just say the trees adapted to have these unusually long root systems that really helped the anchor the tree and this really muddy, saturated soil. But the knees are something completely different. There are these still-like projections that rise maybe a foot or more above the water line and they're kind of placed around the tree. And people thought for a long time that these knees were sort of an aid to camp to the roots that they carried oxygen down into the water, like a kind of a root snorkel perhaps. But then these studies have shown that there's no oxygen or carbon dioxide exchange between the roots and the knees. And so we don't really know why these knees are there. Even though they're relatively easy to get to and they're relatively easy to test, we just don't really understand at all. I'm interested to hear you say they're easy to get to and I think you mean once you put on your waders or step into your kayak and go into the swamp because that's where the bald cypress lives in that brackish water, that mixture of fresh and salt water. Deep in the Louisiana swamps, not just Louisiana, but- I was going to say easy to get to as a relative term and I was thinking of, you know, if you have to climb 300 feet up into the canopy of a coast redwood, I find that would be harder than getting in a kayak and paddling happily to a bald cypress relatively speaking. Yeah. Keep your eye out for the water snakes and the alligators. There's a striking illustration of how the bald cypress can hold up, how sturdy they are. Could you describe the underwater forest that scientists found in the last dozen years or so off the coast of Alabama in the Gulf waters? Yeah, it's extraordinary. So divers came upon this bald cypress forest that was more than 70,000 years old, it turns out about 60 feet underwater and it was actually several miles off the coast of Alabama in the Gulf of Mexico. The trees, of course, were dead, but they were still standing in place. They were arranged as a forest. Some of the trees were still upright, some laid flat where they had fallen, probably before they were overcome by the ocean. And it had probably been uncovered by Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and it probably became an artificial reef. So there are all sorts of species and it was swarming with life and these logs for these trees were huge. And some of the stumps for six feet in diameter and they were probably, they were probably thousands of years old before they died. And one of the things I find most astounding is when they brought some to the service and they cut them, they released this sap odor in this odor of fresh cypress. So, you know, they carried this whole cargo of organic content and those samples are super useful and you can actually do dendro chronological analysis on those trees because they're dead, they can be cut. And you can then study the trees and their tree rings to see what climatic conditions were like 70,000 years ago. So, super important and super useful for being able to understand environmental conditions quite a long time ago through these tree rings. The bald cypress is also holding together Louisiana wetlands because those roots are holding together that precious sediment which forms the land which is eroding. And the cypress is threatened because of logging, because of the disappearance of the wetlands and in Louisiana the swamps are becoming more salty because the levees are cutting off fresh water from the Mississippi. That is a whole story of many, many things happening there on the Gulf Coast. What is the plan for saving these trees or maybe we should start with what is the fate of the bald cypress and is there a plan for saving these trees? I think it's probably, first of all, say it's to their benefit that they are not on dry land because it does make it more difficult to log and harvest trees in swamp lands and, you know, areas that are saturated with water. There are some particular things that tend to be difficult for the bald cypress. One of the things that's happening as sea level rise increases around the world because of climate change, higher concentrations of salt water come up to the habitat of the trees. And so, it's a really kind of a natural, unnatural threat in that it's natural in that it's salt water, it's unnatural in that climate change. Human caused climate change has led to these difficulties. I just want to clarify one thing here because we're talking about these waters becoming more, more saline, but we did say earlier that these are brackish waters. So, the bald cypress can live in salty water if the ratios are right. The problem is, is that it's becoming too salty. That's exactly right. There's too much salt and it is the case with so many things. A little is okay, but a lot is too much. So, as soon as the salt content starts rising, the tree starts doing poorly. And it kills the trees once it gets too salty. And so, of course, as sea levels rise, more ocean water infiltrates these harbors and areas where the trees are located. And so, one very recent and promising approach has been to inoculate the trees to improve their saline resilience by using what are called salt tolerant endophytes, which are fungi and bacteria that they can then essentially inject into the trees. The hope is that these endophytes will take up long-term residents in root systems. They've got other strategies. They've tried putting salicylic acid in the water, which benefits the tree in a number of different ways. It increases the quantity of chlorophyll and other kind of subtle signs of beneficial growth. So, it's a very active area of research about really how to bolster the trees, defense mechanisms, you know, different kinds of proteins that transport water across cell membranes and so on. They're all sorts of aspects to, you know, it's not really what I would call genetic modification as much as it is. We're introducing factors that are kind of help mates to the tree's survival. And a genetic assist. Yeah, that's a good term, a genetic assist, you know, something that helps the trees mechanisms work more effectively. Well, would we be forgiven if we were both grateful to the scientists finding ways to save these trees by perhaps introducing other organisms or something else you talk in the book is through genetic engineering or selective breeding and also feel very uneasy by some of these approaches. I mean, humans have gotten trees into this mess because of our reliance on them, because we have changed the environment. And can we engineer and tinker our way out of this mess? Shouldn't we have some hesitancy about that? I think humans have genetically, if you think about it as genetic modification, modified plants genetically for hundreds and hundreds of years. If you think about grafting a rose or modifying a plant to create some kind of genetic adaptation so that they do better in warmer and dry climates. And I think we've already pressed our hands so firmly on the scale of the natural world that I think we're going to have to continue to do things that are active interventions to the planet to be able to help the planet survive. And clearly we've screwed things up. And I think it now is going to fall to us to fix them. And a lot of those fixes are going to involve manipulations that in a kindler, gentler, pure world, we might be reluctant to do. But I think they really have become kind of essential quests because I think trying to do something armed with the right information and done carefully is more important in letting things lie because letting them be as they are really not enough. Kevin, any thoughts about this discussion, including that of the bald cypress? Well, it got me thinking about evolution because when I learned about redwoods and I learned about bald cypresses, I learned that they were in the same family. And since then, botanists have decided to split them up. And so they're no longer in the same family, but they're still in the cypress family. Redwoods are in the cypress family? Yes, they are now. They are now they didn't used to be. But one thing that stood out is that both of these trees face threats. When we're talking about the giant Sequoia in this year in Nevada, for example, climate change is presenting a problem and with that the occurrence of more severe fires along with the drought. And when you're talking about the bald cypresses threatened by the incursion of saltwater, which makes their environment unlivable. So as Dan says, if we want to preserve these treasures that we've inherited, we need to actively care for these trees as the future of our future and the future of these trees is tied together. Coming up, what's next for trees, how their futures are intertwined with ours, as we consider why the best things in life are trees on big picture science. Imagine what's possible when learning doesn't get in the way of life. At Capelli University, our game-changing FlexPath Learning format lets you set your own deadline so you can learn at a time and pace the works for you. It's an education you can tailor to your schedule. That means you don't have to put your life on hold to pursue your professional goals. Instead, enjoy learning your way and earning degree without missing a beat. A different future is closer than you think, with Capelli University. Learn more at capella.edu. When we walk through a forest, redwood or deciduous, we might reflect on the many ways we depend on trees. They keep us cool in their shade and release the oxygen that keeps us alive. But look around your home. It's probably made of and filled with the products of trees from the house's wooden frame to its floorboards and doors, tables, chairs, books and bookcases themselves. The paper and the printer and the toilet roll is obvious, but rummage through a kitchen drawer, also likely made of wood. You might find toothpicks and wooden spoons, chopsticks, maybe a wine cork, and let's not forget about that bowl of fruit, but maybe now we're mixing apples and oranges. We're coming to the intersection of some trails here. We've been walking on the stream trail and now we're coming to the mill trail. So this whole canyon where we are now, this deeply shaded canyon, was full of mills, churning out lumber. I think maybe this is where the old mill was right around here. There's some concrete on the trail, so yeah. So there would have been a lumber mill here? Yes. So those would have been the mills that churned out the lumber that built San Francisco twice, once before the earthquake and once after. That's right. Logging has so reduced the number of redwoods in California, for example, that only 4% of the old growth forest remains. And while all tree species have long had to adapt to climate change, those shifts in our climate are now happening faster, which raises questions about their ability to keep up. But we have shaken up tree habitats in other ways. Consider the Shaggy Barct and Fragrant Blue Gum Eucalyptus, for example, one of the trees that environmental historian Daniel Lewis profiles in his book, 12 trees. Some of its seeds were sent to California by boat from Australia in the 1850s. Unlike its cousin, the hardy fire resistant redwood, Eucalyptus wood splits easily, making it a poor choice for woodworking, and it is flammable. It became known as an invasive pest among humans, while it also became the preferred roosting spot for monarch butterflies. We've been talking about human tree interconnection, and Dr. Lewis reflects on the blame that the Eucalyptus has received for breaking down the interconnectedness of the California ecosystem. I have lots of things to say about so-called invasive species, which I prefer to introduce species. There's a great quote by Mark Twain about this. He said, nature knows no indecencies man invents them. And it really strikes me that people tend to use really militarized and villainizing language when they're describing other so-called invasive species you hear everywhere. My take on this is that these critters have shown up in these new homes. It's not because of their own agency, but it's really through careless handling by humans. And these plants and animals are doing what they do. They're blamed for doing what all organisms do, which is to try to reproduce and survive. I think that's really important to understand. The blue gum has been implicated in fires. People don't like its messy ways. There are a lot of things people find unattractive about it, but we planted them there. They didn't plant themselves there. Why was the blue gum Eucalyptus brought to California? I think landscaping has always been of interest. And I think they were exotic. And I think people really ransacked the planet in a way for exotic trees that they could just beautify their homes. And so I think that was a key aspect to it. We have a lot of beautiful trees here, but the blue gum is different because it's from Australia. It looks different. It smells different. It also serves as a great windbreak. And it serves a really important role in the survival of migratory butterflies and other natives. And so it's really become an integral part of the landscape of California. And some species of plants and animals have actually gone through enough evolutionary processes that they're actually unique to a region. And I'll give you a non-tree example. The minor bird, a critterious, tristist, was important to Hawaii 150 years ago. And it has now evolved in something genetically distinct. And that's how evolution works. And so how do we think of something that is now unique to Hawaii as a native species? Most people would call it a pest from the mainland. So these trees that arrive in places from other places and then start to change really confound our understanding what it means to say something as a native or not. And I think it's probably true that the blue gum has experienced localized pressures that have changed it. Everything is in the process of turning into something else. And I think the blue gum is an example of something that has now become somewhat more adapted to the climate here in California and the American West that makes it a native. Well, Dan, humans have long admired the beauty of trees, but they have also been seen, of course, as a straight commodity. They've been harvested to make timber, paper, rubber, fuel. Humans are always going to exploit trees, I think. But is there a way that we can take advantage of them without driving them to extinction? I think there's a middle ground that offers us ways to take advantage of trees. And sometimes, perhaps, obvious, city street trees, for instance. If you plant them, they do things like they lower the surface temperature of concrete areas. They provide shade. And so I think there are ways to think about trees as fellow residents within our byways. And I think that is a way to make use of them and their gifts without having to cut them down, tear them down, pluck things off of them or otherwise disrupt their lives. So really, more trees is probably one panacea and one way to think about the ways trees could help us is to really increase their presence everywhere, and carefully and strategically. Because trees also are messy. They have root systems that can be disruptive. And so if you're conscious of those things, you can get them in the right places. It seems like a simple solution, but I think it might be a very good one for the long haul. If we can increase the density of trees on the planet, we'll be doing everything in favor. You say that more trees is better. I wonder, this raises the question of whether tree planting programs work. They certainly seem that there be no harm to them, that they must be positive. But it's true that sometimes these tree planting programs can be disruptive to ecosystems. Sometimes they deplete local water sources. Do you have any thoughts about tree planting programs? So for instance, like in 2019, in a burst of civic pride and environmental duty, Ethiopia planted more than they planted 350 million seedlings in a single day, which I find astonishingly. They closed schools and government offices so that everybody could join the planting work. As it turns out, though, many to most of those seedlings died. So it's not really about quantity. It's about careful quality. And I think it's also true that trees don't really do much workforce until they get bigger. So it takes them a while to get big enough to sequester carbon. Obviously it takes them a while to get tall enough to provide shade. And so I think that is a really important factor, is again the time factor. They've got to have enough time to do their thing. And as they say, the best tree to plant is a tree you planted 20 years ago. As you said, many trees have been successful vehicles of adaptation, or organisms of adaptation, and they've been successful in adapting to changing climates throughout evolutionary history. But of course, human-driven climate change is coming in faster than some animal and plant species can adapt. Dan, how are trees faring in our current warming world? It's hard to generalize because scientists tend to study things in parts, and rather than in a global sense, because it requires so many resources to get a fix on, say, the health of all of a particular species of trees in a large region, because it requires a lot of close study. But what is true, I think, is that they've done, for the examples where they've tried to study survivability of trees in different locations, they've done quite well in some instances. They found that the coast redwood is doing better in warmer-dry climates than they had expected, for instance. They've discovered that to go back to the bald cypress, again, they understand that the bald cypress is very flexible in its behaviors. Same for the long-leaf pine, one of the tree species in the book. It's shown its adaptability in lots of different kind of circumstances. So, trees are incredibly flexible and tolerant. They're not fussy organisms. Their long evolution has given them purchase of a kind that really helps them continue to survive. And so, that's one of the things that gives trees a leg up to mix my metaphors. The fact that they have survived for a long time means that they're well suited to continue to survive. And the fact that there are many different species of trees is something about the fact that they're genetically diverse, that they're still numerous. I mean, I think that even though the decline of trees in the last 300, 200, 200 years is disheartening, the fact that they continue to thrive in a lot of settings, and that they're really well protected by humans in a lot of settings, and there are a lot of people that want to help trees as a really heartening thing. As you describe, trees are repositories of history, if only because many outlive us, and they predated the human arrival on this planet. Some produce amber that captures plants and insects and provides us with a record of past ecosystems. Your final chapter is amusing of deep history and record keeping. When it comes to trees and humans and tree human partnerships, what was the message you wanted to impart here? So, to me, trees really are a form of evidence. They have rings that you can count. They have qualities that you can measure. They breathe. They respire. They have respiration. They provide us with all sorts of evidence about the natural world through their unique lens, as it were, through their unique gifts. And I really want people to understand that there are material parts to trees that we can think of as a form of remembrance and recollection. And understand trees without seeing their physical attributes, without understanding how they grow, without understanding how much like a book they are. There is something that we can make sense of through the physicality of trees. And so, this whole issue of recording is a really an essential one, because without this recording of trees and their attributes and their qualities and their changes, we need that information to continue to understand how to save them. And when you describe them as record keepers that shed some light on ecosystems that is through deep time, decades ago, centuries ago, in the case of some of the trees we talked about, the redwood and the bristle cone pine, thousands of years ago. It's so important. And, you know, as Shakespeare said, what's passed is prologue. All of this deep evidence, some deep time that trees record, becomes really useful to understanding what the future holds. So, to try to predict the future patterns of climate change really relies essentially on information that we've recorded from the deep lives of these trees, how they've responded in the past, to climate events, and how are they responding now. And so thus, we can extrapolate how they might respond in the future, which becomes really important information to keeping them alive and well. Dan Lewis, thank you so much for coming into the studio today to talk to us about trees. It was really a pleasure. Molly, the pleasure has been mine. Dan Lewis is an environmental historian and senior curator for the history of science and technology at the Huntington Library, Art Museum, and Botanical Gardens in Southern California. He also teaches about the natural sciences and the environment at Caltech. And he is the author of 12 trees, the deep roots of our future. Well, this brings us to the big picture. Kevin, what are some of the big themes emerging? I think it's amazing to look around and realize that these trees were cut down to nothing and that they have regenerated. And now we're sitting in this redwood forest again. And the help that they got in this case was this area is now protected. That is true. And this place where we are now, the Reinhardt Redwood Park, is one of the best places to understand that, because it was really the actions of the community members and some really committed people that makes it what it is today, so that they weren't harvested a third and a fourth time and disappear completely. And here's a place that people now cherish. So we've supported these trees and they're giving back to us. Well, Kevin Dixon, thank you so much for joining us on what is a rare treat for me, a walk through a redwood forest, but perhaps all in a day's work for you. This has been lovely. Thank you. Oh, it's really good to be out with you, Molly. Kevin Dixon is a naturalist with the East Bay Regional Park District. If we sit here for a moment and we're just quiet, really all you hear are a few birds and then the wind moving through the trees. Yeah, it's some, you can hear maybe a little bit of the stream in the distance. This show is rooted in the teamwork provided by astronomer and producer Seth Chostek, senior producer Gary Neederhoff and assistant producer Shannon Rose Geary and Brian Edwards. I am the executive producer of Big Picture Science, Molly Bentley, and we all give a big thanks to our listeners and our Patreon supporters. The original music in the show is by Dewey Delay and June Miyaki. This episode of Big Picture Science that looks at the profound leafy pleasure to be found right in our yards and neighborhoods is called The Best Things in Life Our Trees. As a long time fine correspondent, I've worked in lots of places, but nowhere is important to the world as China. I'm Jane Perles, former Beijing Bureau Chief for the New York Times. On Face Off, the US vs China will explore what's critical to this important global relationship. Trump, Ancestion Ping, AI, TikTok, and even Hollywood. New episodes of Face Off are available now, or if you get your podcasts. If you're watching Wherever You Get Your Podcasts, that's the IGN Daily Update, Wherever You Get Your Podcasts.
