If you've been irritated by the buzz of a mosquito, I've heard suffered a sting of a wasp, and frankly, who hasn't? You may have wondered what function certain insect serve. Well, here's one for those of you with us. Sweet tooth, without flies as pollinators, your chocolate habit would end. In fact, many services would stop. Our lives couldn't exist without insects. They're the most numerous animals on earth and the oldest. These are the creatures that really do underpin life, as we know it on this planet. As terrible as it would be to lose rhinos, or an awful crime it would be to lose tigers and orangutans. The loss of these creatures wouldn't cause mass malnutrition or starvation like the loss of insects would. And now, alarming studies show that insect populations are in dangerous decline. Find out what we stand to lose when the buzzing goes away, and how we can address this hidden emergency. This is Big Picture Science, produced at the SETI Institute, and I'm Seth Shostak. I'm Molly Bentley. In this episode, a celebration of the chores taken up by insects from pollination to being food for wild birds to assisting with decomposition. Also, what surprising role insects may play in self-care among chimpanzees. And the forgotten story of how a bug and a few clever entomologists saved the golden state from a lethal threat. This episode is the latest buzz. Now, you may have a family tree that goes back a few generations, but an insect's family tree goes back 400 million years. And if you think your backyard is buggy, which is true, makes you lucky indeed. Well, consider these population numbers. Entomologists estimate there are 10 quintillion insects alive at any given moment. It's rare to see a word designating numbers that high, unless we're counting cells or stars, 10 quintillion. That's a one followed by 19 zeros. But we don't know the actual number of insect species. It might be 91,000 to name one sighted number, or 400,000, or millions. Face it when a single leaf can hide you from the world, you're easily overlooked. So let's begin by looking closely at a couple of these species. Here's a story about evolutionary adaptation, observant entomologists, and Seth, are you a fan of California oranges? Do oranges play a role in your California lifestyle? Well, they certainly do. I have one. Whenever they're in season, although I have to say I still have trouble getting into them. Okay. Well, then you are already invested in the story, because it is also about how one bug helped save the California citrus industry and ushered in a new kind of pest control. Okay. The scene is California in the late 19th century. Can you guess which industry is booming, or which industries are booming? Well, the biggest industries in California have always been, you know, agriculture and then technology and movies. Okay. This is not about technology and movies, but it is about agriculture. It just took off in California at the time. There were new irrigation districts in California. So all of a sudden there was water coming through. The Transcontinental Railroad had been built across the country at that point. It was just reaching California. In oranges, we're just flying across the country at that point all the way to New York and every place in between. Hello, I am Martin Kernen. I am a science journalist and I also write about history. Yeah. Well, that's right. The railroads invented the refrigerator car, which was basically just another car like any other one. But they had boxes at either end of the car for ice. And that was good enough to ship them across the country, I guess. That's right. Martin Kernen tells this story in a recent article for Smithsonian. He says that the fledgling citrus industry was becoming a lucrative business in the 1880s because until then even oranges grown in Florida were a rare treat. Yeah, I think anything becomes a delicacy when it's hard to get. So you could imagine the excitement when huge box cars full of these oranges started arriving from the West Coast. And people were going nuts for them. Oranges traveling to the East Coast were a $20 million annual business. It seemed the sun was shining brightly on the citrus industry. It sounds to be like a phrase to the effect of, but then it's coming up. What happened? Well, it happened kind of insidiously. It happened very quietly. And it happened in the North. Yeah, it's hard to know exactly who saw it first. There's indications in newspapers that homeowners getting around the San Francisco area started noticing this growth in their ornamental trees. Not only were their trees becoming infected with this pest, they couldn't identify, but that they couldn't get rid of it. But looked like a growth was in fact an insect. And tomologists identified it as what's known as a scale insect and not one native to the state. The scientific name for this invasive species is the Isaria. It's also known as the Katnicushion scale because it looks like a little piece of cotton or a dollop of whipped cream. And there's these little fibery things that hang off it and stick to the leaves of plants. It's also called the fluted scale because if you look really closely at its egg sack, you'll see these little flutes, these little grooves. Martin, I wonder if you could describe for us when you see this bug on a branch. It looks like a fungus or something. Can you just describe what we're looking at? Well, I didn't describe it as well as one of the citrus growers described it. He described it as a hideous leprosy. So when these bugs cluster and they kind of cluster together in these white masses on the branches and on the leaves of citrus trees, they make it look like the tree has a disease of some kind, like a fungus perhaps. And most of that unhealthiness doesn't so much come from the the white of the bugs, exact. So it really comes from this black, sooty mold. So the county's cushion scale has this piercing sucking mouth part, okay, at this beak that it pokes into the vein of the leaf and it extracts the sap. So this the sap of the citrus leaf comes out and that sweet sap excretion grows mold. They not only like ornamental trees in private home gardens citrus citrus is their preferred tree of infection. And that sounds pretty darn off putting. I'm not sure I'd want to get into an orange that was covered with that kind of stuff. And headed for the oranges they were because the cottony cushion scale is not a bug that stays put. The way they travel is actually they don't have wings. So they're little larvae which they call crawlers, these little tiny red larvae, their legs are black and they have hooks on them. Well actually it's rides on anything, birds, animals, people and even the wind. The citrus farmers and entomologists knew about the pests up north and perhaps even that they were moving south toward Los Angeles. But I don't think they really appreciated the gravity of what was headed for them. So you can imagine what is hanging in the balance here. Yeah a major new industry source of revenue and a source of vitamin C for people in the cold northeast. Now as we said the voracious insect threatening the California citrus industry at the end of the 19th century wasn't native to the state. So people wondered where did it come from and how did it get here? There are some suspects. There are theories and there are suspects people were blamed. One of them was a sugar baron by the name of George Gordon. And he was famous for importing ornamental trees because the sugar barons were the ones really controlling the trans-Pacific trade at that point. So there's Australia, there's Hawaii and the guys running should have been some gals. But the guys running the steamship spec then were these people involved in the sugar trade and they had sugar plantations. And so George Gordon they think had imported some acacia trees from Australia infested with county cushion scale to San Francisco. And it was there they think that the county cushion scale took hold and started to spread. The citrus growers, the orange growers tried everything they could to stop the infestation of these insects, these county cushion scales. You ready to hear what they tried? You bet. They tried everything. Whatever they thought might work. They were just caressing acids. They would take out the whale soap and the other kinds of non toxic sorts of washes. They even tried fire hoses to blast the scales off of the orange trees. They even pulled out rifles. And it's not really clear in the reports. But what I think they were doing is using the concussive force of these gum powder blasts to blow the insects off of the trees. And they always grew back. Not only did they re-infect the tree, but they spread more trees and an ever widening ring in these groves spreading out. And they became really desperate. This sounds pretty much like a 1950s sci-fi horror film. Right? You got this invasion of some alien species and you try everything including explosives to get rid of it and all it does is get worse. That's exactly it. Now while you set and the citrus farmers may have considered the Isaria of Villain feasting on their trees, there are no villains in ecology. From the insects point of view, of course, it was just trying to survive. Nevertheless, when the Cotney Cushion Scale arrives at the commercial citrus orchards in Los Angeles, the devastation unfolds quickly. It's unknown how many of California's 600,000 citrus trees succumb to Isaria. But here's one measure that Martin found. In 1887, the state citrus export was 2000 box cars. The next year, it was down to 400. Farmers were panicked. The US entomologists were now involved. And they began considering fresh approaches for solving this dire agricultural threat. Are there any predators? Is there anything that can make a meal out of these guys? Great question. And that brings us to the search that the entomologists undertook to try to find a natural predator for the Cotney Cushion Scale. Charles Valentine Riley, or as he's commonly referred to, CV Riley. So CV Riley was the second United States entomologist in the United States Department of Agriculture's Division of Entomology. And he was called upon by the desperate folks in California to come and try to help. And he had a reputation for being a really brilliant scientist. And if anybody could solve a problem, CV Riley could solve the problem. He had a couple of very capable underlings, a couple of very capable deputies, Albert Kobel. And he becomes a real hero here. And also Daniel Coquillette. The idea of biological pest control wasn't new at the time. It had been around for a really long time. In fact, I think, you know, if you go far enough back at originated in China at some point, you know, ancient China. And in fact, already in California, there had been some talk of it. So it can't really be credited to CV Riley for having had the bright idea of going and trying to find the natural predator to the Cotney Cushion Scale. I thought the story was about kind of the typical invasive species story where humans by accident introduced a foreign species. And it has a negative effect on the ecology. But I learned that really this was a story about finding balance. When entomologists went to Australia looking for the Cushion Scale, they actually had trouble finding that. There wasn't a lot of it in Australia. And that's because I think there were all these other environmental pressures, predation and scarcity that kept its populations naturally in check. Entomologist Albert Cobell eventually finds the Cotney Cushion Scale on an ornamental tree, along with its natural predator identified by an Australian entomologist, a parasitic fly called the Cryptocachum, or the Cryptofly. But he was in for a surprise. He noticed among the Cotney Cushion Scale, not only these flies, this Cryptocachum flies, but these little tiny ladybugs, these little tiny ladybugs that are about half the size of what a listener may understand as like a normal American ladybug. These tiny ladybugs crawling around. He didn't stop to find out what the ladybugs were doing there. Albert Cobell grabs branches infested with the Cotney Cushion Scale, the Cryptofly, and the ladybugs, also called the Novus Ladybugs, and brings them back to California. It's there that entomologists Daniel Coquelet set up experiments inside what he called a propagation tent. So he had these small orange trees inside these screened in areas, and he would painstakingly insert the bugs on these trees that were infested with Cotney Cushion Scale to see what the reaction was, and it was it was months of work. They test out this ladybug and the Cryptofly on the Cotney Cushion Scale, and the Cryptofly kind of dies out, Seth. But here's what happens with the ladybug when it meets a Cotney Cushion Scale. These tiny ladybugs had the appetite for Cotney Cushion Scale. Ladybugs to the rescue. It's their meal of choice. It is the only thing they will eat. And the Cotney Cushion Scale is much bigger than the tiny ladybug. It really is. It looks like just a tiny dot on like a big dollop of whipped cream. And then all of a sudden, you'll notice that the dollop whipped cream starts to disappear. And these tiny ladybugs become almost crazed in the way that they consume. Not only is the ladybug themselves feasting, but the larvae, if there's any ladybug larvae, they also consume the Cushion Scale. They leave nothing, but the empty skin is the way Albuq cobalt describes it. I'm not exactly sure what he was referring to with respect to the skin, but every edible from the perspective of the of the Novius ladybug is consumed. They were leasing these ladybugs in the orchards. Right. Exactly. Now knowing and maybe they knew the same thing then, there could be a lot of unintended consequences when we try to introduce the natural enemy of an invasive species. But at the time, I think coquila had been so painstaking in his research in the propagation tent. And that the stakes were so high for the California citrus industry that whatever risk they may have been aware of at the time was worth it. He opens one side of the tent. So we're there in the very sunny California orchard. And he pulls up one side and leaves it open and lets the Novius spread to the adjoining trees in the orchard. And within a matter of a couple weeks, the populations had increased to clean, essentially, every infected orange tree from its infestation of Cushion Scale. And it works. Wow, that's an amazing story. But it sounds like it ends well. And we had this tiny ladybug to thank for the oranges that we enjoy at breakfast. True, but there is a twist. The Novius ladybug was too good. The entomologist discovered to their horror that after all the Cushion Scale had been eaten, that the Novius ladybugs would eat each other. They were little cannibals. And not only would they eat each other, they would eat their own larvae. So the owners of the orange groves scrambled basically to preserve some Cushion Scale. So they were put into this odd position of having to save the very tree pests that they were trying to eradicate so that they could keep two small populations in balance. But still a victory. In fact, the introduction of the Novius ladybug to the citrus grove remains the standard against which biological pest control is measured, says Martin. Of course, biological control is not a silver bullet, and there are more often far-reaching unintended consequences that develop. This effort worked Seth because the entomologists were careful to identify this special relationship. Thanks to science and history journalist Martin Kernin for telling us this tale, you can read it to his article, The Bug That Saved California, appeared in the January, February, 2022 issue of Smithsonian. Primatologists make a surprising observation, a story of chimpanzees, self-medication, and insects in West Africa. That's next. This episode of Big Picture Sciences, the latest bugs. This season, a new hot deal has arrived at Metro. $25 a line for four lines with all the data you need, and four free stamps on Galaxy A155G phones. Getting Metro's best deals is easy. No ID required, no activation fees, get a new number or keep your own. It's up to you. That's four lines for $25 a line. Plus, four free phones. Visit a store or go online today. Only at Metro by T-Mobile. When you join Metro Plus Tax, for a limited time is subject to change. Max won't offer per cap. We're now going to bring some other animals into our discussion about insects. Hi, my name is Lara Southern, and I'm a PhD candidate currently studying communication in one of our closest living relatives, chimpanzees, at the University of Osnaburk in Germany. Hi, my name is Alejandra Mascaro, and I'm a research assistant for the Zula chimpanzee product since 2019. Alexandra and Lara spend hours observing chimpanzee behavior as part of the research at the OZUKA chimpanzee project in Gabon, West Africa. We aim to observe these individuals in their natural habitat to get an essence of how they live socially, how they communicate socially, and how they experience life. So we document every single thing that they do from the moment they wake up in the morning to the moment that they go to sleep at night. A better understanding of chimpanzee behavior helps promote efforts to protect these endangered animals. After five years of watching our primate cousins, the researchers thought they had seen everything. Then one day, Alexandra saw something unusual. A female chim, named Susie, was interacting with her son, Sia. And he had cut his foot the day before. And in that moment, specifically, they were resting and grooming each other. And when I suddenly saw Susie reaching out and grabbing something small from under a leaf, which she put to her mouth, she pressed it between the lips, and then she applied onto the open wound of Sia using the finger tips. And then using the mouth, she took it back and she placed it again using her fingers. Alexandra says she didn't think much of the behavior until she, Lara, and colleagues watched the videos of the interaction. And we agreed that we saw something that we have never seen before, because Susie appeared to reach out and grab an insect, catching an insect directly from under the leaf and apply the insect onto the wound. So here's a chimpanzee, apparently using the insect for what? As a saver, poultus on a wound? I mean, that's kind of incredible. Well, Alexandra and Lara thought so too. And so over a period of 15 months, they looked to see if the behavior repeated. It did. And they published their findings in the February 2022 issue of current biology. The title of their paper, application of insects to wounds of self and others by chimpanzees in the wild. And if chimpanzees are indeed using insects for treating injuries, well, it might be the first reported instance of non-human mammals doing so. When we really started watching the videos back, we were trying to kind of piece together really the sequence of what we had observed. And keep in mind that at the beginning, we really didn't know yet that this was an insect. So we always kept calling it the tiny little object we kept. We were like the mysterious object from underneath the leaf. And so once we started seeing the behavior, we noticed always that there was this initial step in which they moved the object or what we now know to be an insect to their mouth, which we first thought maybe was to immobilize the insect seeing if like a tiny little insect was trying to get away, fly away. You would try to maybe try and crush it. It also seems to be have a purpose for maybe to mix it with a little bit of saliva. So if you want to apply something to the surface of a wound, which can you, which can sometimes be quite large, it might help to have this as almost kind of like a paste. This seems to be a really crucial part in all of the events that we witnessed was this passage to first the mouth and then to the wound. Okay, so, but you saw this in other champs. I mean, this wasn't just a peculiarity of this particular mother son relationship. It was really interesting because that was the first observation was this kind of one of the most special ones really that we saw the whole time was this really nice interaction between a mother and her son. But what we subsequently saw over the next of the rest year were mostly applications by an injured individual onto their own wounds. So just like in the case of humans treating their own wounds, we spend a lot of time actually dedicated to our own wound care in terms of cleaning it, applying some kind of antiseptic lotion. So it's the exact same thing with champs. They're very interested in their own personal health and safety and well-being. And it was only one year later that we saw another allow application event where we were calling it of whether second individual applied an insect onto the wound of another individual. And these are still quite rare in our observations, but we have begin to see this more often. Well, an immediate question that comes to my mind, Alessandra, is does it work? I mean, does it work as an antiseptic or promote healing or stop the pain? Or does it do anything beneficial? Well, for the moment, insect application onto wounds in the animal kingdom was never documented. But we do know that insects produce a lot of substances with a rapid impact like antibacterial antiviral. So this discovery work for us was completely surprising because this led us to understand that not only humans can use insect. And we do hope to analyze what they are using really and the fact that they are having on the healing of the wound of the chimpanzee itself. But this is something that we don't know still. All right, they're crushing up these insects and then applying them, right, as some sort of poultry or something like that to the wound. Is there a particular kind of insect that they use or is any insect good in a wound situation? So this is what we're currently trying to investigate and we've really tried to begin. It's a much harder task. I think we've been asked by many people. So what are these insects like show us the picture of the insect and ultimately why it's so hard is because really by the end of this behavioral sequence where they've taken the insect from underneath the leaf, put it to their mouth, crushed it up into a tiny little minuscule pieces and put it into their wounds. There's not often much left and we've really struggled for many hours trying to find little tiny pieces of insects on the forest floor. And so this is really an ongoing effort to try and collect, first of all, any types of specimens from these events. We do have the assumption that they are flying insects given the way that they were always caught. So there seems to be this very rapid grabbing motion that's always used in really all cases. So it seems that they would be small flying objects and that's what we've kind of narrowed it down to at the moment. But we do think that it will be really interesting if they are in fact not just using one type of insect, but if there may be kind of like a range of insects that they're selecting for, maybe something to do with the type of wound, but these are really just kind of hypotheses at these stage. Okay, well, Laura, I guess the big question here is whether this is an accidentally discovered behavior that has been passed down by teaching, you know, the next generation to do this, in other words, it's a bit of chimp culture. Or is this a hard-wired behavior like learning how to bring down prey if you're a lion or something like that? Did they discover this medical treatment or is it the result of evolutionary selection? Yeah, that's really the question that remains to be answered. And I think this is this will be the subject now, Alessandra, just starting her PhD research on this. So we have a ton of different questions and different research avenues. What we do know for the moment is that nobody has yet documented this behavior in the 60 plus years of research that's been done in kind of long term field sites in other places across Africa. However, what we have done now is we're really doing a call for researchers all across other different long term field sites to ask if anybody has seen this type of behavior. We've released a lot of videos, we've released all the kind of sequence of what to look for specifically. And we hope that this will really inspire kind of chimp field researchers, but not only chimpanzees because there is, there is also gorillas and bonobos. And it might not be something that is just present in great apes. It really might be something that has just been missed because as we said that that first video was just a was just an accident. And of course they had been doing the behavior before that it was just that we didn't know what to look for. In much of the world, there is a concern about the disappearance of insects, not that they disappear completely, but that the density of insect population seems to be decreasing in much of the world. Does this pose a threat to the chimp population of Africa? Chimpancies used to feed on a large number of insects species. So they don't usually eat only plants, but only insect for sure if they are going to decrease because of the temperature variation climate change in general. This is going to affect their diet abilities. So for sure this could have an impact, but we can also suppose that if this species of insect has an influence into the healing process of their wounds, this behavioral solution can potentially disappear. And we don't know the consequence at the moment because we have not studied yet the effect of this application, but truly can potentially have it. I think it just shows us how all kind of factors within an ecosystem are really closely knit and how as human as in human observers, we might not always be able to see these links so directly, but that they are always there. And so in the sense that these two species have really kind of co-adapted to these environments and that they depend, I'm not saying that insects depend on chimpanzees in a certain way, but that there's this kind of food web and mutualistic relationships in these diverse, really highly functioning pristine environments that we might not be able to see, but that are so crucially important to each individual within that web. And I think that there's sometimes the smallest things can play such a huge role in changing that species current circumstances, but also maybe changing their life. All right, well, I want to thank you both for talking to us today. Laura Southern, thanks so very much for telling us about this really remarkable behavior. And thank you for featuring our research as well. So we are a very small NGO and we really do appreciate all kind of the publicity we can get. And also it's really great just to share our research with anybody who would be interested. Alexandra, Mascaro, thank you very much for being with us. Thank you, Seth, for our conversation. It was really a pleasure. Laura Southern is a PhD candidate in primatology at the University of Osna Brook, who is doing research at the Ozuca chimpanzee project in Gabon, West Africa. Alexandra Mascaro is an evolutionary biologist and a volunteer with the project. You know, Molly, I know people who studied animal behavior in particular fish. And you know, the researcher looked at this tank of fish for hours and hours every week, even filming it, right? And they always seem to find something. And it's something that's surprising because we think of these as dumb beasts, but they're not so dumb. Well, not many people think of them as dumb beasts any longer, Seth, as we know chimpanzees are highly intelligent. You know what image is staying in my mind is that of them wetting the insects before they place them on the wounds. Yeah, well, that says something. I mean, maybe they're doing that just to kill them or quiet them down so they can chop on them. I mean, I don't know. But the point is this is such specific behavior. You know, did they learn this? I mean, do all chimps do this? I think they say that they're going to investigate that. If all chimps do it, then I say these chimps are smarter than I thought they were. It sounds like you really underestimate how intelligent chimpanzees are. Speaking of the primates and the megafauna, you know, they often become the center of attention when we do animal stories. But what's compelling about this story is that it's the tiny lesser charismatic animals that are stealing the story here. And they might be playing a vital role in the health of these chimpanzees. Yeah. Well, that's why I think that this is a door that these two researchers have opened to a kind of behavior that would tell you something really rather important about the chimps. If they somehow have learned that this is a good thing to do, I mean, that's remarkable. That's, if you will, that they have science at some level, they do. Well, we can do without mammals. We would never want to, but we could do without them. Earthly life, however, depends on insects and research indicates that their populations are declining. What's behind the Spanish-ing act and what we lose when these tiny creatures go away. Insects are the closest creatures to us in our lives. It feels like having them, maybe our cats and dogs, you know. They sting us, they land on our food, they swarm us around our faces when we go outside sometimes. They seem kind of uncomfortable to be close. And the idea that they could be in any kind of trouble seemed kind of fanciful up until a couple of years ago until research has started to kind of create the data and got a kind of bigger picture about what's actually happening with insect decline. That's next. This episode of Big Picture Science is the latest buzz. Lowes knows that free is just better. That's why My Lowes Rewards is free to join. As a member, you earn points towards My Lowes money on eligible purchases, get exclusive free gifts, and earn free shipping at Silver Key Status all on top of Weekly Member Only deals. Don't wait. Join My Lowes Rewards for free today and start saving more. Lowes, we help you save loyalty program subject to terms and conditions details at Lowes.com slash terms subject to change. It's probably been a while since you wiped insects splatter off your windshield. That unpleasant chore was once part of the ritual of any long drive. And if so, you may have noticed that you need to clean your windshield less often these days. Insect populations are dwindling around the world. It seems preposterous because insects would seem to be everywhere from ants marching across your kitchen floor to gnats swarming your blanket at the beach. And yet... I am Oliver Millman. I'm the Environment Correspondent of the Guardian US and I'm the author of the Insect Crisis, the fall of the tiny empires that run the world. He posts together the numerous stories that you may have been hearing about declining insect numbers and species. And reminds us what we lose if these buzzing, winged, often beautiful, many-legged creatures disappear. And about the tasks they perform to keep ecosystems intact. Oliver, I wonder if you can introduce us to one of your favorite insects that you came to know while reporting on this book. Maybe one that you don't get to describe very often. So one of the most impressive insects that I came across in the course of writing this book is the Hercules Moth, which is the world's largest moth. It's got a winged span as wide as dinner plate. But it doesn't have a mouth. It lives on the reserves it's built up while it was eating as a caterpillar. It also has two false eyes and it's rear end to confused predators. So it's an incredibly impressive and beautiful insect. It's really one of the most incredible insects you would likely ever see. And it's one of the real jewels of the insect world that I really think is worth keeping around and keeping in mind when we think about insects. When we think about them as being annoying or pesky creatures, there is this kind of beauty in the insect world. And I think maybe the Hercules Moth something I'll pest. Well, that brings me to this question, which is, you know, if attention is given to animals, it's often given to the megafauna, either to describe how remarkable they are or what the threats are that they're facing. Oliver, how does our perspective of the world change if we shift our attention to the invertebrates? Yeah, there is this kind of species kind of bias that many of us have about what's important in our world. And a lot of that is drawn through aesthetics and also culturally as well. I mean, culturally we've been made to think of insects as something that our disease-ridden, annoying or even irrelevant. I mean, there are kind of million species of named insects in the world that's only a fraction of what's out there. There may be five million, ten million, maybe thirty million. And of those we maybe only really think fondly of bees, butterflies, maybe fireflies. The rest of them we don't really think about at all and if we do think about them, we think about them in a negative way. But once you actually dig into the roles in sex play in our lives, kind of get a better understanding, appreciation of them. You kind of begin to understand these are the creatures that really do underpin life as we know it on this planet. We would not have the order societies we have now without insects. And as terrible as it would be to lose rhinos, or awful crime it would be to lose tigers and orangutans. The loss of these creatures wouldn't cause mass malnutrition or starvation like the loss of insects would. Well, you begin your book with a pretty grim description of a dystopia where the insects have disappeared and society basically collapses. The food set humans are eating are those that are pollinated by the wind such as rice. I wonder if you would be willing to turn that scenario on its head and describe a world in which the insect populations are thriving. And what does that look like? Yeah, well, I've been lucky enough to get kind of glimpse of what a world kind of teaming with insects would be like. And obviously that was the world that we kind of found ourselves in up to the age of mass industrialization growth of human population, the conversion of land to agriculture. I've been to kind of well-fly meadows, green roofs, which are kind of those kind of meadows artificially put onto urban landscapes. And these are places which aren't kind of covered in chemicals or the garasses and carcasses. It's kind of really left to kind of its own devices. And you see this kind of enormous plethora of insect life. It's kind of you walk through and it's there bugs hitting your legs, they're up in your face. And not just that is the feeling that it's alive. It's this kind of thrumming kind of vibrancy to it. You see them around. You hear them around. You feel like the air around you is crackling with life. And that's kind of what a world with insects at full abundance is like. It's a very vibrant, alive place. It's not the kind of deadened kind of environment that we seem to have imposed upon ourselves as well as them. So in this world that you had the privilege of visiting that no longer exists widely, insects are buzzing all around and describe some of the jobs that they will be doing. What does that look like? Yeah, so the roles are numerous and invaluable. So they pollinate about a third of the world's food crops. So everything from Connoi Apples, cranberries, melons, broccoli, blueberries, cherries, you wouldn't have those without intake populations. And famously chocolate? Yes. As little as we would like to praise tiny midges, a tiny midge is responsible for pollinating the plant that chocolate comes from. So you would not have chocolate without this tiny midge. So perhaps think of that next time you're you're eating a chocolate bar. They do a lot of the unglamorous work of breaking down feces, breaking down corpses, beetles and blow fire. It flies another insects do that kind of dirty work until the bacteria get to get to work beyond them. So a lot that is is done kind of out of sight now of mine for us. Of course, once they do that, that actually helps the whole cycle of life. You know, the nutrients then kind of pass through into soils into plants replenishing them. So they keep kind of forests and other kind of landscapes vibrant and alive through to the cycling of nutrients through the whole ecosystem. And they provide food themselves for other creatures. So about half of the world's birds species rely upon insects for food. If you're raising a young chick, you will know it requires thousands and thousands of insects to eat before it become a convey fully fledged bird. In your book, you describe a method that researchers are using to track beetle populations. And they're looking at the chemical traces of the beetles and the feathers of the birds that eat them. Do I have that right? Could you explain what the scientists are doing and what they're learning about those beetle populations? Yeah, so there is incredible research. We've done where you can take samples from birds and see what they've been eating, see how they're diet is changing. And also what they're ingesting in terms of chemicals. So neonicotinoids, which are the kind of main kind of deadly insecticides spread on fields in the US and many other countries. They are catastrophic for insect populations. They're also pretty bad for birds. So birds are picking up seeds that have been coated in this chemical and eating them and that's been shown to affect their health quite badly. The chemicals can get into their feathers. But yeah, the scientists can find all kinds of things about birds from their feathers and other tests done upon them. And they can see what's happening with their diets. They can see how their actual intake of insects is changing. And in many places it's a worrying set of results. Will you describe what the threats are to insects because it's not just one threat. There are multitude. Yeah, so there are lots of threats sailing insects right now. I mean, there's three main ones. The first one would be habitat loss. So we've obviously deforested a large part of the world. We've converted kind of untouched grasslands into monocultural farming fields, cities, roads. And so on. And that has been disastrous for insects. The second thing we've done is we've doused a lot of that land with chemicals highly toxic chemicals in sector sides that are very, very effective for killing off insects, not just the pests that we hate for chewing our crops up, but the insects that we value and admire and actually are useful in protecting our crops because they eat the pests. So that has been a kind of indiscriminate killing that has swept across much of the Western world and increasingly that farming practice is being adopted elsewhere in Asia and Africa now too. And the third thing which is the escalating crisis for insects is climate change. And previously we thought that climate change wouldn't affect insects as much as under eye animals, but researchers may clear that insects live within quite a number of areas. We then quite narrow banded temperature. They aren't able to move beyond that such as fish for example, we know about fish kind of heading towards the poles because it's cooler there insects aren't able to move that far unless you're a dragonfly or something you can't actually travel great distances if you're an insect. So you're kind of trapped in the environment around you. And as that's been heated up you're seeing many species of insects struggle to survive and adapt to that. And there are other impacts as well like pollution is another big one. We've lit up the night skies which kind of scrambles the hardwired nature of insects to tell the difference between nine day it affects their mating and communication and so on. So we're doing lots of lots of things big and small to make this well quite an unpleasant place for insects. So let's talk about what is happening to the insect populations and you write that they are in decline, but they're not in decline evenly across the board and you write that it's not a quote single downward sloping line on a graph. It's more like a lot of different lines describe for us what is happening to insect populations. Can you expound on that? Yes, so because we haven't mapped out the entirety of insect life around the world, it's impossible for us to say what's happening with their populations in every part of the world. We just don't know in each country if there is a huge decline underway, but there are some pretty stunning studies out there showing that a lot of places there are some incredible declines of insects. There was one meta study in 2018 finding that 40% of insect species are declining globally and that's based on the data that we have. That's 40% of insect species. Yes, a declining globally. Again, it's an incomplete picture of the studies that we have. And there's another study that backed up that study which found that insect populations are falling by kind of one's 2% a year around the world. That's the kind of really big picture we're losing around one's 2% of insects a year based on what we know. So the United Nations has kind of warned about this, that is kind of looming crisis for food security. They estimated there's about half a million insect species that could go extinct by the midpoint of the century. So finally, although it shouldn't be finally, it really is a primary goal of speaking to you is to look at solutions. And you write that the solutions are surprisingly straightforward and there are things that all of us can do to confront this insect decline. And I wonder if you could give us an outline of what those solutions are. Yeah, well, this kind of like big picture kind of policy stuff that you see happening in Europe in Union, for example, they banned three of the main New Nick-to-North pesticides, the real kind of terrible bee killing pesticides, banned. France has gone even further. You can even use them in greenhouses any more. You know, Germany is banning gas powered leaf blowers because insects love hiking underneath leaves. So they've kind of taken that measure. Some countries are working on light pollution reductions and that sort of thing. And you're seeing these kind of new ways of farming, starting to kind of worm their way into the conversation, even in the US, which is kind of very dominated by monocultural farming and big ag, regenerative farming, you know, putting in corridors or wildflowers. So insects can have a bit of breathing room by the side of fields and they can connect and so on. And so there's some kind of big picture policy stuff, but a lot of it is things that you can do at home. And a lot of it is quite indolence. A lot of it is quite, if you're a lazy person, you can do it. I mean, insects have not thrived due to our tidiness and our obsession with everything having its place. So a weed, the word weed is quite a subjective word. It's a plant that we consider to be in the wrong place, wherein the fact is food for an insect. So if you could just, if you do have a yard to maybe not mow the grass every week, don't rake the leaves as often. Don't put chemicals on your property as much. Let's some kind of weeds or native plants, whatever you want to call them, grow in a kind of a variety of action around your property. And you'll see the insects come back and we saw this in the pandemic, when a lot of local authorities started cutting the grass beside highways. You started seeing wildflowers pop up and for the first time in years people were seeing birds around. Why was that? Because the insects had come back. Well, Oliver Millman, thank you so much for talking to us. Good to be with you. Thank you so much. Oliver Millman is the environment correspondent for the Guardian in the United States and the author of the insect crisis, the fall of the tiny empires that run the world. Well, Seth, it's that time again. What is the big picture here in our show about insects? Of course, we've heard a lot of commentary about what insects do, how they're used even by chimpanzees. But the thing that struck me the most was that a 40% of all insects species are declining, but that the decline is 1% to 2% per year. That's an exponential decrease and that means in three decades half of all insects will be gone. And that really scared me because the causes are so diffuse. There are many different causes and it's not easy to fix this problem. Yes, and the other fear is that some of the insects may go away before we've learned what species they are and what some of their relationships are. The next time I see a bug, I'll be happy to see it. This show would not be possible without the Busy as Bees dedication of senior producer Gary Neederhoff and assistant producers Shannon Rose Gary and Brian Edwards. I'm executive producer of Big Picture Science Molly Bentley. Thanks also to financial support from Rino Shoskey David and Sammy David and Tinasse. Big Picture Science has produced at the SETI Institute, a nonprofit education and research organization that considers the diversity of life on our planet. I'm the institute senior astronomer Seth Shostek and also a big thanks to our listeners and our Patreon supporters. Original Music in the show by Dewey Delay and June Miyaki. This episode of Big Picture Science that looks at the unique niches filled by insects and the consequences of their declining populations is called the latest buzz. Music As a long time fine correspondent, I've worked in lots of places but nowhere is important to the world as China. I'm Jane Perles, former Beijing bureau chief for the New York Times. On Face Off, the US vs China will explore what's critical to this important global relationship. Trump, Ancestion Ping, AI, TikTok and even Hollywood. New episodes of Face Off are available now, wherever you get your podcasts. The corporate world is like the ocean. It's a luring but it's also full of deadly creatures that can shred you to pieces. It becomes kind of like a game of thrones, political arena where everyone's trying to murder you to get your job. My family doesn't come from corporate backgrounds so I didn't have any sort of guidance in that. This is not your typical work podcast. Sometimes you need to be empathetic and then there are times that you ask for input but you don't really give a s**t in your life. Listen to the Ambia Award nominated podcast, Serving Corporate. Stretch opportunity, what is it? You'll be class kid?
