For every branch of science, there's usually an idea so fundamental, so revolutionary that it reorganizes the way we think about things. In chemistry, that idea is the periodic table, the simple yet ingenious way in which we organize elements such as hydrogen, oxygen and carbon. And for chemists, it is our big icon. And since this was invented 150 years ago by Dimension Mendeleev, it has absolutely can see to evolve. The periodic table has evolved. In large part, due to scientists drive to discover new elements, that search has moved from discovery in nature to the lab, scientists create elements with funny names like Rangenium and Livermoreium. These things do not exist naturally on Earth. Nor do we even understand how they would be made in the universe. What types of stars would need to be made to reduce these elements? These unstable elements, which are glimpsed for mere fractions of a second before they disintegrate, raise as many questions as they provide answers about the building blocks of matter. And they have us asking whether there's any limit to just how far we can go in our quest to create new elements. I'm Seth Chastak and this is Big Picture Science from the SETI Institute. I'm Molly Bentley and in this episode, we ponder some of the heaviest and lightest topics in the world of chemistry and search for the fabled island of stability as we attempt to go beyond the periodic table. How do we know what the universe is made of after all? We didn't always know. When we go back, the ancients thought there were sort of four basic elements, Earth, Air, Fire and Water. They then saw, or well, there must be something in the stars. There must be something that keeps the Firmament, the Heavens all going and they called that ether, the Fifth Element. But then as time went on, they realized, that doesn't really work. There's so many examples that that's not true. You can kind of have different elements and they aren't the same thing. For the last verse of science, what we now call physicists and leader chemists, realized that there had to be more than five components that made up the world. This is where the idea that there are chemical elements that are indivisible, like they have a particular way of reacting with the world and everything else. And if you isolate them, then you really have something pure. And this is the beginning of the period table. The table has expanded since, of course, eventually iron was added and so was copper. With time, scientists came to isolate things like mercury. Later we'll hear how scientists are further expanding the periodic table by creating new elements to take us beyond the 118 in it today. But first, how did the periodic table come to be and how is it organized? As material scientists Mark Miedovnik describes, it is the very definition of organization. And most of us can picture the periodic table, even if we haven't seen it recently. The asymmetric rows and columns have been reproduced countless times and they have great visual appeal. You could say that the periodic table is a piece of art that illustrates the structure of the universe. What does the parent table do for you? It kind of gives you a framework of thinking about the universe and how to understand it. And it's a very useful framework because you've got this sort of box-like structure and I know it's slightly more complicated than that, but it's mostly like a sort of big, sort of oblong structure. And things on the vertical columns, they're all called families of elements. And as you go down, they get heavier and heavier, but they all have similar chemical properties. And then the horizontals, if you go along the horizontal, you start going through the different families, but you're getting heavier and heavier in that direction. So it's like these different families are kind of born in the universe. And the way the families of elements interact with each other brings you the whole cornucopia of our world. Everything that's made is made of these things and in a load of different combinations. And the periodic table tells you which ones are more likely to react with each other and cause these different rock types, or this different type of liquid, or this type of gas. And that's a really ingenious arrangement, it's a graphical way of thinking about how the world is made. On any given day, for example, you interact with about two-thirds of the elements of the periodic table. Carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, sodium, calcium, iron, just to name a few. And while the periodic table is the fundamental organizing schema for chemists, it's never been static. It's been enlarged, it's been rearranged, it's always been dynamic. My name's Dr. Kit Chapman, I'm a science historian at Phalmouth University, and my book is called Super Heavy, Making and Breaking the Periodic Table. And since this was invented 150 years ago by Dimitri Mendelayev, it has absolutely continued to evolve. Because Mendelayev at the time didn't know what we now know, he didn't know about the neculus of the atom, for instance. He didn't know about protons and neutrons, and he didn't know about the noble gases they hadn't been discovered. So what he was really doing was trying to put the elements that he knew about in an order that made sense. And he was very clever, he looked for patterns in those elements, how they behaved. And when something didn't quite work, unlike everybody else, he left a gap. He said there is an element that hasn't been discovered yet. And because we were in the 19th century, we were having an element, boom, lots of metals were still being discovered. He was able to fill those gaps, and Mendelayev was proved right. When you say he was looking for how they behaved, he was looking for common properties, he was grouping them by their properties. And can you give an example of that? Sure, so a great example is if you look at group one of the periodic tables. So Mendelayev ordered the elements by weight, which is almost correct. There are a couple where it gets a little bit funny, purely because of how elements behave. The group one in terms of trends is a classic example. So if you take lithium and you put it into water, it fizzes a little bit. If you take sodium and you put it into water, it sets itself on fire. If you put potassium in water, it explodes. And so you have these neat trends going down the periodic table. And that's a classic sign of the groups. The problem is that as we get heavier, we start to see elements misbehave a little bit. And we get things called relativistic effects. Now, if you imagine the nucleus at the center of the atom, the electrons are in orbital shells moving around that. And the size of the nucleus can affect how those electrons orbit the speed of which they're going around. And this is down to relativity, which I see almost people have heard of. And it means that we get strange properties that we wouldn't expect. Classic example is mercury being a liquid or gold being a golden colour. That's down to those effects. But again, Mendelayev didn't know about that at the time because he didn't have an understanding of the actual nuclear model of how elements existed and how atoms exist. Well, you said that he grouped these in terms of properties, but that he was also grouping the elements in terms of weight. How did he weigh any of these elements? I mean, how do you weigh hydrogen or iodine? What exactly are you weighing? So in terms of the atomic, you're looking at the atomic mass. And what we do have is the avogadro constants, which tells us we can work out the molar mass based on that. And that gives us the actual mass of this particular element. When it comes to measuring the weight of gases, obviously you're absolutely right, he does get very, very tricky. But it's funny that again, this is something that's evolved over time. So the official masses that we have of elements do not stay constant. Are you pack, who are the governing body of this particular aspect of chemistry? They're constantly updating the atomic mass of elements to be more precise. And that's down to things like isotropic concentrations in the Etypically Encounter. And also because we have a better way of measuring things now. We now have a better definition of the kilogram. Back in Mendeleev's day, a kilogram was literally, there was a piece of metal in Paris, and it was kept in a glass jar, and that was the kilogram. And now we actually measure the kilogram, and we have related directly to scientific properties. We've used incredibly fine balances. So I'll actually in Canada, where they were measuring it. And my footsteps in the room would actually alter the balance if it was in use. So incredibly accurate balances. We also look at things like the number of atoms in a perfect sphere of silicon. And then we base the kilogram on that. So now we've got better measurements and better ways of understanding exactly what our masses are. We can actually, again, be more accurate in terms of atomic mass. So, Kit, can you describe how the periodic table is organized now? And that is according to atomic number, which I believe is the number of protons. Yes. Why protons? Why not electrons? Why is it organized this way? So when you look at the way an atom is structured, we have, at the heart of the atom, we have nucleus, and that's made up of protons and neutrons. And you do have a very number of both. Now, protons are positively charged, and protons attract negatively charged electrons. Electrons are how the elements interact with each other and interact with the world. So if you think of electrons almost as the currency of chemistry, they are traded, they are stolen, effectively sometimes. That is what's governing properties, and so protons decide the element. And of course, the number of neutrons, which are neutrally charged, they're kind of packing filler, if you like, for the nucleus. They do change as well. And that's where we get the different isotopes. So a great example of isotope concentration, if you think about hydrogen. Normally, when we've got hydrogen, it's just a proton and an electron swimming around it. If we add in a neutron, then we get heavy hydrogen, and we get a deuterium, we get two neutrons in there, we get triterium. So we've got three different versions, if you like, of hydrogen. But when it comes to the elements itself, and which elements you've got, that's all down to the number of protons. And it sounds like because the protons are constant, and if you switch out protons, or if you add a proton or subtract a proton, then you actually get a different element. But the electrons are kind of free agents. We can't depend on them to determine what the properties are of the elements. We can't, and of course, if you're missing or you have an extra one, we call it an ion, which means that it's interacting with the world in a slightly different way. We actually define element creation. So is an element, does an element exist or not, as the time it takes to attract electrons? So when we're looking at the element, we're looking at the nucleus, and we're looking at the number of protons. Hydrogen, as you say, number one, that is the lightest, right up to on Earth, element 92, which is uranium. But we've gone a little bit further than that, because we've started looking at creating them ourselves. We'll hear more from Kit Chapman about how we are creating elements, the super-heavy elements, for example, that are the subject of his book. But before we go to the end of the periodic table, let's consider how it begins. Dr. Chapman mentioned that the first and lightest element is hydrogen, and also that the creator of the periodic table, the Metri-Menthal-Lay of, didn't know about the noble gases. They weren't discovered until the end of the 19th century. So before we go to super-heavy, let's go to super light. How can we learn about the relationship of gases to the periodic table? Well, it's elementary. We ask material scientists, Mark Miodovnik, whose new book is, it's a gas. Mark, there are 11 gases in the periodic table. Why these 11? Why not 12? Why not 10? How did 11 gases end up on the periodic table? Well, you say that there's 11, but it all depends on what temperature you are and what pressure you are. Because if you increase the temperature, things become a gas. So I guess the periodic table you're talking about is the one that is at human temperature, right? And also atmospheric pressure, because whether something becomes a gas or not depends on the pressure too. And we live at the bottom of 100 kilometers of atmosphere. We don't really feel it, because we were born at the bottom of this enormous ocean of gas. But everything is under pressure. Okay, this is a great big asterisk. But let's start at human temperature, as you say, a room temperature. And we'll go back to my question. There are 11 gases at room temperature on the periodic table. But why these? And five of them are noble gases. And what determines that grouping? So, yeah, this comes back to why something is a gas. So if we think about matter, we have all these different elements on the parent table. But how do they like to kind of hang out with each other? You know, all the atoms, like they kind of bond to each other if they give them a chance. And so some of them bond very tightly. So, you know, you can think of solids, which is the majority of the parent table. In fact, the majority is metals. In fact, funny thought, isn't it? That most of the parent table is metals. Most of the universe, in terms of number of elements, are metals. But why are they a solid? Well, it's because they like to bond to each other. And they do that really rigidly. So once they're doing that, they can't really move around very much. And because they can't move around very much, they're a solid. And then sometimes those bonds are quite kind of weak. And so they can swap partners quite easily. But they're still kind of all bonded to each other because they can only swap a partner. They can't just completely let go of the partner. And those are liquids. But some atoms, they really don't really at that temperature and pressure. They don't want to bond to anything else. And so they just fly around the universe doing their own thing. They are the ultimate individual atoms. And that's a gas. Right, that's really a gas. Gas is the ultimate freedom. Hydrogen is an interesting gas at room temperature. And it's one that you write about. And it is not placed with the other gases off on the right. It is off on the left. It's like this outlier that is too cool to hang out with the gases that are hanging out over on the right side. Why is it grouped separately? And why is it number one? Well, it's number one because it has one proton. And number two has two protons. And number three has three protons. So that's how the pure of the table works in terms of that. And what does it mean to have one proton? It means it has one positively charged subatomic particle in its middle. And outside it rotating outside is one electron. And that's it. But actually the way it reacts chemically with the other elements in the pure of the table, it is actually more like lithium, a metal, and sodium, a metal, and potassium, a metal. Because they all have one electron on the outside that is doing a lot of the reactions with everything else in the table. So even though it's a gas, we care more about how it chemically interacts with everything to arrange it that way. So we're not arranging the pure of the table over here of the solids, over here of the liquids, and over here of the gases. Because that isn't, it turns out, a useful way of understanding the world. That was the ancient way of understanding the world. But it actually doesn't take you very far. Now, naively before your answer, I was wondering whether or not hydrogen is listed as number one, because isn't it the most abundant element in the universe, or at least in the visible universe? It is. And that's an amazing thought. I mean, basically when the universe, we think. When the universe was first brought into being by some big bang event, the first elements that kind of start to form in the universe are hydrogen everywhere. And is that a coincidence that the most abundant element is the number one on the periodic table? On the other hand, you said that it's just an arrangement that humans made. But I wonder if there's something about that single proton that made it a really useful building block? It's about energy and probability. So, like, you can think of the early universe as being, let's say, lots of little protons on their own and electrons on their own. So, the whole universe, when it starts out, is just these individual particles all over the place. But then occasionally an electron and a proton meet. If they stick together, then they form the hydrogen atom. Now, you could have a situation where two protons and two electrons meet at the same time and they form an atom, and that would be helium. But that's much less likely. That's four things hitting each other at the same time. Whereas two things hitting each other at the same time is more likely. And that's why hydrogen is more abundant. Mark Mead-Dovnik is a professor of materials and society at the University College London and the author of It's a Gas. It's a gas that sublime and elusive elements that expand our world. Kit Chapman said that as elements start to get heavier, we start to see them misbehave. What does that mean for scientists attempting to create elements 119 and 120? Once we get past uranium, which is element 92, absolutely, we need to make these elements. We're going beyond the periodic table on big picture science. Support comes from service now. We're for people doing the creative work they actually want to do. That's why this ad was written and read by a real person. And not AI. You know what people don't want to do? Boring busy work. Now with AI agents built into the service now platform, you can automate millions of repetitive tasks in every corner of your business, IT, HR, and more. So your people can focus on the work that they want to do. That's putting AI agents to work for people. That's your turn. Visit servicenow.com. The periodic table of elements has many groupings as we've heard. You've got your gases and you've got your metals, for example. But in addition to the naturally occurring elements, such as hydrogen, helium, and carbon, there are elements that scientists have created in a lab. These synthetic elements often have funny names. Some reflect where they were created, such as element 97, burcolium. Name for the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. While element 96, Curium, honors Pierre and Marie Curie, who didn't produce it, but did work on radioactivity. All these manmade elements are radioactive, which is to say they spontaneously break down. Chemisclan Seaborg, who is instrumental in producing many trans uranium elements, that is elements that come after element 92 uranium on the periodic table, has element 106 named for him, Seaborgium. Synthetic elements are created by high energy collisions in particle accelerators, and typically last for only a tiny fraction of a second, since FOMOF, the University is storyant, Kit Chapman. Later we'll hear how scientists hope to add to the periodic table by smashing their way to element 120. But first Dr Chapman describes how new elements are created and why, and when you reach element 104, Ruther Fordium, you enter the realm of unstable super heavy elements. Everything after 92 is synthetic. There are some elements that don't really exist on Earth that are lighter than element 92. And again, that's purely because of whether they are on the periodic table. So, elements 43 is technician. That is the first human created element, because that doesn't exist. An incredibly useful element. You will now find that in every single hospital radiology department. We use that for treating people and assessing patients. Prometheum is another example of an element that just doesn't exist on Earth. But once we get past Uranium, which is element 92, absolutely, we need to make these elements. And the thing is, they do exist elsewhere in the universe. So, these elements are created in stars, and when we get to the really, really heavy ones, that's requiring two neutron stars to be smashing together. Basically creates a neutron soup, and that's all to down to how elements are actually created and made. Just a clarifying question. If the elements up to 92 occurred naturally, why would 43 technician be included in that general grouping? Well, think about what I said about Mendeleev at the start. He left gaps. And so, when he was leaving gaps, he created adding elements in the periodic table. He was still leaving gaps saying, this is an element that we haven't discovered yet. And those gaps persisted right up until the Second World War in 1940s. And once we started filling those gaps, we were actually able to complete the periodic table. So, before that, before 1940, there was a periodic table that would have a big hole, saying there is an element there that we have not found yet. What that says, and Mendeleev recognized, is that if you know where in the periodic table an element should be, you could predict what its properties were going to be. Exactly. And that is exactly what we can do. So, we can look at the periodic table and even though we've got elements, for example, the super heavy elements that exist for such a short time, we can't really do any chemical experiments on them, we can extrapolate because of trends and work out how they should behave. Now, the interesting thing is that because of these relativistic effects that I've mentioned, some of them do not follow the pattern that we would expect. A really good example is Oganeson. So, Oganeson is element 118 and it is in the noble gases. And every single one of those elements is a gas that is completely unreactive. It's things like neon, a krypton, argon, xenon. But once we get to Oganeson, we actually predict it's going to be a solid and it's going to be reactive. Basically, the periodic table stops behaving once we start to get to these really heavy elements. We should say about Oganeson that in your book, at least you claim it is your favourite, at least super heavy element. Is that right? Why is it your favourite? Oh, it's my favourite because I've met the guy it's named after. How many times can you say that you've met someone who's got an element named after them? There's only 118 elements, most of which aren't named after people. And it's one of the wonders of my life that I've got a connection and really good friendship with Yuri. He's now in his 90s. We still email occasionally and pass information over, have a little chat. And for me, that's the same thing as being friends with Albert Einstein or Riko Fermi or one of those giants of science. It's a fabulous treat for me. This link that you've just provided between the elements that were created naturally in either the Big Bang or soon thereafter by the mother of all particle accelerators, right? The universe. And then we have recreated that on Earth. And this brings us to how the discovery of elements has changed over 150 years. The periodic table is just over 150 years. And I wonder if you could say more about that that now to expand the the periodic table and it began in World War II, as you said, I believe, we have to create these elements in a lab using particle accelerators. Yeah, absolutely. So if you look at modern element discovery, so if the ancients, they basically dug up a piece of rock and they would find an element from it, from smelting, for instance, or some will just stumble because they exist naturally. Once we get to the modern era, it really begins with Henning Brand, who was a German alchemist. He was trying to turn his own urine into gold as you do. And he discovered phosphorus by accident. Could be a wealthy man if you could do that. Indeed. Indeed. Then we moved on to element discovery through electrolysis, through rocks, essentially breaking those down. And that was technology we had in the 18th and 19th century. And then we move into this area of particle accelerators and creation. Now elements that are the lightest of the heavy elements. So what we call the trans uranium elements elements beyond uranium. We typically make in nuclear reactors because a nuclear reactor for all intents and purposes is a neutron bouncy castle. We feed in the uranium and then there's just loads and loads of neutrons pinging around in there. Eventually they're going to strike a nucleus, they're not going to blow up and that nucleus is going to keep it turning into a proton, move it one place up. And during the second world war, that is what they were doing. They made the first nuclear reactors, the X-10 graphi reactor at Oak Ridge is the first permanent nuclear reactor. It was built to make elements, it was built to make plutonium. And then the Hanford site up in Washington, huge complex. It's the size of greater London. It's absolutely massive. And they were using that to make plutonium with giant nuclear reactors. Now as you keep doing that, it's really, really hard because usually the elements will explode. It's called nuclear fission. And so making uranium into net tunium, that's hard. Making net tunium into plutonium, that's even harder. And then you go the next step and the next step, it becomes harder and harder and harder. And it just becomes unfeasible to do that. Now this is actually a natural process, as I mentioned, it does happen in stars because they have huge size basically. It does happen a little bit in nature as well. So we do get some natural plutonium because this just happens to happen. But once we get beyond plutonium, once we get to things like curium and amerecium, that is not going to happen. So our approach has to change. And what we learn to do is to fire at whole atoms, basically lighter elements, at a target of another lighter element and smash them together in a particle accelerator. Now you don't want to fire it too hard because that's putting too much energy into that system and it's going to explode. It's going to break apart. But what you want to do is get over that cool ombaria, that positive positive repulsion and smush them together. And hopefully it can lose enough energy to become a stable element. And that's why these elements, the super heavies in particular, are so incredibly unstable. They are inherently unstable. It's all about how fast can they throw the ballast off a sinking ship to remain afloat just for a little bit of time to call them an element before they break apart into something lighter. And that's what really we've been doing since the Second World War. Again the Americans, Berkeley in particular, were fantastic at this. And then the Russians became involved as well. And so there was a huge competition during the Cold War between the Americans and the Russians. And then the Germans got involved as well as to try and create elements and fill the periodic table. And so you can see how the expansion of the periodic table runs parallel with the atomic age. It is the atomic age essentially. So if we look at when the atomic age began, which I suppose is quite a big question, a lot of people might think it's the atomic bomb being dropped. I would argue that it's discovery of nuclear fission. And so that's a German scientist called Otto Hahn. He was trying to replicate Fermi's experiment. He was trying to see if he could create this new element that Fermi had created by firing neutrons in there. And he was thinking, I'm doing this wrong. I've got some krypton, I've got some berry and they're much lighter elements. What's going on? And so he sent his results over to Lee's micna. And she was an Austrian chemist and she was Jewish. She'd fled Nazi Germany. And he said, I don't understand what's going on here. And she said, well, what's happened is the nucleus has broken apart. That's nuclear fission. That was something that nobody realized was possible. And if you look at the movie Oppenheimer, there's this wonderful moment where he's walking down the street and Lewis Alvarez, it's supposed to be. He runs out of the barber's shop with a piece of paper. And so I can't believe what I just found out. It changed everything. That is the birth of the nuclear age and the birth of really of understanding how nuclear chemistry, nuclear physics works. Well, and this draws us into a proper definition of super heavy elements, super heavy as the name of your book. You've referenced these elements a couple times in our discussion. What is the definition and how does a super heavy element differ from a synthetic element because it sounds like they are made synthetically? Yes. So they are made synthetically, but a synthetic element is any element that doesn't exist naturally on earth and something we have to create. So that will also include Prometheum Technician and it will include things like plutonium, which is not a super heavy element. So a super heavy element is element 104 and heavier and they're called the super heavy elements because they have so many protons in their nucleus that they're continuously unstable and very likely to break apart in days, minutes, sometimes even less than a second. So Kat, I'm getting hung up on the difference between discovering new elements and creating new elements. And often when the periodic table expands, they say scientists have discovered a new element sometimes, but they haven't really, right? They've created one. And at what point are we artificially inflating the periodic table? Well, this is a... Does that make sense? Is that question makes sense? It's a wonderful question because we know that these elements do exist in nature. As I mentioned, neutron stars colliding. We are positive that the super heavy elements do exist in them. So they exist somewhere, but we're never going to discover something that's inside of the heart of a neutron star. We're never going to be able to get in there. So are we creating them? Are we making elements that don't really exist? Or are we simply creating something that we know exists elsewhere in the universe and we can say it's a discovery? And it's an interesting question, but we use discovery in the same terminology in other places. We discovered the computer, for instance. We discovered how to use, I don't know, spears or bows and arrows or whatever. So if we can say we're discovering something that we've actually created, does it really matter? For me, though, this is a kind of a frontier of science, and that's really where discovery comes in. What are we doing here? Are we looking at existing science and perfecting it? Or are we breaking new ground? Are we entering something that nobody has ever seen before? For me, exploration is the heart of science and the heart of discovery. And I think that's what we're doing with these new elements. So I always say discover. That's a lovely description. I wonder if I can just press back a little bit. Are you ready? Okay. Well, if some of these elements exist for only a fraction of a fraction of a second, at what point do you say that their lifespan is so short, that it doesn't count as existing? Now, this is actually something that we've wrestled with for a long time, to the point that there was actually an official ruling on it. So all of the teams that discover elements actually got together and said, how do we actually define if something exists, if something is made? And the definition is it's able to attract electrons, which happens at about 10 to the minus 14 seconds. So incredibly fast, faster than I can even possibly imagine. And anything that's shorter lived than that doesn't count as an element. Now, this is where it gets really interesting because in the future, we're looking at what elements, how they may behave, and we've been made predictions based on physics. And this is how we know roughly how many elements we think there are. We think there are about 173 elements. So we're still missing a full third of the periodic table. But we think, hypothetically, that around element 140, these elements will be so unstable, so inherently unstable, that they will not be able to attract electrons. So at that point, do we say that chemistry is over? Because you can't have chemistry without electrons. Do we say that these elements even exist at all? Do we leave a big gap in the periodic table? Because we think that they might get a bit more stable later on. No one has the answer to that yet. And again, this is one of those really interesting questions of philosophy when it comes to science. There's antimony, austenic, aluminum, saline, emat hydrogen, an oxygen, an hydrogen and radium. And nickel-iodium, naptonium, germaneium, iron, amorecym, ruthenium, uranium, urobrium, zaconium, ruticium, vanadium, and lanthanamin, austenium, radium, and gold, protecting the emin, and the emin, and gallium. And iodine, and thorium, and thuleum, and thalium. There's an ematurbium, actinium, rubidium, borengatolinium, niobium, iridium, and strontium, and silicon, and silver, and samarium, and visselthromine lithium, but alium, and barium. There's homium, and helium, and hafnium, and herbium, and phosphorus, and fratium, and fluorine, and terbium, and manganese, and mercantium, and amolive, and am magnesium, and sprozium, and scandium, and cerium, and cesium, and lead-pressurium, and flattened and plutonium, and palladium, and amolive, and amotassium, and amotassium. Well, is there any limit in our quest to create new elements? Can we expand the periodic table beyond atomic number 118? Scientists said a particle accelerator in Berkeley, California, are taking up the challenge. Not only are these things very, very hard to make, but they only live for a very brief period of time before they undergo a radioactage decay and turn into other elements. We're going beyond the periodic table on Big Picture Science. This podcast is supported by Progressive, a leader in RV insurance. RVs are for sharing adventures with family, friends, and even your pets. So if you bring your cats and dogs along for the ride, you'll want progressive RV insurance. They protect your cats and dogs like family by offering up to $1,000 in optional coverage for vet bills and case of an RV accident, making it a great companion for the responsible pet owner who loves to travel. See Progressive's other benefits and more when you quote RV insurance at Progressive.com today. Progressive casualty insurance company and affiliates pet injury is an additional coverage and subject to policy terms. The periodic table currently ends at atomic number 118 with the element Oganesson. But that end may only be a pause. As we said, the periodic table is dynamic. It's been rearranged and expanded since its inception. Now scientists using particle accelerators hope to take us beyond element 118. But first, historian Kit Chapman addresses the question of motivation. What drives these efforts? Are there practical reasons for producing new elements? Or is it a race for a scientific breakthrough whose primary motivation is prestige? There is absolutely a status game in play. So when you look at the Japanese team, particularly Reacon, they have been trying for to discover elements for a very, very long time and they persevered for years to discover Nahonium, which is element 113. Because they wanted that prestige, there is a huge amount of Q-DOT attached. You get to name that element. The periodic table is going to be with humanity forever. This is a fundamental part of the universe. So you get to name something that is going to last 10,000 years, 2 million years, as long as humans exist into the future. That is an incredible prize. But there's something else too. It's possible that these elements might become more stable. And if we can understand how to make these elements more stable, we can start using them. Now, if you look at the use of plutonium, for instance, it's fantastic for power and of course for nuclear weapons, which is not a great use of it. But Amarissium, which is also a synthetic element, it's a little bit heavier than plutonium, that is in smoke detectors. That is in every smoke detector in the world. It has saved millions of lives. So being able to discover these fundamental questions in science potentially could lead us to huge discoveries in energy or any other application. If there are to be practical applications for elements beyond 118, then the new creations need to stick around, as he said. But artificially created elements typically self-destruct in a tiny fraction of a second. However, what if we could make them more stable? Now, around Florovium, which is element 114, we think there is someone called the Island of Stability. Now, this is all due to basically how magic numbers they're called, but how stable we can make the atom. I think many of us would like to spend some time on that Island of Stability just for a weekend. We're going to get to the sea of instability, if we can get to this Island of Stability. I mean, the classic example of an Island of Stability is lead. So lead is an incredibly inert element because it is right on those magic numbers. It's fantastic. Everything just basically becomes lead towards the end of its life, which could be millions of years of course. But around Florovium, if we can have a few more neutrons in there, we think we can start making Florovium last much, much longer. That means we can do experiment science, we can understand the fundamental rules of the universe a little bit better. And potentially we could get a use for that element. And a key part of being able to get to that point is creating heavier elements. My name is Jennifer Por and I'm a research scientist working at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in Heavy Elements. Dr. Por and her team at the Berkeley Lab are attempting to make an element that is otherwise produced only in the deep interiors of stars. They're skipping over element 119 for now because the material needed to make it is harder to come by than titanium. The material needed to make element 120. If successful, they'll have left a gap for atomic number 119 just as the creator of the periodic table, Dmitri Mendelay of left gaps 150 years ago. So we produce these elements using nuclear reactions. And the way we do this is we first need to have a beam of a certain type of elements. And then we hit that onto a target made out of a different type of element at very high energies. And the hope is that we're going to get a complete fusion of those two elements. So all the protons and neutrons to form our new heavier element. And so in other words, you just try and stuff an existing atomic nucleus with more neutrons and protons. Is that right? Yeah, it's definitely very rudimentary. But in practice, it's pretty challenging. Well, let me ask you this. I mean, you know, how much of this stuff do you actually make? You're making a new element, you know, with an atomic number that's much higher than anything that we've gotten nature. How much are you making? I mean, you're not making kilograms of this stuff. Are you? No, so we are trying when we do these nuclear reactions, sort of trillions of times a second to produce one of these events. And maybe you would make one event and by event, I mean one atom. So maybe you make one atom a week in a sort of good situation. But in some of these more rare elements, you're making one atom every few months. My goodness. Well, that's pretty slow. I mean, to begin with, it's not clear to me how do you know that you've made one atom of this stuff. I mean, you can't actually see the atoms. Let's start there. I mean, how do you know you've made any of it? Yes. So you do not actually see the atoms, which is an interesting experimental problem. So what we have to do is detect the radiation that these atoms emit. So not only are these things very, very hard to make, but they only live for a very brief periods of time before they undergo a radioactage decay and turn into other elements. So what we do is we implant them into a detector after we've made them. And then we'll see a very unique decay signature telling us that we've seen something new. You say these things are very short lived. I mean, you make it and then pretty soon it goes away by natural decay or something. How short is short lived typically? So fractions of the second. So milliseconds or less. You know, when you're in high school, or maybe it's junior, you know, maybe it's not in a middle school or whatever, you're told that matter can either be created nor destroyed. But it sounds like you're violating that. You're creating at least a new kind of matter. Well, we're just rearranging matter. So we're taking protons and neutrons from smaller elements and we're combining them together into a very tight space to make a new element. When you make these elements, you fire, as you've mentioned, you fire something at them, a beam of some sort. And I believe it's a beam of titanium. Why do you use titanium? Is it just easy to use? Can you accelerate it to a high enough speed? It'll collide with one of the atoms that you got in there and stick to it? I mean, what's the process here? So you can use different combinations of beam material and target material to produce new elements. But at the moment, there's a lot of interest in using titanium beams to make new elements beyond what we've already discovered. So at the moment, the highest element on the periodic table is element 118. And that was discovered using a calcium 48 beam on a Californium target. And pretty much all of those elements in that area were discovered using calcium 48 beams. And this reaction worked very well. So to go to element 1119 or element 120, we can't just go up and target material to get more protons. So to go up, we have to go to Einsteinium or Fermium. And there just isn't enough material of those elements to make a target. So we had to go up in beam. So this is why we moved the titanium beam. So it's definitely very challenging to make a titanium beam. And this is something that our team at Berkeley has worked very hard to do. And titanium is a metal. And to make a beam, you have to vaporize it into a gas and then turn it into a plasma. But titanium is very, very hard to melt and then boil and then turn into this plasma. And our team did a great job figuring out how to do that and how to get us a very high intensity beam of titanium. So over the course of 13 billion years hasn't produced these elements. You know, how would you explain that? I mean, somebody might ask, look, maybe if you just dug in the right place on the surface of the earth, you'd find some of this stuff. How do you explain to them that that's not likely to be true? So there was a period of time where people did think that was possible. Because going back to this theory of the island of stability that maybe some of these things lived for thousands of years. And if they were produced in stars, maybe they're just somewhere here on earth and we can try to find them. So people did do experiments where they were digging up different samples and trying to see if there was super heavy elements in there. But you know, these things are extremely radioactive. So if they are being produced in stars and they're only living for a few seconds, we on earth would not be able to actually detect that they were being produced. So it could be that they are being produced. We just don't quite understand how yet. So Jen, you know, what's the maximum atomic number you can ever hope to reach? I mean, how many protons can you stuff and do a nucleus? There must be some limit. So at the moment, we actually don't know what that limit is. What we do know is each element that we are making is getting harder and harder to make. So the question really is one of can we figure out how to make that element with that specific number of protons and neutrons versus if we could make it, would it actually be stable and exist long enough to be considered an element? And this is one of the more interesting questions in the field. Is this an exciting field to work in Jen? I mean, the idea that you're creating something that just doesn't exist in nature. This is definitely a very exciting field to work and I have to say, I mean every small piece of data we can get from one of these atoms gives us critical information about how our universe is organized, the stability of matter. These things also have some very interesting chemical properties that we can probe. So it's a very interdisciplinary field that's giving us all of this really interesting and unique information. Of course, down the road, you know, a few decades, a hundred years, I'm not sure. There could be new ways discovered to make these elements where we can figure out how to make more than two atoms of them. And there could be applications. Jen, poor. Thank you so very much for speaking with us. Thank you for having me. Jennifer, poor is a research scientist at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Historian Kit Chapman provides final thoughts about where her efforts and those of other scientists might take us. Kit, it sounds like if we went beyond the current periodic table, we might have to reorganize it. And maybe with time, if you could stabilize some of those elements, there might be some practical benefit. But otherwise, immediately, we might not, you know, outside of a lab or particle accelerator, we might not notice that the periodic table had changed. And you know, you wake up, you make your coffee, and the world feels pretty much the way it did the day before, right? Absolutely. But then again, that's been the case for a lot of times. You know, you probably don't notice if plutonium was discovered. It doesn't really affect your life, I hope, in any kind of meaningful way. But we do get those benefits, as I said, with things like amoresium. So do these elements matter on a practical day to day level? Perhaps not. But I think that there is also an inherent curiosity in humanity. We want to know the answers. Does it matter that someone has climbed Mount Everest? Because I am never going to get my butt up that mountain, right? It does matter. It's something that we've done. We've done it because it's there. And I think that that is the greatest reason to do science. Answer those questions. We do things because they are there. And then the benefits come to us in all kinds of ways that we would never expect. Well, then finally, if you were to discover an element, or if they were going to name one after you, would it be ketonium, or would it be Chapmanium? Which do you prefer? Or do you have another name? Well, I am not allowed to name it ketonium. So there are rules about what you can do. Why? You're allowed to name an element after five things, a mythological creature, which I sadly am not. A property of that element, a mineral that that element was discovered in, a place, or the name of a scientist. And so I suppose I could just about nudge into that last category. And usually we use the surname. So that was set up with Boreum in particular, because they wanted to specify that it was Niels Bohr, that they were named not Argue Bohr, which I think is a bit harsh on Argue Bohr. I mean, yeah, he'd have quite like that. Anyway, so you use a certain. And also, and also to call it Boreum, and not like Excidium. Yeah, indeed. So sadly, there are only so, you know, I could name it Chapmanium, but I don't know. I think that there are people that are more worthy of having elements named after them. Well, for a long time, when I was younger, I thought that there was an element named after me, until I learned that malibdenum is pronounced that way and not mollyby denim. That would have been fabulous. Kit Chapman, it is so fun to talk to you. Thank you so much for chatting with us about the periodic table. Any time. Thanks very much for having me. Kit Chapman is a scientist's story and at Falmouth University, and his book is called Super Heavy, Making and Breaking the Periodic Table. All right, Seth. That brings us to the big picture portion of the show. What are your thoughts about extending the periodic table? Well, I think it's kind of interesting, Molly, because after all, you know, for 100,000 years, we didn't even know about the periodic table. Now we have, in fact, all the constituents of the universe on one sheet of paper, and we're going to make that paper bigger. You know, when I was a kid, when I was a very young teenager, I chance to go to the Lawrence Berkeley National Lab to their accelerator, and they were talking about making new elements. I mean, the Lawrence didn't mean too much to me at that time. But now I find it really kind of exciting because, you know, none of our predecessors could have been able to create new elements. I mean, it's just an interesting experiment. I really find it quite compelling. And I like the contrast between the 19th century when all the elements that we had identified, at least the names of all the elements, we could identify, could fit on a piece of paper. And now we're making elements that we would otherwise never even observe. I mean, elements that are found only in the interior of stars. Yeah, you know, we talk about making new materials, new plastics, new alloys, whatever. But this is a slightly different game. Here we're making new elements, the very fundamental constituents of, well, the universe, the fundamentals of chemistry. And it's kind of an exciting time to be around. This show is thanks to the anything but elementary talents of senior producer Gary Neeterhoff and assistant producers Shannon Rose Geary and Brian Edwards. I am the executive producer of Big Picture Science, Molly Bentley. Big Picture Science has produced at the SETTE Institute, a nonprofit education and research organization that studies life and all its complexity. I'm the institute senior astronomer Seth Schostick. And we want to extend a big thanks to our listeners and our Patreon supporters. The original music in the show is by Dewey Delay and June Miyake. This episode of Big Picture Science about the challenge of creating new elements is called Beyond the Periodic Table. As a long time fine correspondent, I've worked in lots of places, but nowhere is important to the world as China. I'm Jane Perles, former Beijing bureau chief for the New York Times. On face off, the US versus China will explore what's critical to this important global relationship. Trump, Ancestion Ping, AI, TikTok and even Hollywood. New episodes of Face Off are available now, wherever you get your podcasts. If you enjoy bizarre true stories, then the useless information podcast is the podcast for you. For example, did you know that author Robert Louis Stevenson gave his birthday away? With it, there was a football team that played for six years before someone realized that the school never ever existed. Or that a dog in upstate New York was once placed on trial for murder. Well, to hear these and hundreds of additional fascinating true stories from a flip side history, we should check out the Usus Information Podcast. That's the Usus Information Podcast, podcasting worldwide since 2008 and available on Apple Podcasts Spotify or wherever you're listening right now. Be sure to check it out.
