What pops to mind when I say the word asteroid? Well, if you're a fan of sci-fi movies, you're probably picturing a large rock, hurtling through the solar system, and threatening the Earth. Now, if this comet continues on its path around the Sun and keeps its present course, there's a chance that we might have impact. All of us will entertain our worst fears and concerns. The danger posed by an asteroid hitting our planet is not only a conceit of Hollywood movies, it's real. But asteroids are more than triggers of extinction-level events. Most people are familiar with amino acids. The building blocks of proteins, and so we wanted to know are they present, and they are in fact present. This means asteroids present an intriguing paradox. The space rocks that can take its life away might also give it its start. But that raises some questions. If asteroids seeded our planet billions of years ago with the building blocks of life, does that mean we are all aliens? Could a similar scenario have played out elsewhere in the universe? I'm Seth Schostak, and welcome to Big Picture Science. I'm Molly Bentley. In this episode, the science of space rocks. From those we catch and sample to learn about the origins of life, to those we need to deflect, to keep us from going the way of the dinosaurs. In either case, in this episode, we are chasing an asteroid. When a piece of an asteroid breaks off and enters Earth's atmosphere, quickly burning up as a result, it becomes a meteor. Large ones came produce fireballs, and a fireball speaking across the sky is a remarkable sight, if you're lucky enough to see one. Daytime fireballs are fairly rare in New York City. And boy, did they get an eye full? Just quote my eye, I say, fireball, just streaming through the sky, I can't believe it. With their origins outside the Earth's atmosphere, these space rocks are literally extraterrestrials. They're also time capsules. As remnants of our early solar system, asteroids carry clues about its formation, four different types of asteroids. And they're also very rare. So, we're seeing these time capsules. As remnants of our early solar system, asteroids carry clues about its formation, 4.5 billion years ago. And let's say something about that formation, Seth, how do asteroids form? Well, in fact, asteroids form, do at the same time that the planets form together with the Sun, by the way. And just the result of this cloud of gas and dust that collapsed under its own weight, the planets, the Sun, and some smaller bits called the asteroids. And they're just leftover bits. Now, later we'll hear about the science and engineering that will help keep dangerous asteroids from slamming into the Earth. But science and engineering have also let us get close to an asteroid, and close enough to even touch it. When NASA's space probe Osiris Rex arrived at the asteroid Bennu in 2020, it swooped into brush its rough and rocky surface, and then flew off again as if playing a game of cosmic tag. Only when it left, the probe took some of Bennu with it. And the probe's camera captured this remarkable moment. You can watch this online. You'll see the sampling arm reach out, kind of bounces off the asteroid, kicks up dust and rock, as it gathers up this sample. Seth, have you seen this footage? I have, actually, yes. It's just remarkable. The first ever sample taken from an orbiting asteroid arrived for study on Earth in 2023. Now, the results of that analysis, that chemical analysis, are in, and they show something extraordinary. The gravel of Bennu contains the chemical building blocks of life, including 14 out of the 20 amino acids that ourselves use to make proteins. So I'm Scott Sanford. I'm a senior laboratory astrophysicist at NASA's Ames Research Center, and I'm also a member of the science team for the Osiris Rex mission. Dr. Sanford described to producer Shannon Geary how and why scientists selected Bennu as their sampling target. Well, there are several reasons. One of the more mundane one is that we knew we could get there and get back with current technology and with a reasonable budget. But also, Bennu was selected from a number of candidates that met that criterion, because we had reason to believe it would be really exciting. We knew from telescopic data that it was probably a very primitive object, probably rich in carbon, and we were very interested in finding out whether asteroids like this could contain organic compounds that could have been delivered to the surfaces of planets and potentially help play a role in getting life started, for example. And when you say primitive, do you mean from further back in the solar system? Yes, so asteroids generally form back in the early solar system, and for the particular kind of asteroid Bennu is, we know it formed very early in the solar system and probably formed a ways out where the temperatures were cold. And so as a result, these objects contain a lot of material that was basically the raw stuff from which the solar system was made. So it's primitive in the sense that it has not been altered much. Since it got together as an asteroid, I mean, you know, the Earth is pretty much the same age, the age of the solar system, but all the material on the Earth has been altered because of volcanoes and weather and every other thing. And so there are no samples on the Earth that date back to the formation of the Earth. But in the case of an asteroid like Bennu, the samples on Bennu date back to the birth of Bennu. And some of the material comes from before the birth of Bennu. That's incredible. So is our chance to get like a pristine look at this early solar system, and it didn't hurt that it was close enough that we had a reasonable course of action to get there. And just how much of the asteroid was carried back to Earth. Like when we imagine this sample coming back, I saw a picture. It was contained in this kind of black capsule that landed in the desert, very dramatic, but how much of the asteroid was in that? Yeah, so I was on the team that went out to Utah to collect the capsule. Oh, really? Yes, but the sample inside, the part that's actually from the asteroid, was all gathered together in a clean room at Johnson Space Center, and Wade and we brought back 121.6 grams of material. About how much is that? Like when I visualized how much of the sample there was, what would I picture? I mean, so it would be like maybe a juice cans worth or something. To just put it in perspective though, for the mission to be a success, we knew we needed to bring back 60 grams of material that would allow us to do all the kinds of analyses. We knew we needed to do, and then I also have a lot of material left over for future scientists to request samples for additional studies. So we brought back almost exactly twice as much as we needed to to be successful. So it sounds like scientists will be studying this sample and analyzing this sample for years to come then. Yeah, I mean, one of the big advantages of sample return missions is that you don't bring the sample back and study it for a few days and say, oh, that was interesting and throw it in the garbage. It's stored very carefully in curatorial facilities where you can maintain the pristine nature of the material. So there will probably be people who will make measurements on the venue samples who potentially aren't even born yet. And now you mentioned that one of the reasons Benu was chosen as a candidate for this mission was because scientists thought it might be carbon rich. Was that proven true? What sorts of molecules were you able to find in the sample from Benu? Yeah, absolutely. It's carbon rich and the number of molecules present is measured in the tens of thousands. It's very complicated mixture of materials. Now one of the things we're particularly interested in is those molecules in the organic mixture that are similar to the kinds of molecules we live in using modern life and living systems now. So for example, I think most people are familiar with amino acids, which are the building blocks of proteins. And so we wanted to know are they present? And if so, what do they look like? And they are in fact present. So we found a whole host of molecules, many of which probably don't even have names, formal names. And many of them are definitely of interest for those of us who are astrochemists and interested in the origin of life. So to clarify, you found the same amino acids that I have in my cells right now that are making up me as a person were also found on Benu. Some. So we didn't find all the, we've yet, I mean, who knows what we'll find as we continue to study. So far we found some of the amino acids that are used in living systems on earth. We've also found amino acids that are not used by current living systems on earth. So it's a wide mix of things. And then one of the interesting things we wanted to look into is what is the chirality of these amino acids that might take a little explanation. But yeah, do you think you could, would you mind for me and our listeners, would you mind just briefly explaining what you mean by chirality? Sure. So some, some molecules have handedness to them and that's called chirality. So if I hold up my hands, you could say, let's suppose my hands represent two molecules. And the actual equation of these molecules is actually the same. It's one palm, one thumb, four fingers. They both have the same chemical equation. But they're not the same thing because they don't overlap, right? One has the thumb sticking out of one side and one has the sticking out of the other. And so we refer to these molecules as having handedness. And so you can have molecules that are one handedness or the other handedness. And for whatever reason, we don't understand why in living systems on the earth, it's the left handed amino acids that dominate all the chemistry. And we don't use the right handed amino acid. So one of the things we wanted to know if we found amino acids in Benio is are they predominately right handed or left handed or are they both? And as what we found is that it's pretty much equal amounts of both. This certainly intriguing because we now getting a somewhat different answer from these very pristine samples we brought back and kept free of contamination from what we're getting from meteorites, which of course have the problem. You know, don't land in a nitrogen purge glove box when they land on the earth, they land in dirt, you know, full of bacteria and things. And so, so our Benio samples having the advantage that contamination isn't such a problem like we have with meteorites. So we'll have to puzzle this out, but it's certainly very intriguing. Okay, so it's insight into how life, well, maybe I shouldn't say life, it's an insight into how organic molecules might form elsewhere in the universe slightly different from how they form here on earth. Yeah, so I mean, it tells us something about the process. I mean, the process didn't involve living things. It was some kind of a biotic process because we got both handedness. So I mean, one of really amazing things about seeing these organics in meteorites or making them in my laboratory or so on is that it's a clear demonstration that the processes that happen automatically as you make a new planetary system in the course of that make organic compounds and they make quite complex mixtures of organic compounds. So in so far as these organic compounds like the amino acids play a role in getting life started here on our solar system, they should be available to play that role in other planetary systems that are forming as well. So in a way, the universe is hardwired to make complex organics. And if you make a suitable planet, this stuff should come. And so that raises the possibility that life may in fact get a leg up from things that fall out of the sky. All over the place now how life actually starts after that and what it looks like may vary quite a bit. I mean, on earth, it decided to pick left handed amino acids, but there's no reason to believe that someplace else might have decided to use the right handed amino acids. So there's that opportunity for an abundance of possibilities out there. So possibly there's a planet teaming with life that is all right handed amino acid base somewhere. And it would be lovely to meet them, but we wouldn't want them to eat us and we wouldn't want to eat them because we couldn't digest each other. Okay. Well, that seems like a good basis for a blossoming friendship. Yeah, there you go. So time to found all these amino acids, including ones that we use in our own cells here on earth. Did you also find D&A RNA? Did you find those essential building blocks for for life here on earth? Well, we didn't find anything as big and complex as DNA and RNA, but what we did find is the building blocks that DNA and RNA are made from, which is the nucleobases. Life on earth uses five different nucleobases to build its structures. And we found all five in the samples. So that's pretty amazing. So nucleobases, evidence of liquid water, amino acids, I mean, this is incredible. It sounds like we found if not life itself, all the ingredients that you might need for life on this little rock floating out in space. Well, maybe I shouldn't say little. It's probably relatively big compared to me. It's about a half a kilometer across. So as asteroids go, it's not huge, but it is bigger than us. Yeah, it's really intriguing that these samples contain many of the building blocks that we use for life now. And it really speaks to this idea that possibly life on earth got a leg up on getting started because many of the ingredients that needed to get going were actually provided free of cost by falling out of the sky. And so undoubtedly chemistry on the earth played a major role in getting life going, but it may have had real assistance coming from space. It's a little bit like if you want to say life is a big fancy Lego castle. And then it seems to suggest that Legos fell out of the sky. So that seems like a great way to get a good start on things. So given that this sample is unique in that it was so pristine and you know, kind of was collected directly from the asteroid itself and was not exposed to any sort of earth contamination is what makes the venue sample significant that we finally have more solid evidence that these biological building blocks for life exists elsewhere. In the solar system. Yeah, so Benu is definitely unique in the sense that it gives us the ability to measure these materials in amazing detail and know that we're looking at a pristine sample. We gain another advantage from sample return, which is that we know where our sample came from. So meteorites fall on the earth all the time, most of them land in the ocean. Some of them land in Antarctica. I've gone down there to pick some of them up. But they all land on the ground and we don't know where they came from. So when we pick up a meteorite, we don't know which asteroid it belongs to. So there are all these meteorites are orphans. And as a result, that means that what you do learn from them can't be placed fully in context with its full history. It's a little bit like if someone hands you a brick, you could measure this brick and grew some detail and know everything about this brick. But you wouldn't necessarily know whether it used to be in an elementary school in St. Louis or it's part of the Leaning Tower piece. So you need to the fact that we brought the sample back from a known object and we know where we collected it on the object allows us to have this kind of context for the sample that we just don't get from meteorites. Scott, what does this all mean? If you help me think about the big picture here, what does the finding of these biomolecules and these building blocks for life on Bennu tell us about the possibility of life elsewhere in the universe? Well, I think it tells us that complex organics are probably common in the universe and that in so far as you need those to get life started, life may well be reasonably common provided you have the right environments for it to start and to evolve. And I think that's pretty fascinating. It suggests that we're not alone. Scott, thank you so much for talking with me today. You're welcome. I'm always happy to talk science. Scott Sanford is a research scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center and a co-investigator on NASA's OSIRIS Rex mission to the asteroid Bennu. Well, there's another side of the story of our relationship to asteroids and that is the threat that the big ones pose to life on Earth. Science journalist Robin George Andrews tells us that story next, but as he has written extensively about these space rocks, we turned to him now for his perspective on and reaction to the Bennu findings. I love OSIRIS Rex. I think it's one of the coolest missions. Asteroid sample return has happened before. Japan's got pretty good at that, but the size of the sample and the pristine nature of the material and all the amino acids, you know, you have essentially the building blocks of a lot of matter that life uses. It's surprising in a way because they found a lot of geological activity that would kind of be present on worlds that would eventually lead to life being there for example they found like salts and brines. And they found lots of clays and lots of phosphates and lots of other things you expect to see on like an active living world. So that's the stuff that I think was really surprising. What's interesting Robin is that the scientists chose Bennu not only because it was big enough and close enough for sampling, but it's also an asteroid that has a chance of hitting Earth. I mean, there are other reasons why scientists are thinking about this asteroid. Right. Yes, OSIRIS Rex is an acronym and one of the SS stands for security and so it is implicitly a planetary defense mission. It actually managed to work out Bennu's orbit to extreme precision and all that couldn't roll out of a future impact. It basically did help refine the odds. Well, we'll talk more with Robin George Andrews and find out what scientists have in mind for keeping the big asteroids away and our planet safe. That's next on Big Picture Science as we go chasing an asteroid. Are you still quoting 30 year old movies? Have you said cool beans in the past 90 days? Do you think Discover isn't widely accepted? If this sounds like you, you're stuck in the past. Discover is accepted at 99% of places that take credit cards nationwide. And every time you make a purchase with your card you automatically earn cash back. Welcome to the now. It pays to discover. Learn more at discover.com slash credit card based on the February 2024 Nelson report. We have a conflicted relationship with asteroids with some were happy that they're big enough and close enough for us to study like the asteroid Bennu. But our feeling about other big asteroids is different. We want them nowhere near Earth. Hollywood has turned the idea of earth busting asteroids into blockbuster movies. These movies are based on a real problem even if the solution they depict is seriously bonkers. Like in the movie Armageddon when they drilled a hole and planted a nuclear bomb in the asteroid. Why don't we just send up 150 nuclear warheads and blast that rock apart? Hitting the rock may outside will do the job. Are you suggesting that we pull this thing up from the inside? It's exactly what I'm saying. But what if instead we could deflect it, you know, nudge the rock in a different direction? Well here's how volcanologist turn science journalist Robin George Andrews sets the scene for the NASA experiment done not long ago to try that very thing. His book is called how to kill an asteroid the real science of planetary defense and think of it as a dry run to save the earth from real life Armageddon. It's 7pm on September 26th, 2022. Across the campus of a university in Maryland hundreds of people are glued to their screens, windows into the cold depths of space, counting down to the moment that everything changes. And all over the world astronomers are standing by their telescopes all pointed at one tiny speck of light in the night sky. Seven million miles from home an uncrewed spaceship is headed towards an asteroid of breakneck speeds. It's mission to crash straight into it, losing its robotic life in the process and change the journey of the asteroid around the sun. This is it. This single space mission could alter the course of human history. Later we'll find out what happened to that mission and whether NASA's historic first attempt to deflect an asteroid was successful and how we might build a planetary defense system. But first let's identify the threat. Robin prior to the dark mission to deflect an asteroid to attempt to deflect an asteroid which we will get to. What were we doing or in what ways were we considering trying to protect Earth from an asteroid. Could you give us a rundown of the sorts of ideas that were out there. Yeah, so I mean for as long as telescopes have existed I mean people been looking out for things zipping about in the sky but only in the last few decades was that kind of formalized under NASA. You need to find the dangerous asteroids before they find us so that's step one of planetary defense you need to know what's out there for either my heading our way. And then for a while like the idea of actually dealing with these asteroids was super science fiction. I mean some of the inspiration comes from science fiction and the two ideas are always can you knock the asteroid out the way or can you destroy it. And generally when those two conversations came up people are talking about some sort of super futuristic weapon type technology rather than a really basic kind of spacecraft or they were referring to nuclear weapons. So those are the ideas wasn't there also something about painting it a certain color or. Yeah, so if this is sounds it does obviously sound ridiculous that you could paint an asteroid. So you would paint it white or something very silvery the idea is that you'd want one side of the asteroid to be very reflective and the other side to be its usual kind of dull self and theoretically the amount of light bouncing off the reflective side would increase and you would get an extra little push from from literal sunlight to like nudged the asteroid of course. So you know on paper that sounds not unreasonable. But yeah it's in practice I think a little bit trickier. Well what was what was stunning about your book about asteroids is learning that asteroids don't need to be extinction event size rocks like the one that did away with the dinosaurs 66 million years ago. They can still create destruction and havoc and smaller asteroids can do a lot of damage can you describe what a terrible phrase but what a city killer is. Yeah so the phrase city killer is interesting because it sounds like something that like non scientists came up with but actually it's something that astronomers kind of unofficially called them and it really you know I think it's quite an app description. So city killer is anything that's roughly the size of a football stadium a little bit smaller you know and obviously to actually cause damage to the city they need to hit it the earth is big there are lots of places asteroids could hit but ever an asteroid that's relatively small we're talking 460 feet across our 140 meters. It would plan through the atmosphere in a matter of seconds it may break up a little bit in the atmosphere but it'll probably make it to the ground when it does it will basically turn everything solid into a fluid it will leave an impact crater in the heart of that city and vaporize anything that it hit which is the least bad bit of it the bad bit is that the shock wave it would unleash would be akin to you know the largest nuclear weapon ever detonated. We have some experience with that maybe not with the destruction that you just described but we've had near misses or misses but they weren't as bad as maybe they could have been in Russia in 2013 and further back in 1908 can you just describe what our close calls have been like. Close call is a great way to describe me so the one in 1908 I mean this was kind of buried by history for a while I mean this asteroid impact happened before the first world war so the idea of there being like colossal explosions that weren't volcano is basically was it was it was quite a little concept and this asteroid was about 40 or 50 meters across so again quite small and it hit a remote patch of Siberia. On June 30th 1908 and fortunately there are only sort of no mads going for the air at the time so it's quite sparsely populated but there aren't any minutes to count to what they saw and it exploded in mid air it didn't even touch the ground the atmosphere forced its way into the asteroid and broke it apart as often happens of small asteroids it's leveled a forest about twice the size of New York City like in a heartbeat only three people killed because it's not a big deal. It was a very very sparsely populated area but it was also like blowing over huts and things like this I mean it destroyed buildings is maybe not quite what you call them but yeah yeah so so one one of the eyewitnesses was saw their father blown up into a tree the metal utensils in these tents melted the sky burned red I mean it would have looked genuinely apocalyptic it was very lucky in the sense that it hit that exact spot on the ground. I don't know for that time because if it hit earth just an hour or two later it would have hit somewhere like Moscow so the entire world history would be completely different so definitely a close call with Tunguska. Okay so the one in 1908 we have written accounts we have dash cam footage of the one that exploded in the skies in Russia in 2013 so that is something maybe many listeners have seen footage of. Yeah so the the the cell you've been to meet you named after the Russian city it exploded over was really a wake up call to the planetary defense community just to point out that meat is don't hate Russia for any particular reason it's just Russia is quite big and that's why it often gets hit and this this asteroid was like 18 meters across this is very very small very small and yet it's still it burnt across the sky it was seen across all these dash cam footage is CCTV. And it's mid air explosion was about 500,000 tons of TNT to still pretty big and although no one died it did injure about 1,600 people mostly through glass windows being turned into like shotgun shells it was actually lucky no one was killed because it came in at a very very shallow angle if it actually came in like straight from above for example it would have plunged deeper into the atmosphere and the explosion probably would have killed people. So again a very very close call there so you know how lucky do we feel at this point. I'm going to follow up on that question of how lucky do we feel in just a moment. Robin what actually causes the explosion what is it what is the physics behind that. Yeah so when we're talking about explosion with these asteroids even in terms of like a full blown you know 140 meter city killer what's happening is the asteroid is plunging into the atmosphere and we have a wonderful atmosphere not just the atmosphere but the atmosphere. The wonderful atmosphere not only does it allow us to breathe it's quite a substantial atmosphere and the front of the asteroid gets really hot hot air gets essentially forced into the asteroid and asteroids are normally full of like holes and weaknesses and fractures like that and the asteroid essentially gets blasted open and as the asteroid rapidly decelerates and gets blasted open all that kinetic energy I mean these things are traveling so fast and they way so much gets dumped into the atmosphere all kind of all in one go. And it's that like release of kinetic energy into the atmosphere that causes the shock wave which you know can do anything from calls windows to smashed a blasting homes into the air. Back to the question of how lucky we feel. What are the odds at a big asteroid or damaging asteroid would ever hit earth when I told a friend that I was going to be speaking with you about asteroids he said how concerned should we be about asteroids. It's not something you should worry about day to day this is not like a day to day risk thing it is sort of more like a lifetime or several lifetimes risk type situation and again we're talking about these like city killer asteroids so. Asteroids of that size it's only an estimate it's based on the fact that smaller things are more common in the cosmos the bigger things most asteroids hang out in the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter they are completely harmless they're very chill. But there are about 25 to 30,000 city killer size asteroids in near earth or it means they orbit the sun in an orbit that kind of huge somewhat closer now all the ones discovered maybe by one exception opposed no risk to us in the next century. But most of the city killer somewhere like 55 to 60% of yet to be discovered and the the guess at the moment is there's like oh there's like a if you live to 100 there's like a one in 200 chance that a city killer will. In packs somewhere on the earth in your lifetime that could be anywhere on earth but again like do you really want to risk doing nothing and have a city killer randomly choose a spot on earth to say here I mean I don't so you know don't panic but it's not like there is no trouble so it may not be a danger within one's lifetime but eventually eventually if we don't do anything a big rock is going to hit earth. So let's look more closely at some of these asteroids that we should be worried about. I find it both amazing that NASA has tracked so many of them and I think you say that they've tracked them and actually you know computed their trajectories over a hundred years. And then you also just said that there are a lot of them that that are not on their radar as it as it were right. Can you give us an idea of what makes an asteroid a threat in other words is its trajectory set now so all we have to do is identify and say well it's it might hit in in 2050 or do asteroids get knocked out of their orbit and they become threats. So NASA and the European Space Agency basically are very skilled at using computer software to track objects that they know exists. So the first thing you have to do is find as many of the asteroids as possible which they are getting rapidly better out for a whole bunch of reasons in terms of tracking them over the next century but basically they say a century because you know barring something incredibly random which they've never seen. If you know where an asteroid is and you can plot out its orbit and this is an asteroid of any size by the way you can plot out orbit over several months or years even but several months or two. You can basically use really rudimentary orbital dynamics to work out where the asteroid is going to be you know at least a century from now that's why they say a century that's how that's when they're really confident over time and for asteroids of different sizes certain things can alter their trajectory other than the gravity of the sun. One of these is something called the Arkowski effect where asteroids for smaller asteroids in particular they can heat up during the day when they're facing when they're facing the sun they spin around and that warm aside cools down and when it re radiates that radiation it can act like a very tiny thruster on a rocket thruster that can nudge an asteroid off an orbit. Now in a very short term that doesn't make a difference but asteroids you know over a century or more that can put them on a potentially dangerous trajectory so it's important that that's taken into consideration. There is a threshold that people have agreed on like this international like a UN agreed threshold that took into account like lots of recommendations and essentially if an asteroid that's bigger than 50 meters so that's one that comfortably will make it through the atmosphere and call and at least devastate a city if the impact is in less than half a century and it's not going to be a big deal. So that's a very important trajectory and if there is a 1% chance of an impact that can't be swiftly rolled out so that's that's when like a UN based organization who will actually start putting into works like how should we advise governments how should we communicate should we set up the channels for people to communicate this how do we convey the uncertainty it is a little arbitrary I mean you know I think a major issue there is is the the warning time you have like ideally you know you can't get it out of the way you're doing it. Like ideally you want like you know a decade to do something about an asteroid that's coming your way sort of thing so if you if you had like for example six months that would be a massive problem that would be an enormous problem. Let's just follow up on that if you had six months lead time instead of a decade under what scenario would we have just a few months warning would it be that one of those rogue asteroids one that maybe NASA is not able to track suddenly comes into view. I mean how does that happen so so quickly. Yeah so I mean this is a thing like you think you know asteroids seem like they should be somewhat easy to spot but the main way asteroids spotted now although this is soon going to change is visible light is like sunlight reflecting off them and not our asteroids are alike I mean if you have a small asteroid it's really harder to see and these things move really fast and if you have a really shiny reflective asteroid coating. You can see it more easily but a lot of asteroids have really dull city light coatings and much harder to spot so kind of like Kelly Vince you know in 2013 that day NASA was looking on the other side of the night sky of the sky to tracking an asteroid they thought might be dangerous but they're tracking anyway and Kelly Vince basically come out of the direction of the sun so they're just blinded by the light of the sun so there is an element of luck to it at the moment where we could get ambush by an asteroid and there is you know I mean you know not not to unnerving one but there is a tiny chance that we could just not see an asteroid coming before it hits us or we can have six months or we can spot it and have 90 years the trick is having as many eyes on the sky as possible. We heard the setup about the first ever mission to change the orbit of an asteroid will hear the results of that mission next they can move up to 55,000 miles an hour so buckle up because we're chasing an asteroid on big picture science. This episode is brought to you by Audi the road is calling embrace the thrill of the drive with the all new fully electric Audi Q6 e-tron featuring effortless power serious acceleration and advanced Audi tech it's not just a new EV it's a new way to experience driving the all new fully electric Audi Q6 e-tron is here the next chapter of Audi starts now. There aren't many things in life that are certain but in addition to the usual pair deaf taxes we can add a third collision of a large asteroid with earth that rock will come eventually unless we do something and that's it is doing something for several decades now the agency has had one of the coolest name departments around the office of planetary protection it deals with threats from space and most obviously asteroids in September 2022 the office conducted a first of its kind experiment called dark the double asteroid redirection test the target of this asteroid deflecting experiment was called the more foes the moon orbiting an asteroid called diddimos the goal was to give the moon a nudge and change its orbit so do we stand a chance going head to head with these space rocks Robin George Andrews shares how the scheme to one day save the earth turned out Robin maybe you could comment on our planetary defense strategy that we see in the movies and in the movies what we usually do is we send somebody up to an incoming asteroid or whatever and he drills a hole in it he put a nuclear bomb in it whatever and we just blow it up now blowing it up might work but we usually don't consider doing that why not well I mean the first thing you definitely not do is you wouldn't send astronauts to do it I mean that's just adding points of failure to already complex operation you'd send robots to do it you also wouldn't drill into the asteroid plant and you and blow up if you wanted to cleanly break the asteroid in half so the two bits go in different directions I mean asteroids or comments don't cleanly break in half like almost nothing does anyway that would be really convenient but they don't and you certainly would hope that the asteroid or comment wasn't I think the asteroid in Armageddon was the size of Texas which is hilariously big like that's just unbelievably big to see only 18 days out so you know there is a lot of things that we can do is just you know there is a point to you can weapons and show it talk about there is a use to them for planetary defense but you wouldn't drill into an asteroid dropping you with humans and then fly away from your game you just put the new kind of robot parking next door and blow it up and if you blow it apart you've got lots and lots of projectiles headed toward the earth right true yet you have to be very very sure if you're going to destroy it or disrupt it it's called that you are basically vaporizing it into harmicide pieces otherwise you always if you can you have time you'd want to deflect it you know whether that's with the new course something else all right deflection is the strategy yeah what was the plan with dart what was the idea of dart and maybe you could explain the acronym yeah so the acronym is a backron in like most space things it basically scientists came up with the with the name of the mission and then put the words in afterwards because they think it looks cool a cyrus Rex was the same it looked cool and darts answer double asteroid redirection test now if you have time in a real emergency you want to deflect an asteroid and you deflect it by ramming a spacecraft into it not too hard to break apart but just hard enough that it will deflect it away from earth now they were they had an original plan to test us out they would send a European spacecraft out first to an asteroid that would then film darts smacking into it and and you know record the dramatic aftermath that kind of fell through and so the u.s. was running how else to do it and they realized that they could use a binary asteroid system to work out what happened now binary asteroid system is like the earth and the moon except as a bigger asteroid and a small asteroid and they figured that if they ram a spacecraft a semi autonomous spacecraft into the smaller asteroid it would change its orbit around the bigger asteroid now that's good for two reasons one you can see it would tell us coach from earth and you can see it with the telescope from earth and like the hand of a clock changing speed kind of changing size almost and the second thing is when you hit the smaller asteroid it's not going to fly off randomly into space maybe accidentally you know kill an astronaut or an earthling or a martian in the future so it's very safe and cleverly design experiment but you know they didn't know if it was going to work no one had ever tried anything like this before so you know it would be game changing if it did work this mission involved slamming a spacecraft into you know so let's deal on the object but that's kind of a suicide mission that kamikaze mission is it not it is in fact it's the first time I can think of that there was a planetary sort of science esque mission whose sole purpose was to die normally when when NASA or any other space entry sends any spacecraft to any celestial object they want it to live for as long as possible to do as much as possible in this case the anyway you can ram an asteroid is fly a spacecraft into it and unfortunately spacecraft is not going to survive so yeah that's destiny was to die very unusual for any space mission so you know how should I think about this matter of actually hitting an asteroid I mean they're not next door they're not as close as the moon by any means so you know maybe you can give us an analogy yeah so the best analogy for how difficult this was was put to me by like one of the sort of top engineers of the mission so it was a NASA mission along with the Johns Hopkins applied physics laboratory they kind of built and designed it and and and fluid and she Elaine Adam she said imagine you're at JFK airport and you have a dark very very small dark and you need to hit the center of a bullseye in Dallas and you throw it all the way from New York and hit exactly the center of that bullseye in Dallas except that you're also blindfolded and you don't know whether the dark board is that's how hard it is to do and on top of that the dark board is moving at 14,000 miles an hour okay so what happened so it launched on a space sex rocket in November 2021 it would only take 10 months to reach this target which for planetary science it's always like incredibly quick and they were hoping that it would hit the small asteroid and would basically you know think the trench run at the end of Star Wars you know it had to hit this exact target if it deviated of course even a little bit it would completely miss a set to the 26 2022 that's when the dark mission this van size spacecraft with the camera for a face was destined to die and you know with a kind of live stream be back to mission control scientists actually saw in real time this spacecraft slam into this asteroid and completely self destruct and then when they looked at over telescope they could see the explosion and then over the next few weeks they could see that the asteroid died more for us change its orbit by 33 minutes is shrank by 33 minutes around did he must the bigger asteroid which was 25 times more effective than they thought it was going to be so it was an incredible success like deflecting an asteroid city killer asteroid actually is more effective than people thought which is great so this is a really from a technical point of view a very substantial achievement extremely substantial I mean they genuinely you know publicly NASA was very like oh yeah yeah you know we're going to give it a good shot we don't know if it's going to work but we're pretty sure but honestly they did not know if this was going to work on I mean they'd never tried it before it's hard to practice the sort of thing and the fact they did it like first try like and with flying colors is genuinely incredible I mean you know it was it was truly jaw dropping to see happen so you say that it worked by changing the orbital time what is it the orbital period by 33 minutes is that right but you know what does that mean is that enough of a change so that this asteroid would never hit the earth it'll just slide right by and you know cause headlines and the papers but no more so when you want to deflect an asteroid I think people imagine probably because of the movies you you would deflect it when it's just about to hit the earth you know like hit it away like you're playing billions or something but actually like a 33 minute change for an asteroid that big is huge if you had several years to do it that would add up to it easily enough to like deflect an asteroid of that size NASA's original target was 73 seconds so the fact that they got 33 minutes shows that they can you know they can really deflect asteroids if they need to so over the course of a several years that's a huge difference yeah that would comfortably miss the earth yeah well it sounded like a success I mean by the way you know when we talk about asteroids I think most people think of what they've seen in the movies is a big parkmark rock but I've also read in the past that asteroids may just be big piles of rubble and more like sponges than like rocks what's the truth yeah so um for asteroids are like really big like a kilometer or or over two thirds of a mile over there they're probably a mixture of things if they're like very very tiny they're probably just single rock but in this weird middle ground the city killer size it does look like that they are essentially bolder flying information cliffs flying in close formation they're barely bound together by their own gravity and in fact dimorphos the target of dark was a rubble pile asteroid which there's a pro and come to that the con is if you hit one of those two hard it will break apart and you'll send fragments everywhere which no one wants the pro is if you hit it you can remove so much debris from the surface that debris flying off acts like a rocket and pushes the asteroid even further in the direction you want it to deflect which is exactly what happened with the dark mission so yeah rubble piles of wood I think if you tried to stand on one you'd sink into it like a bull pit very weird you know rather what strikes me and it's kind of profound in a way is that humans don't have too much sway in the structure of the solar system but you know when we nudge dimorphos in a sense we did I believe that's the first time humans have purposely changed the motion of a celestial object don't it matter wrong yeah no in terms of intentional intentional changes and like severe changes yeah it's the first time with changed the motion of a celestial object with the intent to like make the the cosmos more safe I think that the most poetic way I've ever heard this being described me I think I'm from Lindley Johnson who was then the head of NASA's planetary defense coordination office and he said we are rearranging the cosmos to make it more habitable which is incredible to me I mean that's that's the stuff of magic really and myth made real so yeah so Robin you know following this if you will demonstration experiment are we all set when it comes to deflecting an asteroid if we were to find one next week you know come on our way do we have the tools to you know mitigate the problem I'd say that you know the dark mission success represents the end of the beginning we have proven that we can deflect asteroids that are of that city killer size but they still more work to do you know you don't you don't just want one tool and toolbox you know people are actively researching how to use nuclear weapons to disrupt or deflect them you know not with a real test using experiments simulations other ideas have been touted you know dark to has been suggested why don't we hit another asteroid but at the same time and and the thing that's really at the forefront of planetary defenders minds at the moment is we need to find the potentially hazardous asteroids before they find us so a lot of work is going into launching a mission called neo surveyor near earth object surveyor whose infrared eye and position in space will let it spot 90% of the city killers in near a for in just a few years so right now the big focus is on okay we can deflect an asteroid and we find them all before they find us that's really the next thing so no we are nowhere near being sorted but the world has never been safer at the same time so I think that's like that's that's nice to think about well finally Robin we might just be able to put you know this experiment into practice in late 2024 astronomers and chilly spotted a hundred meter wide asteroid that had risen to the top of the impact list I think the name given to this thing is asteroid 20 24 why are four should we be losing sleep about this rock not yet I wish I could say no I'm just going to say not yet because this is this is an unusual case there is currently a 1.9% chance of an impact on December the 22nd 2032 which has gone up a bit impact odds are often rise before they fall the thing that's different about this is that it's quite a large asteroid in that it can destroy city if it hits it hopefully it would land in the middle of the ocean but right now they haven't been able to rule out chances of an impact and they've only got two months left of more observation so there is a slight chance that we may be left with a small possibility of an impact until 2028 when it makes another close fly by which no one wants I think the optimistic thing here is it's good that we know it's there we have time to plan to do something if we need to and people are working on this problem around the clock so don't lose any sleep over it just yet but you know don't don't forget it exists well Robin Andrews thanks very much for speaking with us thank you so much for having me super fun super fun Robin George Andrews is a science journalist and he is the author of How to Kill an Asteroid the real science of planetary defense so that brings us to the big picture in the show and I'm joined by Seth and Shannon and you know maybe we should start by just underscoring that these two missions were two first ever NASA asteroid missions one along with Issa was to sample an asteroid and the other one was to test the feasibility of deflecting one and both were successful yeah in fact Robin Andrews specified that not only was NASA successful with the uh dark mission but they actually passed with flying colors which I thought was fun to note I also got the feeling Shannon that you were much relieved uh when you and I had conversations about this that you were much relieved that the dark mission was successful definitely I definitely felt like my anxiety spiked a little bit during this episode but after hearing about just how accurate NASA could be in and getting to an asteroid and how much they were able to deflect it on the first try I definitely feel like I can sleep soundly at night give him my rocks the size of the one that did in the dinos and three quarters of all other species don't hit us very often it's been 66 million years without such a rock hitting us so uh you know the big difference is that today thanks to technology and uh you know science really we have the means to not only find out if we're in danger but to do something about it and the poor dinos didn't have either of those but I found so incredible about the Bennu story is that uh it's really the first time I believe since we took samples back from the moon that we've had the opportunity to get a you know physical pristine piece of a celestial body back to us here on earth to study as Scott mentioned when I talked to him for the episode you know the amount of sample that they were able to recover is going to fuel scientific exploration for years and years to come so it's exciting to think about the generations of scientists some of whom may be just starting out in science some who this might be a really big career moment some of whom probably aren't even born yet uh it's exciting to think about everything that they're going to discover it's always nice when you can study the cosmos in the lab instead of looking at it from a far with a telescope or something like that so sample return missions are great eventually we'll start bringing bits of Mars back to earth I'm sure of that well one other point about asteroids bringing life to earth that we didn't mention and that sort of ties together the the thoughts that the two of you shared if it weren't for an asteroid hitting earth the three of us might not be here not because of the the seeds of life that an asteroid might have planted on earth but because an asteroid 66 million years ago as the one that sets referred to wiped out the dinosaurs and that made room for the mammals and then with the evolution of mammals came us this show is thanks to the rock solid talents of senior producer Gary Niederhoff and assistant producers Brian Edwards and Shannon Rose Gary I am Molly Bentley the executive producer for Big Picture Science and I'm Seth Shaustack senior astronomer at this setty institute we'd like to give a big thanks to our listeners and our patreon supporters the original music in the show is by Dewey Delay and June Miyaki this episode of Big Picture Science that considers the relationship of rocks and space to life on earth is called chasing an asteroid as a long time fine correspondent I've worked in lots of places but nowhere as important to the world as China I'm Jane Perler's former Beijing bureau chief for the New York Times on face off the US versus China will explore what's critical to this important global relationship trump and cesion ping AI tick tock and even hollywood you episodes of face off are available now or if you get your podcasts it feels really good to be productive but a lot of the time it's easier said than done especially when you need to make time to learn about productivity so you can actually you know be productive but you can start your morning off right and be ready to get stuff done in just a few minutes with the ink productivity tip of the day podcast new episodes drop every weekday so listen and subscribe to ink productivity tip of the day wherever you get your podcasts that's ink productivity tip of the day wherever you get your podcasts
