They're back. UFOs are in the news and in the sky again. We label any object cruising the sky as we can identify as an unidentified flying object. And the term UFO applies to some surprising sightings in New Jersey. I was driving home from a friend's house and I saw a drone that looked like the size of a small car. Just hovering right above the golf course. And I tried to get a picture of it, but you know how it is. The light is kind of hard to get a true image out of it. The moving lights in the sky had some garden state residents alarmed. The reports increased. And at some point it seemed everyone in the area was seeing these objects. Many which were thought to be drones. And then the questions began flying. Were the objects military drones or something else? And why did it all feel so menacing? Well, we now have some answers. Well, this frenzy may not seem like your typical UFO story. It has a lot in common with the long history of UFO sightings. Welcome to Big Picture Science. I'm Seth Chastek. I'm Molly Bentley. In this our regular look at critical thinking skeptic check. We help make sense of the drone panic. Music We'd like to begin with a story that unfolded seven decades ago on the West Coast. In 1954, something strange happened in Bellyham, Washington. Residents began noticing dings in their car windshields. You know those pits from errant rocks or hail. People said that they had appeared suddenly. The reports multiplied. Drivers began stopping the police to show the damage done to their cars. As the wave of windshield pitting spread, people suggested what might be the cause. They included vandalism, cosmic rays, even fall out from nuclear tests. One idea was charmingly odd. Some thought sand flees were laying eggs in the glass. And curiously, the pitting never occurred to the side windows of cars or to windows of homes. In just two weeks the tally of reports had grown to 3,000. And now included some from neighboring Seattle. Officials had no convincing explanation and public disquiet grew. The mayor of Bellyham appealed to the state governor and then to President Eisenhower for help. This event became known as the Seattle windshield pitting epidemic. You might be asking what the sudden appearance of windshield dings in 1954 has in common with the 2024 drone sightings in New Jersey. We'll hear later how the windshield incident was resolved. In November of 2024, people began reporting strange lights moving in the sky over New Jersey. Over the next few weeks the frequency of reports increased. Many believed the lights were drones. Some found the whole event mysterious. Others found it funny. But some like New York congresswoman Nicole Maliotakis were genuinely unsettled by the appearance of unidentified objects in our airspace. So it is concerning, particularly, over an area like New York City, so densely populated. That we have so many of these drones. There could be an accident. There could be a crash. There could be a lithium battery issue. We are very concerned about the safety and we expect the government to have answers for us on what this is. But let's step back. After all, we don't always know what we're looking at, although we may think we do. So to understand these weird phenomena, let's begin by drawing on the experience of someone who studies this guy for a living. Hi, I'm Andrew Fracknoy and I'm the professor of astronomy at the From Institute at the University of San Francisco. I'm originally from the East Coast, so let's begin by getting the obligatory New Jersey joke out of the way. Andy, what went through your head when you first heard that there were unusual drone sightings over New Jersey? Well, as an old New Yorker, of course, the first thing I said is, of course, over New Jersey. Although, as we'll hear, the Garden State may have been the ideal location for this phenomenon, but not for the reasons New Yorkers would like to think. For now, let's forget about it. Professor Andy Fracknoy says he wasn't surprised that lights in the sky caused a public stir. We have a long history in the United States of people seeing something in the sky, then other people latching onto that story. And suddenly there's a whole public uproar about something in the sky that seems mysterious. But generally, they all turn out to be something quite ordinary, either in the sky or from planet Earth. Do we ever have it around astronomical phenomena? Well, there are many people who misinterpret astronomical phenomena as lights in the sky they can't explain. The classic story is the late President Jimmy Carter, who was a wonderful man in so many ways. But in 1969, Jimmy Carter went to a service club meeting. He was then governor of Georgia. And he saw in the twilight sky a bright light that seemed to be approaching him. And being a careful and sober man, he recorded the position, the direction he noted it with other people. There is some sort of mysterious light in the sky. Later, when this was published, he actually sent it to a UFO bureau in Oklahoma. When this was all published, astronomers went back and looked to see what might have been in the sky right at that time. And it turned out to be the planet Venus. And the planet Venus, which is often a brilliant evening star or morning star, is perhaps the most misinterpreted astronomical objects. There are stories of recruits in the military trying to shoot down Venus as an approaching enemy plane. But it just turned out to be Venus for the future President as well. And we're getting some reports now that some of the drones in New Jersey, some of the pictures that have been reported, were actually of the bright planet Venus in the evening sky. Andy, I wonder if you could just describe what the lights look like. Did people see small dots of lights, white lights, blinking lights? What were they seen? People saw a wide range of different lights, and that also contributed to the mystery that they weren't all the same. Some lights, as you say, were just pinpoints of light. Others were groups of lights, some colored, some not. Some of the lights were mysteriously still and not moving, and others seem to be moving at what the observer interpreted to be very significant speed. Now, it's very hard from the ground to estimate the speed of something in the sky, unless you also know it's distance, because how fast something will seem to be moving depends a lot on how far away it is. So there were interpretations of these lights that said they were moving at rates that were just unbelievable, and others that said, oh, the lights were just so still, it seemed menacing. You have to remember that New Jersey has a major international airport, Newark Airport, into which planes fly and out of which planes come. And if you are in the right part of New Jersey, you are likely to see moving lights in the sky relatively low as airplanes come in and go out of Newark Airport. What do you think people didn't identify them as planes? What did they think they were drones? No one saying that there weren't any drones. It's just that the discussion of drones then started to convert airplanes, planet stars into drones rather than limiting the drones of the ones that actually were drones. Well, here's a good example of that. The ex-governor of Maryland, Larry Hogan, reported a number of drones, a cluster of drones over his house. Did you hear this? What the story of this? This is a great story. So yes, the former governor, Larry Hogan, reported that he had seen drones in formation. They weren't flying very fast. They were staying sort of hovering in one place and it is unusual formation where there were three in a line. Kind of like a belt? Yes, like a belt, you might say. And if you know the sky, if you are an amateur astronomer, you may be familiar with the bright constellation of Orion, the hunter, which has three stars in a belt and a bright star above and a bright star below. And so it's pretty clear now from a discussion of where the ex-governor saw this formation of drones that he was really looking at the constellation of Orion. I want to pick up on that point that some of these lights look like they were hovering or still, of course in the case of Orion, a certain set of circumstances there that explain that. But as for the other lights, Andy, isn't there a phenomenon called the parallax view, which makes objects look like in the example of planes, they're hovering, or they're not moving? Could you describe that for us? Right. So parallax is when we can measure for a star how it's moving across the line of sight. But we don't know what's called a proper motion, which is the moving toward us or away from us. We have to measure that by using the Doppler shifts and things like that. So when you look at something in the sky, light in the sky, it's very difficult to estimate the exact speed of which it's moving. For example, if something is moving directly away from you or toward you, it doesn't look like it's moving across the sky. It may just get dimmer or look like it's gone because it's moved away from you. Whereas if something is moving in a path which is directly across your line of sight, then it will look like it's moving across the sky. Most objects move in both directions, both in the away from you and toward you direction and across the sky direction. Unless you know where they're located and how exactly their flight path is, you don't estimate very accurately the physical speed of the objects. Things can look like they're moving faster or slower than they really are unless you have some sense of their location. The other thing about looking in the sky is that it's not always entirely clear. There can be turbulence in the air, there can be clouds, even subtle clouds. Things can wink in and out because of the unsteadiness of the atmosphere. That's why stars twinkle because the light from distant stars goes through quite a bit of the Earth's atmosphere, some of which is moving, some of which has a particular matter in it. And so it's all making the interpretation much more confusing for an inexperienced person. There are many different kinds of drones and they come in all different sizes and some of the bigger drones that I saw have seen are about two feet across. But Andy, people reported scene drones the size of cars. And this is a subcategory of the answer you just gave us or of the question I asked you. But why are we so poor at estimating the size, not only the movement but the size of objects. Why might we think that a drone looks like the size of a car when it's just a couple feet across? Or equivalently, why do people see a giant airplane and interpret it to be a drone? Which is, as you said, quite small. It's because we really don't know the size of something in the sky until we know how far away it is. And that's what I think is confused a number of well-meaning observers. There was a story back, I think, even in the fifties of lights in the sky in Texas. There was a town in Texas where all of a sudden there weren't just lights in the sky that couldn't be interpreted, but swarms of them. Great swarms flying overhead. And not just one night, but several times. People saw this. They called it radio stations. And there was just tremendous public concern about some sort of in those days it would have been airplanes from another country or an enemy power. 1950s were a time when we were very worried about the Russians and the communist menace. And only later did it become clear what had happened. There had been an oil slick near the town. And a number of birds had landed, unfortunately, in that oil. And then had flown away. And as a swarm of birds with oil on their bellies flew over the lights of the town, their bellies became much more reflective than bird bellies usually were. And that was the swarm of lights. It was a poor set of oily birds reflecting the lights of the town. But there was a great deal of hysteria about this until the answer came in. And there are still people who don't believe that it was birds who think that the government is covering up some kind of deep mystery. I'll say one other thing about scientists. So it's fascinating that there have been many surveys done of who sees UFOs. And you'd imagine that there were two populations of people who would be especially prone to see alien spaceships that are visiting our planet. And that would be the amateur astronomers who observed the sky as a hobby. And the professional astronomers who observed the sky as a job. And yet when you survey them, they very rarely or mostly never see a UFO. That's because they know what they're looking for and what they're looking at in the sky. Whereas the average person who doesn't know the sky is much more likely to report a UFO. Andy Fraknoi, thank you so much for joining us. My pleasure. Good to be with you. Andrew Fraknoi is a professor of astronomy at the From Institute at the University of San Francisco. So Seth, I wonder if you could give us your perspective as an astronomer. Another astronomer, Andy, is one that people were confusing planets like Venus and the constellation of Orion with drones. I think that the stories of course reflect the fact that the general public is not necessarily so conversant with objects in the night sky. But it would be great if they became more conversant. There are 10,000 amateurs, probably 100,000 amateurs, astronomers in the country. And they throw star parties or you can look through their telescopes and so forth and so on. It doesn't take much to see a lot of interesting stuff in this sky. And if not for you, maybe for your kids. Andy's story about the oil slick birds got me thinking how fun it would be to have to write the headlines for a story like that. I don't know, birds of a feather slick together or oil vey. Well, I think my headline would be oil mythology visible in the night skies. So that's oil anthology instead of ornithology? Yes. And the oil anthology is the history of the petroleum business, I guess. Next, how many of the objects flying over New Jersey were ultimately identified? If you have the date of time, the location and the direction, what you can do is you can look up what would be in the air at that time. We're looking at what caused drone panic on this episode of Skeptic Check from Big Picture Science. This season a new hot deal has arrived at Metro. $25 a line for four lines with all the data you need and four free stamps on Galaxy A155G phones. Getting Metro's best deals is easy. No ID required, no activation fees, get a new number or keep your own. It's up to you. That's four lines for $25 a line. Plus, four free phones. Visit a store or go online today. Only at Metro by Team Mobile. When you join Metro Plus Tax, for a limited time is subject to change. One of our per capita. The drone sightings in New Jersey provoked a great deal of interest from the public. Some people were amused, others were alarmed. State and national representatives told reporters that they wanted answers. New York representative Nicole Malia Toccus suggested to CNN's Jake Tapper that the government might deliberately be withholding information. Honestly, we just want the truth. We just want the government to tell us what they know. I find it very hard to believe that our government with its intelligence and its military capabilities does not know what's going on here. And if the truth is they don't, then we have a much bigger problem right now. Before experts could weigh in on what they knew, she and other officials were floating their own ideas about what the objects were. Personally, I think it's potentially our own government that may be doing some surveillance or counterterrorism, but then be honest. Do you, for that theory you just posited that it's our own government doing some anti-terrorism work? Is that just a theory? Do you have any evidence for that? What's the reason for that suspicion? You know, it's actually my hope that that's what it is. It's our own government. Other officials such as Michael Mellum, Mayor of Bellview, New Jersey, were confident what the objects were not. We know for a fact that these things are not operating the way airplanes do. Air planes tend to glide and go from pointing to point being a direct line. These things are going up and down in elevation. They're hovering. They're moving erratically. These things are not manned aircraft. That's insulting to be told that. All this speculation helped the drone story take off. Collecting evidence to explain the odd phenomena took a little longer to get off the ground. My name is Mick West and I investigate strange things such as conspiracy theories and UFOs. Mick explained to producer Brian Edwards how officials determine the identity of many of the objects, the role of the media and human nature and fomenting drone panic, and why we might need to adjust to the presence of drones because they have become popular. But drones were only part of the story. Drones actually represent like a whole bunch of different things. Basically a drone just means an unmanned aircraft. People were reporting seeing what they described as car-sized drones, which is quite a spectacular claim really because car-sized drones are actually very, very rare. Most drones that you would see in the night sky would be the smaller drones. You're not going to actually see a car-sized drone. So what people actually were seeing there were lights in the sky and they were reporting seeing basically configurations of lights that they didn't recognize. And they interpreted those lights as being drones. So I'm Brian in Brooklyn. I go outside. I look up in the sky. There are no stars here. So I see three lights in the sky and I'm like, wow, that is very odd. Who do we report this to? Who looks into something that we're seeing in the sky to figure out what that is? Well, when the public is seeing things in the sky, nobody really wants to handle that because you get these huge influx of reports from the public and they usually very low quality reports. Now, say if a craft did fly over downtown Manhattan, you would expect to see hundreds, if not thousands of reports and that would be something that would get the attention of the authorities. That would be something that would be the purview of the department of your homeland security because that's something that's a domestic possible terrorist threat or something that's interfering with our airspace. So it would be DHS and the FAA because the FAA controls the airspace. When we talk about reports of drones now, what we're talking about is largely social media. The public will post something on social media and then perhaps a news outlet might pick that up and then they would report it on the news. Make it seems to me in these cases that people are posting unverified claims online and there's a bit of a straight line right to news organizations covering those stories and amplifying that information that they're putting out. Is that the case here? Yeah, very much so. The media is a lot of responsibility for this story like getting to where it is. It's really a kind of a feedback loop. It started out relatively small, like several weeks before it got into this mainstream media thing. And then you get things like local news reporting on it and that drives more public interest and then you get the mainstream media eventually comes in. But then because it becomes a big news story, they're kind of desperate for footage. And so they'll pretty much put anything up on the screen that someone has said is actually a drone. So you see these ridiculous news stories in the background. There's a loop of this footage and it's just stuff that's obviously playing some of them. You can even see like the wings and the lights and everything. So the media is in the hunger for a story as actually created a story. It did get very big on the news. It got big online and officials eventually did respond to these sightings at least in some way. Can you kind of summarize what the word was about what they said these lights in the sky were? The official word on it was that basically they were getting lots of reports, which means that they were hearing that people were seeing these things in the sky. They were seeing them on the news of other people were like sending things in. And later they actually issued statements saying, you know what we we've looked into this and the vast majority of these reports appear to just be misidentifications of domestic drones or airplanes, which is actually the majority of what these things turned out to be. And they said there's no actual cause for alarm. There's no parent security threat and there's really nothing to worry about, which of course doesn't make people happy. Everyone's getting all worried. And then the officials say there's nothing to worry about. That just makes them even more suspicious. So it seems like you've hit on a key point of this story here, which is that once official sources put out information saying that this is nothing to worry about. That actually has the opposite effect that is throwing gasoline on this fire and it takes off after that. Why is that? Well, we're living in a time where people are very suspicious of official sources. And there's also the idea that people know what they saw. They don't like to be told that they didn't see what they think they saw. So someone goes out there and they think they saw a drone there and then they hear there's an official story where they're saying, oh, you're just seeing airplanes. If you can't actually demonstrate to that person that they saw an airplane, they just hear someone saying you didn't see what you thought you saw. Like, you know, the evidence of your own eyes isn't isn't valid. And so they will naturally push back against that. So you've got this natural zipgeist where people are suspicious of authority and you've got people who are desperately looking for validation of what they thought they saw, which those two things together means that when someone says there's nothing to see here, don't worry about it. It just makes things worse. Can you kind of go through and lay out some of the cases that you've looked at and what evidence you've seen for these sightings in this guy? Well, we've got a lot of cases. I'm on social media and I have this website Metabunk where we have a sky identify for and where we look into these things. And so when we see an interesting one, we'll try to figure out what it is. That's the majority of the things that got posted on social media with just little videos of lights in the sky with no real context. It's very difficult to do anything than say that looks like a plane. And the most matter we did actually look like planes. However, there are a number of cases where they were post the video that also post where they were and what time it was and what direction they were looking in. So if you have those things to date the time, the location and the direction, what you can do is you can look up what would be in the air at that time. And you can use these online sites like FlightRadar24 or ADSBXchange to basically rewind the positions of the planes to where they were. And then I wrote some custom software where I can put the camera in a certain position where the person would be looking and just recreate the video. And we were able to do that with pretty much all of the cases where we had that daytime location. And it was invariably something like a plane or a helicopter or in a couple of cases, it was some stars or some planets. But people were posting things without the information and that's where the kind of the mystery arises in this low information zone. Not just people posting either. They were even politicians going on the news or posting things online and it seemed like the evidence was quite weak for what they were saying despite the big claims of spy planes or other nefarious things like that. Yeah, there was a senator Andy Kim who was actually one of the few people who did actually first make the mistake and he first thought there was something up in the sky. And then he posted about it online but then he did actually take the time to listen to what people were telling him and actually investigate what he was actually looking at and do it with the actual details of the daytime location, these technical things which are perhaps a little boring. He actually took that step to actually do that. A lot of people do not do that. They just say, I know what I saw, I saw things in the sky. I know you went through some of the ways that people can look into these types of cases but I'd love for you if you could kind of give us a step by step of, I'm again Brian and Brooklyn, I go out, I see the lights in the sky, what should I be doing from that moment if I'm like, I want to know what this is, how can I figure out what this is, can you kind of give me the play by play of that? Sure, if you do see some lights in the sky, I mean the first thing to do really is to take a photograph and then take a video. You take a photograph, usually with cameras now they have a night mode and you will see some surrounding things and perhaps some stars, you will take a long exposure and that will give you a very good context shot of what you're looking at. Then take some video, big mistake people make when taking videos, they try to zoom in, you just end up with this very shaky video of something that's usually out of focus. Just use the normal zoom on your camera and you can just take normal video and then you can see where something is in the sky and hopefully you will have some buildings or some context. So you can see what direction you're looking in exactly, some stars would be ideal as well but you wouldn't probably want to get that in Brooklyn. The next step then is to try to figure out what you're looking at. So what you can do is you can basically take your information, they date the time in the location. There's actually a chat box which is very useful as an AI chat box. You can just type in in just in plain English. I was in Brooklyn, it was like 730 at night on January the 10th and let me know what was in the sky. And it will give you a link to one of these sites, this site called ADSB Exchange. You'll click on that, it'll give you a map of where all the planes were at that precise pointing time over that location. A lot of people don't even realize just how many planes there are in the sky or how low they are or weather flying. A lot of what you get in the New Jersey and New York area is private jets. There's a lot of rich people in that area and there's a lot of people fly private jets and they're often going to an understanding airport, smaller airports. And they come in fairly low and people don't recognize them. They're used to seeing regular big old planes. But when they see these private jets, they look hot because they have different lighting configurations. They're a bit smaller, their engines are at the back and the wings are further back and the lights sometimes illuminate the body in a certain way. So you get these unusual planes which you have a lot more of in that area which kind of made New Jersey the ideal breeding ground for this story. So Mick let's say we have a case where we've used these tools at our disposal. We have figured out that it is not a plane, it's not Venus or another planet, it's not a constellation of stars that we're seeing. Can we automatically assume that that's a drone? How do we figure out if it is a drone? Well drones exist. I mean drones do fly around in the sky and they fly around at night. So it is possible. But drones have some fairly distinctive characteristics. When you see a plane fly across the sky, it's going to fly across basically in a straight line, maybe it's like curve, but it doesn't stop. Drones can stop and they can hover in one spot. They can go vertically up and down. This is something that you don't see planes doing, you don't even see helicopters do that. So if you see that type of motion in an object, that kind of will lend you to the conclusion that it's probably a drone. And then the lighting configurations are going to be a bit different. You don't really have these wide-dispaced red and green lights that you have on planes and you often just have a white light or a single green light or something like that. So if you have this very atypical small cluster of lights that might indicate a drone, but really the key thing for drones is that they are small and they move in a way that a plane or helicopter would not move. I'm curious, it's just occurred to me now. Are these sightings UFO sightings? Well, any sighting that you see in the sky where you can't identify something is technically a UFO. People have mistakenly identified things as drones, but really the UFOs, because they don't actually know what they are. They're seeing lights in the sky and they're ascribing a course of them perhaps because they've got a cause. But what they're actually seeing is more likely things like high altitude planes. So, Mick, if evidence is weak for these being drones and some of the concerns that arose around drones like surveillance and things like that, is there any reason to be concerned about drones generally? Are those fears or kind of those concerns that people have founded in anything at all? Well, that's the thing. Drones are actually a real problem and quite a large problem and going to be a bigger problem in the future. Drones are a very easy way of transporting explosives from one location to another and they're a very easy way of spying on things, like looking at things from the sky with a very high quality camera. So, there's a real issue with security with drones and we law enforcement needs to be vigilant because it's going to be something that will be increasingly a problem in the future. That's partly why this story got legs is that it does represent a real thing and the military acknowledges that it's a real issue. And when drones are seeing over military bases, it's something they take very seriously. Unfortunately, we just kind of infected the public sphere and we just got this vast amount of noise which doesn't help. It's just a big distraction because you know where we've got people shutting down airspace just because the public has been being seen planes above that airspace. It's not actually helping. Finally, Mick, how did the drone story resolve? It seems to have kind of fallen out of the news cycle at least for the time being. Is that because these mystery drones and lights have stopped flying over New Jersey or is it possible just that attention has shifted elsewhere? Well, there's been no change whatsoever in the amount of air traffic over New Jersey. And there's a hardcore group of people who are on the mystery drones of New Jersey Facebook group who are daily reporting these sightings of drones. However, there has been official statements now from the FBI and DHS who have basically explained what's going on. The vast majority of what people are seeing are just either normal drones or the mostly airplanes. And there isn't actually any need to be concerned. And so the media, they take that face value. It's also true. And they know that there's no actual story there. And they've had their own experiences, a lot of the media. They've gone out and they've gone studying cowpox and they've looked up in the sky. And they've seen things that they thought were drones and then later on someone points out to them, he was just a plane. And so they're going a little bit burnt there so that they know there's really nothing there. But it hasn't gone away. There's still a hardcore group of people and there's like a almost like a new subculture has emerged in new apology that the people who I think there is weird mystery drones. But in terms of a mainstream story, it's running its course. Well, it seems like with people latching onto this it likely will not be the last time that we have you on the show to talk about this. But I really do appreciate you taking the time to talk with us today. Thank you. McQuest is a skeptic who investigates conspiracy theories and UFO reports. McQuest says that we are witnessing the birth of a new UFO subculture. What might it have in common with the long history of UFO mythology? What happens when we take a look at a phenomenon that has been strange, weird, spooky odd that also says something about the ways we think about science? That's next. It's our regular look at critical thinking on big picture science. This episode is skeptic check drone panic. Lowes knows that free is just better. That's why my lows rewards is free to join. As a member, you earn points towards my lows money on eligible purchases, get exclusive free gifts, and earn free shipping at Silver Key status all on top of weekly member only deals. Don't wait. Join my lows rewards for free today and start saving more. Lowes, we help you save. Loyalty program subject to terms and conditions details at Lowes.com slash terms subject to change. The panic and consternation over a flurry of mysterious flying objects is quite familiar to me at least. As an astronomer with a steady institute, an organization that looks or evidence of alien life in the cosmos, I have long been the recipient of reports from the public in the form of phone calls, emails, people stopping me in the streets, who hope that I can validate their apparent sightings of alien craft. And while I'm sympathetic, I have yet to see any evidence that were being visited by aliens. The parallels between decades of UFO sightings and the relatively recent drone phenomenon run deeper than the riddle of mysterious objects in the sky. They include how the objects were interpreted by the public, reported on by the headline Hungry Press, and to paraphrase Mark Twain, how rumor outpaced truth. When we heard that Penn State historian Greg Igigian was writing a book about the history and psychology of UFOs, well, it was one arrival that we were pretty excited about. That book, When the Flying Saucers Came, a global history of the UFO phenomenon has now landed. Dr. Igigian covers the 1940s up to the recent reports when the term UAP, unidentified anomalous phenomenon, replaced UFO. He recognizes the place that the recent drone craze has within the historic context of UFOs. The two things have in common, basically, this idea of a high concentration of sightings over one general area. So that's what would traditionally and classically be referred to in the UFO biz as a flap. That's a flap. Well, well, let's look at the history of that, the history of UFO sightings, if you will. In your book, you say that you weren't really setting out a proof or disprove many of the claims about UFOs. What was your goal in writing this book then? Yeah, so my goal was really to sit there and say, what happens, right? When we take a look at a phenomenon that has been a part of our popular culture and a part of, you have to say, even politics, right, for well over 70 years now, right? That is strange, weird, spooky, odd, kind of unexplainable at times, right? That also says something about the ways we think about science. How do we approach that and think about that in a way that doesn't get caught up in the same old stories that we've been hearing for really decades about, you know, did Roswell happen or didn't it happen? When we sort of approach it historically, we see is it offers an opportunity to see the ways in which we have engaged historically with science and technology. In a way, in other words, in a way, it reveals a lot about the ways we think about ourselves less than it does about what we think about aliens. Isn't it true that indeed the association with aliens wasn't the first explanation for these sightings, right? I mean, many people thought it was just all related to the Pentagon or maybe the Soviets in the early days that this was some sort of military phenomenon. Why is it that the emphasis which do alien? Yeah, I mean, what's interesting is that I think those two things do actually feed off of one another to a large extent, right? The idea of that whatever is being seen, and we can talk about this as something that was there in the early days in the 1940s or something you're seeing since 2017, it's all the same in the sense that the thing that gives this coverage, that gives this media attention, but as seen as therefore worthy of legitimate concern among politicians, right? Is this idea of threat to national security? But the threat to national security in turn also provides a way for people who are interested in promoting the idea that this is really about aliens, it gives them a way of saying, hey, ultimately this is what this is about, right? Let's not drop the ball here, let's take this stuff seriously, because at the very least you're going to find national security issues that are worthy of investigation. So both sides of those things, I think, kind of feed off of one another, but you're quite right, the thing that mostly captures the attention I think of, the general public, is this possibility, is this prospect that these are extraterrestrials? When were they first described as looking like saucers? When did that begin? That begins the summer of 1947, it begins when this guy, Kenneth Arnold, who's a private pilot in June of 1947, is flying around Mount Rainier, says he sees these sort of, what? He first described them as pie-pan-shaped objects, nine of them flying information, never seen anything like it, they're moving at incredible speeds, and that's where this idea of the pie-pan-shaped kind of object starts to be described. When he ends up sort of telling reporters about it, an enterprising journalist comes up with this term flying saucer, and that's then throughout the rest of the summer of 1947, there are hundreds of reports across America by ordinary civilians of people saying they saw flying saucers. So usually, if you look more carefully at the records, it's pretty much indicates that most people are actually describing scene odd lights, that's oftentimes what people describe, but they usually get pigeon-hold as saucers. The period you cover in your book, right, extends from the first UFO sightings in the mid-1940s, late 1940s until now, can you give a couple of examples of maybe cultural turning points or important moments during this history? Sure. I'd say the first big moment after that initial sighting and that initial wave of reports in 1947 is 1950. 1950 is when this fellow by the name of Donald Kehoe, first of all writes an article and then publishes soon after that a book called The Flying Saucers Are Real. He's a retired military man, but he'd been writing pulp fiction for quite some time after retiring. He sort of sees himself as an investigative reporter, talks to his contacts in the defense department, who tell him that the United States government and intelligence officials in the Air Force are actually looking into these flying saucers sightings. And he then reports that they have come to the conclusion that two things are happening. That the military thinks these things are extraterrestrial and be they're not going to reveal that to the general public because their fear is that they will provoke a mass panic. And so that story, that sort of narrative makes its way into the general public, his book is a bestseller, it gets serialized all across the world so it gets translated into all these languages. So within just the span of just a few months, that storyline, those two story lines, the military thinks UFOs are extraterrestrial and then you get this other line that they're keeping it a secret. Those two things are really planted into people's minds and that becomes really the modern UFO phenomenon. Those two narratives become really, I think, formative in how we think about UFOs. So Greg, we all know about the hysteria, though the hysteria has largely been overstated, I think, with the Orson Wells broadcast award the World's at the end of the 1930s. What about the 1950s in America where people were going nuts about alien visitors? I think hysteria is, you're quite right, hysteria is overblown as a term to refer to the war of the worlds and the receptions to it in 1938. And I think the same holds true about UFOs. The term calling it a craze seems to sort of indicate that people were jumping out of windows, packing up the kids, moving to the mountains, things like that. That really doesn't happen. You have a few isolated instances where people say they got overly, they encountered somebody who seemed like they were overwrought about these things. I would say actually the reaction that made it really a craze was less fear than enthusiasm. It was excitement. It was about getting involved and maybe spotting one of these things. I think of one of them in particular caught my eye. I think it was in the 1950s of a local radio station in Indiana that basically held a kind of a one night sort of UFO sighting night. Everybody in the community get out there, get out your binoculars, get on the roof, see if you see anything. And if so, reported to our station, we'll send it off to the local Air Force Base. We have hotlines ready for you to report stuff. Hundreds of people reported things. There even was a group of people who was assembled over what then was called Notre Dame Stadium. They had telescopes and I think things like that set up for observations and people got together. Hundreds of people got together at the stadium to observe this stuff. The kind of craze really was less about people getting really, really overwrought and fraught and worried about things. Then it was about this prospect that maybe they were going to see something pretty incredible. You also cite societal fears that were driving the UFO craze, certainly in the 1950s, nuclear weapons, nuclear war, that kind of thing. What might be the cultural anxiety driving the interest, the current interest, and these drone sightings? Or is it just the same phenomenon? Well, I think there are broad and deep sets of concerns that are sort of being expressed in all of this stuff. A lot of that is what we've been seeing over the last five to seven years now. Once we had this sort of new wave of interest, this kind of resurgence or revival of interest in UFOs. I think a lot of that comes from a number of different things. One is this sense and this recognition that the United States is slowly losing ground or this feeling that the United States is losing ground to Russia, China, in particular, when it comes to both commercial enterprises in the case of China, but in both cases when it comes to the technologies of surveillance. This sense that they have technologies or they potentially have technologies that we don't yet have, that we've got to be worried about them, that we know they're spying on us, that they're up to no good when it comes to playing around with our elections and playing around with disinformation. I think there's a lot of that concern being expressed. I think the other part of it is this newfound excitement about things like drone technologies, but also the concerns that come with that, which is this inherent idea that people of all Ilks from your neighbor down the road to two villages down the road might be able to spy and look in on you. All of those things I think are at work in this kind of concern and this kind of wave of concern of fears about drones. Greg, you mentioned in your book that whether or not the UFO phenomenon has anything to do with aliens, it does tell us something about humans. What did you mean by that? Yeah, I mean, it tells us a lot of different things, but I'd say one of the biggest takeaways about this is that what the UFO thing has done, right? Because of this idea that these are potentially extraterrestrial visitors, right? In other words, they must be extremely advanced. They are in a sense, if they are visiting us or even if we imagine them as a possibility, they must be so advanced technologically, scientifically, culturally, that they in a sense offer us a vision of our own future. One of the things that strikes me about what you see in the UFO phenomenon as a social phenomenon is a constant discussion and debate about what science and technology is and what it should be and maybe what it shouldn't be. What it did the UFO phenomenon has always done is offer an opportunity to have this kind of debate and discussion about, you know, is science and technology going to save us? Or are they actually the thing that's going to pose the greatest menace to us, right? And UFOs were a way to have that conversation without actually having it directly. And I think that in that sense, it's been very, very revelatory. How do you maintain a healthy skepticism in situations like this? And not so much skepticism that you're shutting yourself off from what may be very interesting ideas or news? You know, it's okay to be skeptical about the government, but on the other hand, sometimes the government is telling you the truth. What's the way back? That's the tough thing. I think the big thing is, and this is what you might expect from a historian, is to take a deep breath. Don't get caught up in hype. Don't feel you have to react to something immediately, right? Avoid the thumbs up thumbs down approach to information that comes your way. The key thing for me is to take the long view about things that knowledge is not the same as information information isn't the same as knowledge. Knowledge comes through a slow process of moving through the information, looking at it carefully to decipher, does some stuff triangulate well with other information? Is this information, however, come from a questionable source? All that hard work has to come in. It's not a terribly exciting way of doing things. It's the way, however, academics like me do it. So I'd say it's about taking things slow. It's slow cooking is the way to approach it. Well, Greg, a gig again. Thank you so very much for speaking with us. Thank you very much for having me on. Greg, a gig again, is a professor of history and bioethics at Penn State University. And he is the author of After the Flying Saucers Game, a global history of the UFO phenomenon. Well, this brings us to the big picture, thoughts in the show, and we'll start with the conclusion to the story that we told at the beginning of the episode. That is, that of the Seattle windshield pity nepotemic of 1954 in Bellyham, Washington. Well, this is how that resolved. After that frantic month, it went away. People stopped reporting the things in their windshield and the panic evaporates. As a long time fine correspondent, I've worked in lots of places, but nowhere as important to the world as China. I'm Jane Perler's former Beijing bureau chief for the New York Times. On face off, the US versus China will explore what's critical to this important global relationship. Trump and Xi Jinping, AI, TikTok, and even Hollywood. New episodes of Face Off are available now, wherever you get your podcasts. Spend less time staying in the know about all things gaming and more time actually watching and playing what you want with the IGN Daily Update podcast. All you need is a few minutes to hear the latest from IGN on the world of video games, movies and television with news, previews, and reviews. So listen and subscribe to the IGN Daily Update, wherever you get your podcasts. That's the IGN Daily Update, wherever you get your podcasts. And Seth Shawstack, of course, what are your big picture thoughts in this episode about drones? I found it interesting, Seth, that when people were given answers by experts, it fueled their skepticism anyways. And it makes me think that this is an example of the big decline in trust that people have in experts and their expertise and how being too skeptical can actually get in the way of the truth. You're absolutely right, Brian. I think a lot of this goes back to the 40s and 50s when the government was being disingenuous about what really was in this guy. And that was because a lot of it had to do with the Department of Defense and it was kept secret for a good reason. I think if we're tossing a little bit of blame out to groups that have historically done a poor job of communicating this information to the public, I can't help but think of how the media has treated this as well. I think that's how many of these stories now, and I'm sure you have examples in the past of reporters being very excited to cover these when people say they're UFOs, but once we know their planes, maybe that's not quite the same story anymore. You know, Brian, there was a survey not terribly long ago in which people were asked, okay, do you think the government knows about alien visitors? Well, Seth, maybe we can end on that thought. How likely is it that the government would cover up evidence of alien craft? And is it possible that aliens could visit Earth one day? I mean, it doesn't defy physics for the aliens to come here, although you have to give them a lot of credit for putting in the time to do it. I mean, our fastest rockets take close to 100,000 years just to reach the nearest other star. Now, the aliens, of course, would probably have faster rockets, but it's not a trivial thing to come to Earth. But I don't think that the government could cover it up in any case. I mean, you know, the government is not all powerful and the aliens might land in a place that the government doesn't even know about. Seth, do you think though that because it is not impossible that aliens could visit us, that that is one of the reasons why we can't shake these tails, we can't shake these UFO sightings because it is possible and people are always going to lean towards that possibility? Absolutely. It's something they want to believe. And if you can't refute it on the basis of being impossible from the physics point of view or some other point of view, yes, there's going to be a fraction of people who believe it. And in this case, it's a fairly large fraction. This show is thanks to the well-identified and documented talents of senior producer Gary Neederhoff and assistant producers Brian Edwards and Shannon Rose Gary. I am Molly Bentley the executive producer for Big Picture Science. And I'm Seth Chastack, senior astronomer at the SETI Institute. We'd like to give a big thanks to our listeners and to our Patreon supporters. The original music in the show is by Dewey Delay and June Miyake. This episode of Big Picture Science, our regular look at critical thinking, suggests rational explanations for strange objects in the sky and is called Skeptic Check Drone Panic. Skeptic Check is brought to you thanks to a generous grant from the Trimberger Family Foundation. At the Trimberger Family Foundation, we hold that skepticism is a lamp that lights the way to truth. Trimberger.org.
