Hey everyone, this is Dr. Marie McNeely, welcoming you to episode 173 of People Behind the Science. I am joined today by Dr. Norman L. Strand. So I want to thank you for listening today as well, and in particular, take a moment to thank everyone who's been sending us emails and reviewing our show on iTunes. Now I read every email and review that we get, and I really enjoy getting to meet you. So if you haven't introduced yourself yet, you can find the show on Twitter, at PBT Science, or tweet to me, at PhD Marie. You can also find us on Facebook, or send an email to contact at people behind the science.com. Now we have a great show in store today, so get ready to meet another one of our fascinating. People behind the science. Every day discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNeely is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries, so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone, and welcome to another episode of People Behind the Science. I am delighted to be here today with Dr. Norman L. Strand. So welcome to our show today, Norm. How's everything going? Going great. Fantastic. Well, we are delighted to have you here today. Now listeners, Norm is a professor of genetics at the University of California Riverside, and founder and past director of the Center for Conservation Biology and the Biotechnology Impact Center there. Norman received his PhD in Biology from the University of Texas at Austin, and completed a postdoctoral fellowship at Duke University, before joining the faculty at the University of California Riverside in 1979. Now, Norm has received many awards and honors during his career, including a Fulbright fellowship, election as a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and he received a Guggenheim fellowship. Now, Norm is also an accomplished author, noted for writing the book Dangerous Liaisons, when cultivated plants mate with their wild relatives. Norm is here with us today to tell us all about his journey through life and science. So today, Norm, we want to hear your story, and we want to get to know you both as a scientist, but also as a person. So can you tell us what you like to do when you're not doing science? When I'm not doing science, I've got a number of hobbies. Probably the one I'm most excited about is bird watching. I started birding when I was about four years old, and in the last five, ten years I've gone back to it and got real excited about identifying the different kinds of birds around Riverside, around the world, and in particular, getting to know the birds of the Riverside area, a lot better refining that. So I brews bird books, I go to a lot of websites, and I have a lot of fun plotting out my next target bird. Wonderful. So what's the next target, Norm? I'm trying to figure that out. There's a few birds in Southern California that I still haven't seen in my life. The hermit wortlers, up in the mountains, not easy to see, and that's probably the one that I'm going after next. I just tracked down the least bittern, which is not a super rare bird, but it lives inside of cat tails swabs. And you have to wander around and wait for one to fly from one clump of cat tails to the others. And I've been working on that for about five years, and went out with my family on Father's Day. And my wife persuaded me to stay ten more minutes, and we nailed one. Oh wow, well happy Father's Day gift right there. That's wonderful. Absolutely. That brought me up to 500 birds. And so that's sort of a milestone. Oh, that is a fantastic, Norm. It's great to hear about your hobbies. What you like to do when you're not working, enjoying some birdwatching, certainly getting outside. So can we change years here now, and have you tell us about what you do at work? And how you describe what you do to someone who's not in science? Well, I think it's actually important to be able to describe what you do to someone who's not in science because those are the people who are supporting your scientific career. Probably the best way to summarize the focus of what I've done for my career is that I study the Romance of Plants. Plant reproduction is extremely variable. From species to species, there's sexuality, non-sexuality. When there is sexuality, you've got plants that can fertilize themselves. You've got plants that can have both male and female parts on them. You can have species that are composed only of females plus plants that are male and female. There's thousand different variations on the theme. Plant reproduction in the broad sense for me is an evolutionary biologist, the population geneticist, involves everything from self-fertilization rates to long-distance romances. A lot of the effort that I've put in over my career involves those long distance romances. How far are males and females apart when they mate? The traditional view to the 1980s had been that your most likely mate was closest individual next to you and we did a series of experiments that proved that that view was not necessarily correct. That sent my career on a pathway that brought me to where I am today. Certainly. Well, I love that tagline that you use. There you study the Romance of Plants. I think that is a great way to describe it to people in an accessible way. I think certainly conveying the importance of it. Plants are so important from a crop standpoint as well as just the plants that were surrounded by all the time being able to think about how they're reproducing, how the genetics are changing and alleles are moving over time. I think that's fascinating. We are going to talk next about what motivates you. I know what scientists, when they look at their to-do list every day, it's ever growing and I'm curious to hear what motivates scientists to get it all done. Can you share with us today norm your favorite motivational quote or saying? Actually, right. That's a great question because scientists have a long to-do list and at the same time, if you're even moderately successful, you have opportunities to fill your to-do list too large. The question then is, how do you sift through all of that? I have a bit of a story that I could tell if that's okay. Sure. Okay. Soon after I was notified that I was going to get tenure at Riverside, one of the senior members of the faculty came up to my office and said, well, El Stranding, done good and you should be proud, but now you really have to get to work. Bracer's there for what's ahead, yeah? Exactly. He said, I think to get to be full professor, you're going to have to start doing and just gave me a long list of extra work, be an editor of a journal, be a president of a society, on and on and on and on and on and on. And I was sort of feeling pretty good that I'd gotten tenure until they had fun. Right. What did I sign up for? Yeah. Exactly. So, had a discussion with my wife and she said, go to one of your mentors and ask them if that's true. So, I called my post-accentral intern of Exitouke University and I told him the story and he said, I didn't have to do those things to become full professor. And my post-accentral was somebody who'd sell all of the Royal Society of London, so he's no slacker. Certainly. And I said, well, what do I do? And he said, you're going to have more opportunities than you're going to be able to say yes to. So, you have to be able to identify what gives you energy. And that was the best motivational advice I'd ever gotten. Do what gives you energy. So, when my plate is on the verge of flowing over and I get invitations to do new things and to add to that long list, I follow my heart. Is this going to be something that's exciting? Is it going to give me energy? Or is it going to just be one more task to put on the plate? And that makes a huge difference. Absolutely. Well, I think that is a great piece of advice, a great motivational factor to keep in your mind when you're trying to prioritize. You're trying to decide, you know, what's going to make the to-do list and what's maybe just going to get scratched off right off the bat. So, certainly thinking about whether this thing is just going to be another task on your list, another thing to exhaust you or whether it's going to be something that really adds to what you're doing that gives you energy. Now, can you tell us a little bit more about some of these people who may have motivated you or inspired you over the years? You mentioned your post-doc mentor and I love hearing about these people that shaped your career or inspired you. I haven't had one mentor. I've had numerous mentors and it's interesting that there's sort of little surprises in my life that come along exactly at the right time. When I was in undergrad, I did a project in a lab of a protozoan geneticist named David Nanny and I was very shy at that point and I was just interested in what it was like to be a scientist and so I would do the little projects in his lab and then he would let me walk home with him and I would ask him a million questions about what it was like to be a scientist as a person and he showed me that scientists can be people and people can be scientists and that was such a relief because I thought scientists had to be somebody really special. My next mentor was Don Levin, a major professor at University of Texas at Austin. He was throwing out pearls of wisdom all the time. He didn't know they were pearls of wisdom. I was mostly very close to him. You were collecting them all, yeah. Exactly. Remember at one point we were going over how to write a seminar and I suggested I could add a certain slide and he said never attack anybody in the seminar unless they're dead and then he said no you shouldn't even attack dead people. And just many, many useful insights into how science worked and he remains a friend to this day. We occasionally write emails back and forth about how the Chicago Cubs are doing since we both grew up in the Chicago area. Since I've been to Riverside a lot of the senior faculty here have played mentorship roles over the years. There would be too many to list in terms of senior faculty. I would take special mention of Bob Berg who is an avocado breeder who approached me just before he was going to retire and said I want you to take over my nine major's human genetics class and I thought he was giving me a white elephant. He said if you're going to take over the class then you have to sit through the whole class which I did and I could see he was really giving me a gift because I never entertained the thought of teaching non science majors before and he taught basic human values and compassion as part of the human genetics class. He really used it as a platform to reach people to appreciate genetics. We're talking about art majors in a totally different way. Since that time I've developed my own nine majors course in the biology of food and I do the same sort of thing and that was a tremendous gift from Dr. Birds. Now my newest mentors are the younger faculty who we hired over the past few years and some young faculty on other campuses. One of my ex-master students Jeff Rossibara UC Davis I go up and visit him and we have a great time talking science and these young folks may not know that they are my mentors but they are a thrill and we have such big times together. Certainly well norm it sounds like you have had an amazing network of mentors throughout your life. These people who you could go to for inspiration for life lessons and I love this little quote this snippet you know the scientists can be people and people can be scientists and I think you know that's a big goal of our show here is just to show the human side of science you know it's not some unachievable career you know these are people these are everyday people who are doing amazing research making amazing discoveries so fantastic to hear about these mentors and I love this description you've given of the opportunity you had to teach people who are excited about science but also non-science majors as well and I think you know that communication of science to people who are outside the world of science is so important so great to hear that this was something that you really valued and we're excited to participate in. So I love talking about the journeys of scientists and we've hit a couple of these points through talking about your mentors but can you tell us next where your journey in science began can you tell us what got you excited about the world of science to begin with and then maybe hit some of these key pivotal moments along your journey that really got you to where you are today. Absolutely so before I was able to read my parents bought me a bird book I matched a bird outside the window to a bird in the bird book and I probably started me on my interest in science birds were pretty easy to watch and I remember at age six I was wandering around the neighborhood counting Robbins and I told a neighbor I was counting Robbins and I got my first pure review he said how do you know you haven't counted the same Robbins twice and so I ran home crying. The criticism starts early yeah. Exactly was biology major at University of Illinois like I said really didn't know what I wanted to do other than the fact was that I really liked genetics and ecology. I had a summer job keying out mosquitoes at a mosquito abatement district I'd collect the mosquitoes bring them into the lab look at them under the microscope and key them out to the 23 common species of the northwest Chicago suburbs. So I knew a little bit about insects I knew a little bit about birds but when I went to grad school the person who was interested in me and I was interested in working with was down 11 who worked on plants when I went out to interview for Texas he gave me the hard saw on plants saying that the nice thing about plants was that they didn't bite they didn't bleed they didn't poop in your hand. You don't have to chase them right. And they stay in the same place and you can come back and study them again and I thought that was great. Much bigger sample sizes than birds too so I left birds my recreation and Levin talking into plants. Got my PhD on a project involving the effects of three different breeding systems and three closely related species one was asexual one was sexual outcrossing and one sexual selfing. Went on to Duke where I did a project doing experiments on the adaptive significance of sex in other words under what ecological conditions with sexual reproduction be favored and under what conditions would it be a detriment. Theoretical studies had already shown that sex is a detriment that sex is a hassle and it's just much easier if you have an all female species moving out their babies about males. So we did some experiments and we got some hints about what might contribute to maintaining sexual reproduction in populations got my job at Riverside and came back to Duke actually every year for three more years to collect data. At Riverside being one of the three egg experiments station campuses the University of California was able to do research that was actually applied and I like that idea because you should be doing research where you can explain the significance of it to your parents. So I started doing both basic research and applied research separate programs because some people encouraged me to do one some people encouraged me to do the other. I got to know a lot of different crafts. Did research on sorghum, on cow peas, on avocados and on cheromias. So that was one thread of the career and the other thread was doing some basic evolutionary biology where we were among the first to do paternity analysis of seeds on plants and wild populations to ask who's the daddy of the seed. You know who the mother is already because the seeds are touched in the mother. You genotype the mother, you genotype the seed. You compare the genotypes, you subtract all of those contributions from the mother and what's left is the contribution from the father. You compare that to all the potential fathers in the population and at that time our markers were limited so we used very small populations and we were able to identify who the father was or make a short list of who the father is. You got a paternity test for plants there that's awesome. Exactly. In the end, there's a group of people who all developed paternity analysis and plants at about the same time and I wouldn't say that we were necessarily the first but I would say that we put a lot of papers asking a lot of different questions at that time so we made a bit of a mark for ourselves that way. One of the things that we found that was a little worrisome was that there was a list of what we called impossible fathers. Here we would have 40 wild radish plants growing 3,000 feet from the nearest wild radish population and yet there would be some fathers who could not be attributed to the local population. There are a couple ways that this could happen. One would be that you had a high mutation rate that we ruled that out because the mutation rates for our markers were known to be exceedingly low less than one and a million per generation. The next possibility would be that we were just having procedural problems and misgorn things and the third was that it was gene flow. It was cross-pollination at 3,000 feet. The gene flow at 3,000 feet in the early 1980s was thought to be impossible. Most people would have said that 100 feet or maybe 300 feet would have been sufficient to isolate populations but certainly 3,000 feet would have not given you the 7-8% cross-pollination rates that we would have been finding. I hired a perfectionist postdoc named Diane Marshall who's now a professor at the University of New Mexico and she redid all the experiments and went through everything meticulously and found low and behold that the only reasonable answer is that the cross-pollination rates were just much higher than anybody had ever anticipated. At the time we published that data, other labs were beginning to find the same thing using their paternity techniques. I used this gene flow issue then as a new theme in my research and I decided to apply it to basically take gene flow and see what I could do with gene flow and applied population balance. Again, agricultural or applied systems. I started getting involved in conservation genetics but at the same time, visited my father-in-law who was in Northern San Diego County and he had suggested to myself and my wife that we should get involved in biotechnology. This new thing, very exciting and I thought, well, how can I get gene flow involved in agricultural biotechnology and driving back from visiting him? It occurred to me that well, maybe genes would end up where people wouldn't expect them to end up. Engineer genes would end up in populations of wild relatives. I wrote a little paper on that that was published I think in 1988 and that was a radical change in my career. I didn't know at the time that I wrote the paper. I had been encouraged to write the paper by an editor who'd seen me give a one line about engineer genes out of place in a bigger seminar and he bugged me until I wrote the article which I wrote more or less all at once after feeding my newborn son at five o'clock in the morning. Oh wow, it's the best time, right? You're already awake. Exactly. I mean, I just sat down and I sort of spewed it out and I thought that was the end of it. Well, I got a phone call a couple months later after it was published from somebody else at Riverside going, wow, I saw that article. I'm writing this grant proposal sort of a third of a million dollars. Do you want to get involved in this? I said yes, I was one of 10 PIs and we started doing research on gene flow from perhaps their wild relatives as my chunk of the grant. That got a lot of attention right away and I got into the world of public policy. Policy groups were calling me up saying we're examining how we should develop policy for the risks of genetically engineered plants. Do you want to come out to Washington DC or wherever and participate in that discussion? And I started doing these things and there was a whole world of science I didn't know about. So that helped direct my research. I would go to the meetings. I would help develop policy questions or help come up with guidelines and how science could inform policy and at the same time I would go back to my lab with new ideas about what was missing from that policy. Questions that really hadn't been answered. So from the late 1980s until actually it's never going away as my wife points out. Right. The main theme of my research now has gone to a new question of what is the role of gene flow in the evolution of invasive plants. Every once in a while the phone rings and there's another genetic engineering question or another workshop or another reporter from some magazine who's found something and it keeps my one foot in the game there and studying the evolution of invasiveness actually keeps my research sharp because around the year 2000 it occurred to me that the questions regulators are really asking when they worry about transgenic plants is what genes are necessary or gene changes are necessary to change a benign crop into a weed or an invasive species. And that research just really had largely not been done. There was a little bit of weed evolution earlier than that. In the year 2000 very few people were thinking of invasive plants as being evolved. Rather they were thinking that they were just ecological opportunists where somebody had transported something from point A to point B and point B was better and so these things took off. The whole world of invasion genetics has changed radically and actually as we speak there's a major meeting at a summer in California on the genetics of invasive species. So I help contribute to the change in the head field. Well Norm it sounds like you have had an amazing adventure throughout science. All these different stages in your life these different research questions you've been asking and I love hearing how the questions evolve and change into these slightly different fields and now being in this world of invasive plants I think is a fascinating area. And I think throughout our discussion so far communication of science and the science policy things like that have come up a few times. I know you've had an opportunity to do some science communication yourself as well as be a scientific advisor for a movie Bosnian Blue's which was about rice genetics. Can you tell us a little bit about your experiences in scientific communication and how that may have been enriching or exciting in your career? It's truth be told being a scientist competed with being a writer as a career choice for me. I've always loved writing that doesn't necessarily mean a good one. But soon after I got married my wife was persuading me to start learning how to use a word processing program and she knew that I wanted to be a writer so she said look why don't you write an article for a popular magazine and I'll teach you how to use the writing program which was called Easy Writer at that time along the dinosaur now among word processing programs. So I wrote an article for Natural History magazine it was very well received I got a nice check for it funded a nice vacation. Wonderful. And over the years I've periodically tried to write articles that straddle both science and popular writing and do this you know every once in a while there used to be a science slash science fiction magazine called Omni in the late 80s I wrote a number of 300 word essays for that magazine. I've written articles for some of the magazines that are associated with California's agriculture industry so again have to take the science and make it both accessible and interesting. And finally my book James Liezons got a lot of really great reviews and particularly what I was looking for in the reviews was is this accessible do you have fun reading this and that's what almost every review said was that the people who read this and it goes over some fairly sophisticated science found the science very accessible and interesting so my next project I'm working on book proposal right now that I'm in some of the University of Chicago press on a book called The Romance of Plants and the subtitle is Sex on the Kitchen Table. I like it and it's going to be about the interface of plant sex and our food and it'll be a platform to examine the sexuality of different plants and tell interesting stories about them so the avocado chapter for example talks about how there's two kinds of avocados the avocado trees of one genotype which all over the world are male in the morning and female in the afternoon and the alternate genotype is female in the morning and male all over the world in the afternoon and you really have to have both of them together to pollinate so you can get an optimal yield and given the history of avocados in California there's a lot of risks to create a great chapter about that and I finally end with a chapter on genetic engineering which discusses the fact that how we do genetic engineering is essentially identical to how the original kind of sex was performed between bacterial organisms called recombination where there's sex without reproduction the insertion of DNA from one organism to another and this still occasionally occurs naturally among organisms where we find a few bacterial genes in humans that some place along in our human history bacteria shot some DNA into our genome and had persisted and other organisms as well so it keeps going back and forth between celebrating food plants we eat and at the same time exploring the different kinds of sex that contribute to the genetics of what we're eating certainly well norm it is fascinating to hear about your passion for writing and some of these great opportunities you've had over the years and I think so far we've talked about all the wonderful opportunities all the great experiences and we haven't yet chatted about some of these struggles some of these challenges but I know every scientist faces in their career so can you take us back to one of these low points one of these times where you had a major failure or you were really having trouble with something and tell us what happened and how you worked through it wow so there are so many of those for better words right I mean and isn't it great because I mean that's what really makes science so exciting as I tell my graduate students when they walk in with a problem which is at least once a month I said if it was easy everybody would do it right there are struggles at all kinds of levels I think the first struggle and I think that this is the one that tells the best story was I told you that my dissertation was based on comparison of three species in fact until the last minute I thought I was comparing two species and the world famous botanist Peter Raven showed up at Texas gave a seminar and said I want to meet with you I said oh this is great exciting to meet you know Mr. Botany and the first thing he says when we sit down for a cup of coffee is just then he says you don't know what you're studying and I said what do you mean he said well you're studying Inetheria and Inetheria B but Inetheria B is really made up of two species and I said well you know it's okay if both of those species are exactual because then I can just compare the outcrossing to the exactual and he goes no when is the sulfur and I said what should I do and he said well you're very close to finishing your dissertation you'll have it written up in about six months why don't you just pretend I didn't tell you this and I said and what yes in the Raven go around the world saying L. Strand's work is worthless and he goes well I guess I would do something like that oh wow I took and and I think this is what's happened with almost every struggle is you take your lemons and you make lemonade out of it so you know I went and kicked a few walls and then I realized nope this is time I can go back and revisit every population and identify which ones are species B and which ones are species C and now I can do a better dissertation because I can compare these three different major types of reproduction and so I put a little effort into it when I'm collected made the comparisons and this remains the only study of three closely related species that have these three vastly different breeding systems and that has been the way it has been since that time is that every challenge I get upset and then I start looking for the gift that comes with the challenge and there's a famous Richard Bach quote from illusions every problem comes to you with a gift in its hands we seek problems because we seek their gifts and I really try hard to believe it's true because it makes life so much easier and that's one example of a frustration early on that's the kind of frustration that maybe other graduate students might have given up their career right then for whatever reason I survived that and now I have used that as sort of one of my themes and so when we do a research project we ask a question and the answer seems weird impossible you know those impossible fathers for example instead of saying it some scientists might oh I've made a mistake I can't publish this I'll just forget it it has become a theme in my lab to say you know what is mother nature trying to tell us and what is gift in the data I like that well I love this attitude that you have of taking those lemons making lemonade out of them you know trying to figure out what is going on in these curious situations and instead of becoming upset about them you know maybe like you said kick a wall for a minute or two but then you know really get in there and try and figure out what is the gift what is the little nugget that you can take out of this I think that is a great approach and I think what you're describing in terms of this time of struggles is almost one of these graduates to nightmares you know being close to finishing your dissertation speaking to a leading expert in the field who then proceeds to tell you well everything's wronged you know so you can't just you know casually drop that in conversation and walk away yeah so great to hear that you did the right thing you went back you did that perhaps even more interesting analysis of now being able to compare these three closely related species I think that's fantastic so nor we don't just want to talk about the struggles of scientists can you tell us next about one of these success stories from your lab and from your research now this can be one of these you know big successes like grants or papers books things like that or even just one of these little victories along the way actually you don't know whether something's little or big until you know what happens but one of the things that I've taken a lot of pride in in my career is that I've always maintained a fairly small lab but I put a lot of energy into each graduate students that is having a large lab where you're spread to but some people do an excellent job with large labs and I don't want to just their concept I'm just saying for me I have valued my students and have been blessed by wonderful students wonderful post-docs all of my students have gone on to do careers in science all but one of my post-docs has gone on to do a career in science and I'm really proud of their accomplishments so the university here has various annual awards and they set up a new award called Mentor of the Year where ex-grids students in post-docs could nominate their supervisor and have that nomination compete with many other nominations and I received the mentor of the year I think the second year was offered and to me that is my favorite award and it came out of the blue my understanding is that one of my post-docs did a tremendous amount of research contacted dozens of people around the world and got a tremendous upwelling support for me as a mentor and that means more to me than anything else you're absolutely right you get a lot of these papers these more traditional successes but really enjoying these successes with your students and the acknowledgement that your students appreciate your mentorship and really have gotten a lot out of it I think is huge so congratulations on that mentorship award that's wonderful thank you yes it's thrilling and humbling at the same time certainly well that is fantastic to hear about these success stories in your life now we've talked a little bit about your book dangerous liaisons and I love to ask researchers about books that they've enjoyed and would recommend to our listeners so we'll definitely put that one on the list but can you tell us norm about another book that you've enjoyed and think our listeners should check out it can be a science book or even a non-science book the sake of books next to my bed is largely non-fiction but I have to say is that the fraction of those that I enjoy and would recommend is very small they're okay so in terms of books that have changed my life the one that I have probably read more times than anyone else is instructions to the cook by glassman and fields it's basically an introduction to Zen Buddhism and I came upon it almost by accident at a bookstore it really was a life-changing book I always thought that Eastern religion was a lot of hoolly but I knew nothing about Eastern religion my wife had watched the Sunday morning TV show said hey come see this guy glassman talking I mean listen to my thought gosh that's great there was something about a book so we winded through a bookstore looking for it and couldn't seem to find it I leaned up on a stack of books and I asked the clerk to help me and he said you're actually leaning on the book you found them accidentally yeah exactly and that turns out to be a very zen thing too so for me fundamental stripped down Buddhism and lots of pieces of Zen worked very well for my lifestyle they worked very well for my career one worries about how to be especially when one's a scientist and to have to be skeptical but Buddhism's a very practical way of looking at the world and I've become a much more spiritual person for that certainly well that is an excellent recommendation norm I will add that one to our list as well for our listeners to check out on our website so great recommendation and I love this description of how you sort of accidentally happened upon it in the bookstore I think that's a sign of anything absolutely well norm I think a lot of scientists you stay so busy oftentimes the only time you get a chance to read is maybe right before bed or when you're hopping on a plane to travel and I know scientists get so many opportunities to travel and this might be to work with different collaborators or to go to conferences or maybe even to do fieldwork can you think back now norm on all of these places that you've traveled to for science and can you tell us about your favorite and what was it about that place that made it so special to you that's a hard question there are four radically different trips that were live-changing so what I'll do is I'll tell you the four places and then I'll tell you the one that I think is most significant sure the first major international trip I took was a full-bride funded visit to Sweden the next significant trip for me was a trip to Kampa there's a group called Pugwash conferences that does a Nobel Prize winning group and tries to seek world peace and they were doing a biotechnology conference in Havana the third set of significant trips was to China and visiting China I met basically my academic clone my academic brother by Ron Liu who looks at the world the same way I do which is just amazing that somebody basically on the opposite side of the world asks the same sort of research questions has the same sort of values you know feels like a brother to me that's tremendously important and then just a few months ago I went to Africa for the first time and that was just such an eye opener but I think the biggest life-changing one is going to Sweden. Elstrand is a Swedish name two of my grandparents came from Sweden the other two are Eastern European Jews and I know a lot more about Eastern European Jewish culture than I did about Swedish culture went to Sweden met relatives and that was my first major international trip and I think what I learned that was most significant was that every culture has ways of doing things that are the same ways of doing things that are different the different ways sometimes are better sometimes are worse and sometimes they're the same and they just sort of blew my mind right that you can learn so much about your own culture by learning about other cultures so standing arms length and at the same time seeing where my father values came from from his Swedish parents needing these wonderful people one of whom said if I wasn't related to I would really like you anyhow I think that is a great testament right there so yeah going to Sweden to study at Uppsala University with honor, apprentice we worked on a project associated with the conservation genetics of rare species in the United States versus Sweden and we worked on a project on hybridization between crabs and the wild relatives and honor has been a great colleague since that time she's now moved to wound university and I just visited her again last year oh wonderful norm it is great to hear about all of these travel opportunities these adventures that you've had going to Sweden and Cuba and China and Africa sort of all over the world and I love hearing about the opportunities you had in Sweden while you were there on your full-bright scholarship to experience the culture and you're right I think you don't really think too much about certain aspects of your own culture until you have some things side by side to really compare it to so that sounds like a wonderful opportunity and certainly kind of going back to your roots there with knowing that your family came from Sweden and being able to appreciate perhaps even more some of the traditions of your family so I love chatting about these different travel opportunities and you alluded to a little bit some of these people that you had the chance to meet with and work with over there you know certainly that kindered spirit the scientific twin almost in China and I think when you look back over all these different collaborators you've had these different groups you've worked with I think it's full of fond funny memories you know when you get this many creative amazing and oftentimes very funny people together for work you take science very seriously but you have a lot of fun doing it so can you share with us today maybe one of these traditions that you had in a research group or even just a fun science memory from one of them I'm going to answer that question in a perpendicular way so one of the things that we don't do very well in science is celebrate actually there is more celebrations in Sweden than in the United States but I think that altogether too often we you know might go out for a beer together if a good paper is accepted in a good journal if there wasn't so much work getting a grain set up after you learned they've got the money I think we'd celebrate those more here at the University of California we do have advancements we have promotions and we have little steps along the way so the university thanks you for your surface but we don't have sort of general milestone so I decided to give myself a party I like it after I'd been at Riverside for 30 years I gave myself a party and as opposed to the sort of professional parties one does my wife and I made a list of our most favorite people we asked our friends who run a restaurant if they would cater the party and they said we don't cater parties and then there was a pause and they said but for you we'll do it and so we had this breakfast lunch place open at night and you know we pay for of course we they did cater it and we just filled the place with our favorite people and it was so much fun nobody wanted to go home we had music we had dancing my wife had created a quiz about norm and offered a prize for the people who could get the most the answers right in the quiz there were speeches I mean I didn't ask where it just people grabbed the microphone and started to talk because there's microphone at the restaurant just to call people to the counter and they started grabbing it and giving speeches it was awesome it was one of the high points of my life and at the same time very honored and humbled that there were so many people who care so much about me well that sounds like a fantastic party I love that you're describing no one wanted to go home they were having too much fun and I think you're absolutely right in science I mean I feel like you get these celebrations and you sort of breathe the sigh of relief and then it's on to the next thing I feel like there's not enough attention given to the successes or you know time to celebrate them so great to hear that you are able to pull off this party get everyone together and just have a fantastic time so can I ask what was the prize for getting the most correct answers in your quiz you know I'm sorry I can't remember now well I'm sure someone is treasuring it I was trying to think of it in fact Tracy gave away prizes for first second and third place and I am just totally blanking at it you'll have to call the people that won and see what the trophy was I will I know who they are well that is wonderful norm great to hear about this you know what tradition of taking the time to celebrate and I think this party is a great example of that and in addition to chatting to people about these memories these traditions in the world of science I love to hear about the research questions what are they working on what have they worked on and what would they like to be working on so I think you know in this more hypothetical question if all of the resources were available what is your dream research question is one that I love to ask so can you tell us today norm if things like funding and staff and technology and feasibility were all not an issue what is one research question that you are just dying to know the answer to I saw that question on your list and I've been thinking about it for 48 hours and my answer has evolved I decided that I'm already really excited about all the problems that are going on right now yeah being addressed in my lab and that a giant amount of funding probably would be more of a distraction to me and a giant amount of resources because basically part of the fun I think of doing research is to figure out how to do it in the most elegant way the easiest way and I think that sometimes too much money actually obfuscates job and during my Guggenheim year I visited a lot of genomics and they said that high money high info genomics was actually offering a sledgehammer to people who could do the work with a pen and get an equally good or maybe even better results one certainly always worries about money and my main worry about money is taking care of the people that I have so if I had giant lab giant staff great flow of money I might get distracted from asking the best scientific question and getting the best answer now all that being said that's a good answer in terms of research that I'm really satisfied and happy and I do not generally feel frustrated that I can't end up doing the science that my lab wants to do but now in terms of technology well I guess I have two answers one is that for a modest amount of money I think I would like to take a year off and visit evolutionary genomics and apply genomics and really understand this new technology more deeply and so it's not necessarily doing research but to understand the technology to the extent that I could supplement what I've done with my marker based analysis with the whole tens of thousands of data points that you can get from genomics but to understand the technology one has to understand shortcomings as well as its weaknesses so if you read papers on it or you see the occasional talk or you talk to somebody for half hour you just don't get it so you don't get the depth of the strengths in the weaknesses so I think for a modest amount of money and a year off I would love to really understand genomics deeply there and work with some mid-career or early career folks who communicate well and just hang out in their labs for some months and really understand it the third answer is and again this concerns technology more than concerns research but the third answer is that I'm curious about whether or not somebody could genetically engineer a plant that would more efficiently suck down carbon dioxide and methane and all these greenhouse gasses now I know that it has nothing at all to do with my background but if I had a zillion dollars I might spend some time doing that kind of research because I've talked to people millionaires in the biotech industry about whether they think one could engineer a plant to suck down greenhouse gasses and slow the effects of climate change and they have said yes I think it's perfectly doable and I said why don't you do it and they said you can't make money doing that so yeah if I had a zillion dollars that would be something I would look into but I also know that technology is often a two-inch sword and creating such a plant might have all kinds of interesting downsides to it as well so that's huge science fiction answered certainly well norm I love all three of these answers I think you brought up some amazing points I mean we'll say answer number one you had that really insightful description that you oftentimes when you have a lot of funding and a lot of amazing technology that is surrounded by it oftentimes these shiny new toys can distract you or be almost detrimental to asking these fundamental questions to making sure you're not distracted and just sort of using things because it's there so great points there and I love this description of what you would do with resources in terms of taking a sabbatical working with all the world's experts gleaning information from them and really kind of building this comprehensive perspective on genomics I think that is a fascinating approach and a fantastic project to undertake and then of course the dream question here figuring out how to improve the situation with climate change and certainly engineering the ideal plant to be the most productive in terms of fixing this carbon situation I think that is a great research question to tackle so you had amazing answers there on all three levels and I love chatting about these dream research questions and what people would do with all the restrictions aside but I also love to chat with people you know about the advice that they've received over the years and I think as a scientist you have some great opportunities to talk to brilliant people these amazing mentors you've had over the years and it's almost impossible not to get all those little pearls of wisdom thrown at you so can you share it with us today Norm what you would consider the best piece of advice you've ever received I think the best piece of advice I've ever received I alluded to earlier in the conversation was the advice of my post-doc advisor, Gnostan Tanavix who said do what gives you energy and follow your heart basically if I really do follow my heart and do what gives me energy that opens up the right path so that is in a generic way extremely good advice at all levels as scientists we are faced with a lot of decisions about what to do and how to do it being true to yourself is probably the most important thing and doing what gives you energy is the most important thing so if I try to be myself things seem to work out pretty well if I try to be someone that doesn't work so well certainly Antanavix's advice is the best advice I once mentioned to him that he told me that and that was the best advice I ever got and he said did I say that really and he said oh yeah that was pretty good wasn't it sounds like me why not exactly well that is amazing advice certainly follow your heart and do the things that give you energy the things that you're passionate about I love it now Norm is there any other last piece of advice or maybe a last piece of inspiration that you want to share with our listeners today coming from you I'm just thrilled that there's an opportunity to communicate what a scientist is like as a person and I really appreciate your show so that's all I have to say well thank you Norm I appreciate those compliments and certainly this has been so much fun for me to chat with scientists and find out what they're doing what they're excited about what they're passionate about so can you tell our listeners next if they want to learn more about what you're doing and what you're working on next how they can get in touch with you to learn more so they should email me at elsetrend.ucr.edu and else trans spelled E-L-L-S-T-R-A-N-D that's the best way fantastic well Norm thank you so much for joining us today and sharing your story my pleasure and thank you to our listeners as well join us again next time for another episode of People Behind the Science your voyage to the lives of today's exceptional scientists has just begun you can find everything we talked about today including our guests favorite books biographies photos and more when you visit us at www.peoplebehindtheScience.com I look forward to seeing you next time on People Behind the Science
