Hey everyone, I'm your People Behind the Science podcast host, Dr. Marie McNally. And as always, it is a great day to chat about life and science. And that is exactly what we're going to do today in episode 456 here with Dr. Daniel Whiteson. Now listeners, if you like this episode and you want to hear more stories from great people doing research today, you can check out our website, peoplebehindtheScience.com, or subscribe to our podcast on iTunes, Stitcher, or wherever else you love to listen. Now I'm looking forward to sharing my conversation with Daniel, so I hope you're ready to meet another one of our phenomenal people behind the science. Every day discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNally is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone and welcome to People Behind the Science. Today I am thrilled to introduce you to our guest, Dr. Daniel Whiteson. So Daniel, welcome to the show. How are you? I'm good. Thanks very much for having me on. Wonderful. Well, thank you so much for joining me to talk about your experiences in life and in science. But before we jump into all of the interview questions, I do want to start by giving our listeners a little bit of background about your current position and how you got there. So listeners, Daniel is a professor of physics and astronomy at the University of California, Irvine. He's also co-author of the book. We have no idea, a guide to the unknown universe. Daniel received his bachelor's degree in physics and computer science from Rice University. He was then awarded a Fulbright fellowship to study at the Niels Bohr Institute in Copenhagen, and he went on afterwards to earn his PhD in physics from the University of California Berkeley. Daniel then conducted postdoctoral research at the University of Pennsylvania before joining the faculty there at UC Irvine. And Daniel has received various awards in honors during his career, including an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation fellowship, an Outstanding Junior Investigator Award from the US Department of Energy. The Chancellor's Award for Excellence in Undergraduate Research from UC Irvine, and also a Webby Award in Experimental and Innovation Sites for developing a smartphone app called Cosmic Rays Found in Smartphones, which uses a cell phone's camera to detect ultra high energy cosmic rays. Now, Daniel has also been named a fellow of the American Physical Society. And today he's joining us for an interview to talk more about his life and science. So Daniel, we want to hear it all. We want to hear both about the work that you're doing in the lab and also the things that you do in everyday life. So can you start by telling us what you like to do when you're not doing science? Well, a lot of my life is focused on my work and my career, but I try really hard to not have that define my entire existence. So I take on other projects. Something I like to do when I'm not at work is bake, big into experimental baking. So trying to make crazy desserts or cook something I saw on TV or perfect something. Right now I'm working on the perfect recipe for chocolate bobka, which is one of my favorite desserts of all time. Oh, what is a chocolate bobka? Oh my gosh, that you sound like you've never had a chocolate bobka, which means I have not. There will be two phases in your life, the pre-chocolate bobka and the post chocolate bobka phase. I didn't even know there was a hole in my life. Yes, absolutely. Tell me more. Chocolate bobka is a Jewish dessert. It's like a brioche bread rolled up with a bunch of chocolate. So it's sort of like swirls of chocolate and bread. But it's got this dense dark chocolateiness that I really haven't found anywhere else. You can get great ones in a lot of delis. And I've been trying to reproduce those at home with very success. But my family have a wife and two kids eight and 10 really enjoy at least tasting all of my experimental attempts. Some of them have been spectacular and some of them have been failures. Some of them are delicious, but ugly. Some of them are beautiful, but not so tasty. So I'm sort of exploring that entire space. I love it. Well, I'm going to have to find one of these in my area and sample it and let you know how it goes. Yes, I encourage you and all your listeners to experience their first bobka. Excellent. Well, listeners, we have something to add to our to do list today. Daniel is great to hear a little bit more about life outside of science. And I love the here that you're creative and sort of exploring and experimenting in the kitchen here. But I know you're doing a lot of cool stuff in science as well. So can you tell us how you describe your work to someone who might not be familiar with this world of high energy physics? Well, I meet a lot of people who are not familiar with high energy physics. Often I'm on an airplane and somebody chadi asks me what I do and I say, oh, I'm a physicist. And then they get that face when somebody feels like they won't understand what you do or they won't like what you do or what have I done? I've started this conversation. Sometimes I even get sympathy people like, oh, I hate physics. That's too bad. You have to do physics. So I always take that as a challenge to show them why physics is exciting. And it's not actually very hard. So I just described to them the questions that I want answers to. The reason I'm in science, the reason I do physics is because I want answers to questions, big, basic, simple questions like, how did the universe begin? What is everything made out of? I want to know the answers to those things and I wanted to know the answers to those things before I really knew how to do any science. And I'm pretty sure most people want to know the answer to how did the universe begin? So I talked to them about the questions rather than the minute details or the faculty meetings or the technical obstacles because it's really those questions that are driving science and those questions that are driving scientists to do their work. I like it. I like that your target is to get people curious and get them excited about what you do, not just to kind of unload on them all the challenges and the struggles. I think that's important for keeping people interested and invested in science. Yeah, and there's a big disconnect between the sort of big question that you're trying to ask in science and the work that you do is a day-to-day job. Most of my time during the day is spent talking to people or writing computer code. And I happen to enjoy that. It's the daily craft of my work, but it's craft in furtherins of some big question. And that's the thing that most people I think we'll connect with is the thing we're trying to accomplish rather than how we're actually doing it. Absolutely. And when the computer code or perhaps the conversations and meetings aren't going so well, I think it can be helpful to have some motivation and inspiration to keep you going. And I think that big question is a big part of it. But I also like to ask our guests if they have particular motivational sayings or quotes or things that they use to really keep them motivated when they're struggling. So do you have a favorite? My mother had this bumper sticker in our car when we were growing up and it said, question authority. And I always like the attitude of that. It says, don't believe anything you told and make sure you understand things yourself. And I think she meant it probably politically or sort of socially and culturally. But I like to think of it sort of scientifically. It's not that every paper I read I doubt and need to reproduce myself. But I ask myself, how do they really know these things? How do we know what we assume? Do we true? Because one of my fantasies in science is to begin a physics revolution to upend our knowledge of the universe, to think we used to think the universe worked this way. And then we discovered that it's actually totally different than what we imagined. That's sort of my scientific fantasy. And to me, that comes from questioning authorities from asking, what are the basic assumptions we're making about the world that might turn out to not be true? Like man and women 1,000 or 2,000 years ago thought that the earth was at the center of creation, right? That was just a given or 5,000 years ago, people thought the earth was flat. These things were obvious to people and accepted and widely supported. And now we don't believe them. And though that came about because people questioned those basic facts about our universe, they questioned the authority and they've tried to figure out answers for themselves. And they discovered things which totally blew their minds. And it's my hope that we have a lot of those discoveries ahead of us. That there are things about our world today that we all take for granted is obviously true. Which in a thousand years people will look back and wonder, what was it like to think whatever it is that we think that's not actually true? So I hope to spark a scientific revolution by questioning authority motivated by my mother's bumper sticker. A bumper sticker is our great source of motivation. So there can be real wisdom in a couple of words on the back of a car. That's right. That's right. These pithy sayings are great. And I think it's so important this point that you brought up of making sure you're examining or at least being aware of your biases and preconceived notions and this dogma that's in a lot of different fields. Because I think that's a way that you make these huge monumental discoveries and make this sort of physics revolution that you're describing. And I like that you highlighted certain points in history where people had these assumptions and now they're completely different. And I love looking to history for motivation and inspiration. So do you have any maybe historical figures or people that you've looked up to in the field or even mentors or people you've worked with along the way who really had a big impact on you? Well, there certainly are people in history who have done things that I'm envious of that look up to and it's the folks who are around during these scientific revolutions. For example, the discovery of quantum mechanics. What a mind-blowing discovery to figure out that the world is not deterministic. That you can do the same exact experiment twice and get two different outcomes because that it's core of the world is fundamentally random. To me, it's mind-blowing to imagine that the world actually works that way. It's low levels. And I'd like to think about what it was like for those people when they first buttered up against this idea. Now it's strange and odd but we're supported by textbooks and people telling us about this and teaching us and science explainers. But when people were first conceiving of this idea, what was that like for them as they forged into this strange new world that they had discovered? I like to think about that. And the fascinating thing is that these things don't happen in an afternoon. It's not like somebody had a year-recommo moment and then the next day they understood these scientific revolutions take years or decades for the pieces they put together and things become accepted in the story of the field changes. So those are the kind of moments in science history that I really enjoy. In terms of specific role models, I remember as a grad student and as a postdoc wondering, is this the direction I want to take my life to or want to become a professor of physics? Is this the field that I really want to spend my life in? And I spend some time looking at the people who were 10 or 20 years older than me. What is their life like? Is that what I want? Frankly, I had a hard time finding anybody whose life I wanted to mimic. A lot of people who were 10 or 20 years older than me were workaholics. They had suffered and they were stressed out and overworked. A lot of them were single or on their second or third marriage because the right of passage through physics, academia can be pretty tough and it can be pretty tough on families. So I had a lot of doubts there. I don't actually want to follow the path of a lot of the people I see around me. I don't say that to criticize them, but physics used to be a little bit different than it is today. It used to be a little less family-friendly and work-life-balanced-friendly than it is today. So I didn't really have anybody whose path I specifically wanted to follow. I actually used a lot of people I met as sort of negative role models. I thought, well, here are the mistakes this person made. Let me try to avoid those mistakes. And I tried to find my own path. I like it. And I think in many cases, learning what not to do is just as important as learning what to do in terms of your modeling your career. Absolutely. It's good that we don't repeat the mistakes that people before us have made. Right. So when you look back and start thinking about when this curiosity of yours began, is there a specific moment that you can really pinpoint where you became interested in science or maybe in physics specifically? My parents tell me that I was always interested in taking things apart and trying to figure out how they worked. And I think that's probably true. I remember as a kid playing in the backyard and banging rocks together, seeing them breaking the small rocks and then taking those rocks and banging together. And I also remember thinking, how small do these rocks get? Can you go on forever and make infinitely small rocks? Or at some point is it turning to something else? Is there as small as possible rock? These are the kind of things that I puzzle over as a kid. So maybe it's not a surprise that I became a particle physicist and that's still to this day I'm smashing stuff together. But to me, the traction of physics specifically was that it seemed to be asking the questions that are sort of at the core of the onion. I'm fascinated by the questions of biology. How do you build a machine that lives and reproduces itself and it's so complicated and fascinating? I think it's absolutely worthwhile things to study and very important. But I was curious about the questions that were sort of the ones that everything else derived from. I wanted to know answers to questions that were bigger than humanity. If you understood how cancer was created, how cancer starts and how to cure it, you have a huge impact in human life. But if we met aliens, they wouldn't necessarily be interested in that knowledge. And I wanted to learn things which were universal, which were fundamental, which when we meet aliens, we would talk to their scientists about that sort of deep knowledge that I really wanted to reveal about the universe to learn on my own. Gotcha. Well, I will say you had great ambitions as a young child. I'm impressed. I certainly did. Not that I've made any transformation of discoveries or really learned that much, but what sucked me is the possibility that that could happen. I love it. So can you tell us, Danielle, what took you from this curious kid getting interested in science to where you are today? What are some of these key moments along your own career path? One key moment was in high school. And like many people, I was strongly influenced by my high school physics teacher. And a lot of people didn't have great high school physics teachers, which is what they tell me when they discover that I'm a physicist. They say, oh, I hated physics in high school. My teacher was terrible. And a lot of my colleagues around me tell stories about having great high school physics teachers. And I was lucky enough to have a great one. I grew up in Los Alamos, Mexico, which is a town sort of immersed in physics because we have a Los Alamos national labs, which is the home in the Manhattan Project and decades of excellent physics. So there was physics everywhere. And my high school physics teacher was actually a practicing physicist at Los Alamos. And he would come in early in the morning before his work day. And we would have, we called it zero period because it was before high school actually started. And we would have a special AP physics class taught by a physicist. And he was a wonderful teacher. And he had this great enthusiasm for it. And I remember him describing physics as a way to predict the future that actually worked. That blew my mind. I thought, wow, we can take this world as crazy world we live in, which seems chaotic and unpredictable. And from it, we can extract mathematical laws that predict what's going to happen. It's incredible to me that that's possible. And that physics has achieved so much in simplifying this crazy world into a few basic laws that can be applied generally. The idea that the universe follows laws, right? That there are mathematical rules that the universe follows and that we can discover them. That just blew my mind. And that was the first moment I discovered that describing how a baseball flies through the air, how a cannonball can be shot at a castle. And the idea that we know these rules and we can use them to predict the future that hooked me. I love it. So then did you realize at that time what your career options were? Did you kind of know that you wanted to be a professor? I think I thought I wanted to be a professor. At the time, I really had no idea what being a professor was like. And I had no idea what being a particle physicist was like. So my journey to being a particle physicist was a little longer. And it suits me very well. But I didn't really know at the time how well it would fit me. The details of being a particle physicist, mostly writing computer code and working in these big collaborations is unusual in science. And I had no way to know that this little niche of science would suit me so well. So I just sort of fell into it, but I actually tried various other kinds of physics before I found particle physics. Absolutely. So can you walk us through kind of what your stages were between going to college, getting your PhD, postdoc, all these things that took you then to your current position? So I was an undergraduate rice and I was doing homework problems and having fun, solving physics problems, which was great. But then I wanted some research experience because people told me research is what physics is mostly about. So I thought, all right, well, if I have burning questions about the universe, I better learn how to do research. So I did a summer research program actually back home in Los Alamos, and I worked for a group that did plasma physics. And I thought, this is important because these guys are going to build fusion reactors that are going to solve the energy problem. It's going to be free energy forever. And at the time fusion was saying, we're 20 years away from building a reactor that can mimic the processes of the sun and generate energy basically from water without pollution. And I thought, this sounds interesting and important, I'm going to go help out. So I signed up for a summer research and there's some really nice guys there and they introduced me to the lab and how to do research and stuff. But honestly, I was deadly bored every day. I just couldn't really get myself into the questions of the day and motivated to do any actual work. The thing about science is that you have these big questions and often those are motivating. But then the day-to-day work is pretty different from the big questions. It's not like every day you're making some dramatic discovery or revealing an insight about the universe. So the day-to-day work has to also be fun. And in the case of plasma physics, it was thinking about hot gases and modeling them with numerical codes. And I just wasn't having any fun, honestly. So I had a summer there where I tried to do some work, but I wasn't really into it because it didn't really hook me. So I thought, well, maybe plasma physics isn't for me. So then the next summer, I did a different research project. I went to Texas Tech and I did a research project involving condensed matter physics. People were trying to build new kinds of materials, different kinds of metals to understand their properties and their conductivity. And I thought, well, this sounds important because you can make better computer chips and work on superconductivity, which sounds really cool. So I spent a summer in the basement of a lab where they were shooting lasers at metals trying to understand them. I thought, oh, cool lasers. And that was fun for a little while, but the problem is that a laser is a big complicated instrument. There's like 100 pieces to it. And on any given day, any piece has a 99% chance of working. But if you have 100 pieces in your instrument and each one works only 99% of the time, it means honestly, most of the time it's not working. So I spend most of that summer in the basement trying to get that laser to work. And for some people that might have been fun playing with these tools, but I didn't actually enjoy it very much. And it was like the last day we had that summer in the lab, I finally got it all together and we collected like 45 minutes worth of data on which I based everything I did. Oh wow. So I was like, maybe across this one off the list. So yeah. So it's not always obvious in advance what you're going to enjoy. You can be interested in the big questions, but then you have to find something where the day-to-day work is actually fun. So it was the following summer that I tried particle physics. There was a professor at Rice who I had a class from in particle physics. And I thought, wow, particle physics sounds really cool. You're studying questions at the center, at the center, at the center of everything. So I spent a summer working with him. And in particle physics, we collide these particles together and we take these big digital pictures of it. So basically, we just have a big pile of data. And then we try to ask questions about that. We say, what was in this collision or what came out of this collision or how heavy are the particles in this collision. But most of the actual work is computer programming. These writing programs to analyze that data and answer questions. And I love computer programming. I used to write video games as a kid or write programs to do this better the other and the puzzle of making a computer program work. Or why doesn't it work? Let me try to fix it that detective work, which I found really boring when it came to plasma physics codes or fixing a laser. I found really fun when it came to writing data analysis code for particle physics. So it was a good fit for me finally. Something which had really interesting big questions and something which I enjoyed the day to day work. So I had a great time doing particle physics that summer. And then when I graduated, I applied to a bunch of graduate schools. I got into several and I wasn't sure exactly where I wanted to go. I've always as a kid wanted to go to MIT. I'm not sure why just because it's MIT. Is that a lure to it? The prestige, yeah. Yeah, the prestige. So when I got a phone call and I got into MIT for grad school, I thought, wow, this is it. I've made it and I'm definitely going to go. And I went to MIT to visit and I was sort of intimidated and blown away and it was awesome and impressive. And I thought, well, I'm definitely going here. But then I went to visit a few other schools. I went to Berkeley, for example. And everybody there was just as sharp, but they spent a little more time outside in the grass playing Frisbee and enjoying their life a little bit and the weather was better. So I thought, it was a different kind of path. But I actually put off the decision and I spent a year in Copenhagen doing some research while I thought about what I wanted to do next. And when I came back from Copenhagen, I decided I thought Berkeley was a better path for me than MIT. I wasn't sure I was ready for the intensity of the experience at MIT. I wanted something with a big more mix of work life balance. So I ended up going to Berkeley doing a PhD in particle physics there. Gotcha. Well, wonderful to hear more about your path. And after that postdoc, you did land a position where you are today at UC Irvine and you have so many great projects that you're working on. So is there one in particular I hate making people choose favorites, but is there one that you wanted to chat with us about today? Sure. I have a project which began as sort of a crazy idea and then turned into a side project and is now maybe actually going to do some real science. And think I love about this project is that it's either totally absurd and will never work or the most important thing I'll ever do scientifically and exciting to me to have the sort of range of possible outcomes. So the project is to build the world's largest telescope. And we're trying to build the telescope by linking together everybody's smartphones because it turns out that smartphones that when you have in your pocket is sensitive to a kind of particle that comes from space. And we've been trying to understand these particles for decades and we don't understand them. We don't understand where they come from. We don't understand why they have so much energy. The particles from space we call cosmic rays. It's a fancy name for them. And cosmic rays are hitting the earth all the time. They smash the atmosphere and they create little explosions just like if a meteor hit the atmosphere with create a shooting star when it really high energy particle hits the atmosphere. The same thing happens. And most of the time the atmosphere stops these particles. And so we don't have to worry about it. But sometimes these particles have ridiculously high energy. Higher energy than anything we've ever seen before. And higher energy than anything anybody understands. Like if you ask scientists or astrophysicists and you say, what's the highest energy particle you can imagine existing anywhere in the universe? And they come up with a crazy number. Well, we see particles from space that are a thousand times more energetic than what we think should be the maximum. Oh wow. So that means that something or someone out there is shooting these particles at the earth. And we don't understand it. It means it's something new out there. Some new kind of object or some new kind of physics or some new kind of alien race that's shooting these particles at us. So we want to understand what are these things. And the particles hit the atmosphere and then they create this big explosion which comes on the ground as a bunch of particles. And there are some places that are studying this. The OJ experiment in South America and telescope array in Utah. And when they hit the ground they make this big flash of particles like a kilometer wide. And the problem is these things are pretty rare. They're really high energy ones. You have one per square kilometer per hundred years. Wow. Which means if you want to see them, you either need a lot of square kilometers or lots of years. And we don't want to wait hundreds of years to get the answer. So these telescopes they build are pretty big. They're like to 3,000 square kilometers. But they're pretty small compared to the size of the earth. So my research group thought can we build an earth sized telescope that looks for these particles. And we were thinking about it and we realized that the smart phones we have in our pocket can see these particles because the camera that's in your smart phone is a particle detector. It's a little piece of silicon that uses a camera. But the camera is nothing more than a particle detector detects photons. It can also detect muons and electrons and positrons and other kinds of particles. So we wrote this app. It's called crayfish cosmic rays found in smart phones. And if you run it on your app it turns your phone into a particle detector. It runs at night while you're sleeping and you're not using the phone. And it turns your phone into a particle detector. And we did this calculation when we thought well how many phones do we need to build a telescope that can see these cosmic rays at the level or greater than what these dedicated government funded $100 million dollars. So we did these calculations and we discovered we only need a few million smartphones. Five, maybe 10 million smartphones running and we can build an earth sized telescope that can mimic the scientific potential of these really expensive facilities. And people have already spent their money on these smartphones. A few million smartphones sounds like a lot but it's small number compared to the billions of smartphones that are being used. There's millions of smartphones turned on every single day. So the exciting thing is that the potential of this experiment depends just on how many people we can get to run it. If we get five or 10 million people to run it then we can build a telescope that's about as good as what exists. But if we get 50 million or 100 million or God forbid a billion people to run it then we can have an extraordinarily powerful telescope that could see these cosmic rays and could understand where they're coming from and help us figure out one of these deep mysteries. So to me it's exciting because there's some technical challenges to making it work. So it's fun to try to bump up against these things and think creatively but it's also great potential. It could turn into something crazy. So is this something that our listeners can download and use today? Absolutely. Yeah. Just type crayfish app into Google and you'll find our website and instructions on how to run it on your phone. Phenomenal and I'm curious about I guess the detection capability. What is the range for an individual smartphone in terms of where does this particle have to be for it to detect it? Right. It's a great question. In your smartphone is a very tiny spot that's actually sensitive. That's the chip that's behind your camera. And because smartphones need to be so lightweight and small the technology is push these cameras to be really, really small and these chips are really, really tiny. So there's about a quarter of a square centimeter is the area of the smartphone that's actually sensitive to these particles. It's this silicon chip that lies just behind the lens in your smartphone camera. Now fortunately consumers also want really good pictures. So that's pushing smartphone manufacturers to make these chips actually larger and larger in recent years. So they're creeping up a little bit inside but they'll never be huge. So the particle has to hit just in the right spot in the smartphone for us to see it. However, when these really energetic particles hit the atmosphere and cause these crazy showers of particles, then the number of particles on the ground is enormous. It's like 10 to the 9 or 10 to the 10 particles hit the ground. So if you're in the middle of one of these showers, your phone will see it. So cool. Wonderful to hear about this project. Thanks so much for sharing it with us. But I think so far we've made your journey in science sound pretty fun, pretty relaxed like everything went smoothly. And I know that is almost never the case. So do you have a story of struggle or challenge or failure, Daniel, that you can share with us today and walk us through how you got through that tough time? I think one of the hardest things for a lot of people to learn and was very difficult for me is how to transition from being a good college student to being a good scientist. Being a good college student means solving homework problems. And these homework problems have been solved by generations of students before you. You know there's an answer. There's a path. You just have to find it. And usually you sit together and work with people and exercise your math skills and it's sort of a particular skill to be good at solving homework problems. And by the time I was a senior in college, I was excellent at it. I've been doing it for more than a decade and I was getting pretty good at it. And the thing I discovered about homework problems is that there's only a small number of actually solvable physics problems. And every problem we saw was one variation on that. So instead of needing to really think creatively, I developed this skill. Which problem is this? Oh, this is just like that other problem. I can turn this one into that other problem. So that worked pretty well. But then when I got to grad school, I had to do actual research and research involves solving unsolved problems. Nobody saw before problems. We don't know if they are solvable. That's a very different kind of skill. So I signed up to work on the DZR experiment at Fermin Lab and my advisor was Mark Strowing. And he was an older gentleman. He was sort of at the end of his career. I think actually I was his last graduate student. And his supervision style was extremely hands off. It was something like Throws student in the deep end. See if they drown. So he just gave me the tools I needed. He introduced me to the science. He said, Here's what's going on. Go. And he didn't give me any direction. And I didn't know what to do. And I sat there at my computer thinking around at this and reading that and trying to keep busy. But really, I didn't have anything to do. And I didn't really do anything. I think I sat there for six months getting nothing done, not really sure what to do. Until finally, I realized that nobody cared about my PhD and my career and my science as much as I did. It was more important to me than to anyone else. For my advisor, I was one of a dozen or two dozen students he would have in his career. So it wasn't that important to him. And he was looking towards retirement anyway. But for me, it was everything. So I realized that I needed to think, like, what are my questions? What do I want to do? What's exciting and fun for me? And then I need to figure out how to get there. What do I want to accomplish? What is the step I need to take in order to get there today? And that was not easy to learn. And I stumbled and struggled a little bit before I finally figured out what I wanted to do and caught myself an interesting little mini problem to work on. And that was exciting. And then I caught me into the next one and the next one. And finally, I figured out how to guide myself, how to figure out what I wanted to accomplish and how to get there. And there's totally different skill from being a college student. And in my generous moments, I think my advisor must have been trying to teach me that. That's how he was teaching me. He just ignored me and figured that I would figure it out for myself. There are less generous interpretations also. But I like to think that maybe he was giving me the space to figure out how to motivate myself. I like the optimism. Well, it worked out for me, so I'll give him some credit. Definitely. And I think this sort of hands-off mentorship style is something that a lot of young scientists struggle with. And I think in that situation, you're right, you sort of have the sink or swim option. And for people who are able to swim, what are some of the things that really helped you kind of get moving or figure out what you needed to do? What are some of the steps that you took to make it start working? There was a postdoc in that research group who I became friends with. And he's the one who saw me wasting my time. And he said to me, you can do so much more than this. You need to find something that interests you. You need to find something that excites you. I was just sort of waiting for somebody to tell me what to do. I didn't realize that I could be self-directed. So I think the thing people should remember is that they're in science to answer their own questions. And when you become a professor, nobody's telling you what to do. Nobody's coming to your office and saying, here's your next research priority. So if you want to be a scientist, you have to be able to be good at generating your own research questions. What is it you want to answer? What is it you want to figure out about the universe? And then the other tricky part is figuring out how to get there from here. What can I do to accomplish that today? Because in research, there's not always a lot of correlation between busyness and progress. Right. You can spend six months working on something and then discover that was a waste of time. Whereas you can be on a jog and have a brilliant insight, which will leap you forward. So you have to be in your way against that. You have to be ready to push forward, even if you're not necessarily making any progress, because the progress itself can be very stutter-step and very unpredictable. Absolutely. And I think you brought up a good point there. And even if your main mentor maybe isn't mentoring you in a way that's most useful for you, kind of finding these other mentors, maybe a postdoc in the lab, maybe a senior graduate student, or even another faculty member who you can bounce ideas off or get some insight into, how do I start this process of thinking independently as a scientist? So I think that's really helpful. That's right. Science should never be a lonely endeavor. The best ideas come from talking to people. I've often had some new idea, and I've gone into a colleague's office to explain to me actually why that's a terrible idea. But then sometimes my terrible idea will inspire a better idea than them. But that makes me think about this other thing, maybe we can go this direction. And then through that back and forth, we can often find something interesting or important to do. So sharing ideas with people and talking with people is very important. Young scientists should not be spending their time isolated. This should be bouncing their ideas around among each other. Absolutely. Well, thanks so much for sharing some of your dark days, Daniel. But we don't just want to focus on those. Can you share with us next a story of success? Whether it's a big win or a small win, but one that was really meaningful for you? Sure. In the last few years we've had a revolution of sorts in particle physics, where we realized that a lot of the problems we are having in analyzing our data have already been solved by other fields. So we had this hammer and nail moment. We realized that our colleagues in an adjacent field had already solved one of our problems. And I was involved sort of in the early days of this, which is a lot of fun. And it came about by chance. So I work on the large H. John Collider. We smash protons together. And when we do that, we take a digital picture of the collision. And these digital pictures are huge. There are a hundred million pieces of information for every collision. And we take a collision every 25 nanoseconds. So it's an ocean of data. It's not a fire hose. And overwhelming sea. Yeah. Exactly. It's a tsunami of data. And this is difficult. So what we do when we analyze this data is we have to simplify it. We make all sorts of simplifying assumptions to boil it down to a few pieces of information. But we long thought that probably we're losing a lot of information where we're making these assumptions. Because there's no way you can represent a hundred million pieces of information in just one or two pieces. But we couldn't really handle more information than that. The data was too big. And here at UC Irvine, we have an excellent machine learning group of computer science department where they're teaching computers to analyze data. And they invited me to talk about my research. So I went over there and I took it as an opportunity to say, here's where we are. Here's the problem we're having. What can you guys do? So I described our problem. I said, we'd love to handle our data, met a higher dimensionality, that's a lower level to get all the details out of it that we can. But right now we're limited because we can't handle that size of data. So I described the problem and this professor in the computer science department, Pierre Baldy, he said, wow, this sounds like a perfect application for some tools that we've been developing. And the computer science department, they have been studying really high data problems. For example, the really difficult problem of answering the question, is there a cat in this internet video? This is the kind of problem that computer scientists work on. Right, it's an important problem. I'm not sure it's important, but it's hard. And that's what the computer scientists do is they look for problems that are hard. And that's difficult. I mean, can you write a computer program which analyzes pixel by pixel a video on the internet to answer, is this a cat? No, it's not easy. Yeah. So they developed these neural networks that could handle this very large data problem because a video is like 400 by 800 in pixels and then times time. So to huge number of pieces of information, they developed these data algorithms, deep learning, a machine learning that could handle these very large data problems. But they're applying them to these really silly tasks that nobody really cared about. So Pierre said, well, maybe we can apply our tools to your project, which actually sounds interesting and important. So I cooked up a problem. I showed him where our current ideas were failing and sent a statement said, what can you do? And they came back with a neural network, which beat everything we had thought and everything we had done before. And even did better than my personal efforts. I spent some time crafting some algorithms that I thought would be the state of the art and their deep network totally blew it out of the water. And that's when we realized, wow, these deep networks have incredible power to analyze our data. And since then, people have been applying deep networks to all sorts of stuff in particle physics and really boosted our ability to understand nature and the universe itself, which I think is more interesting than is there a cat in this internet video that we brought this incredible hammer that the computer sciences department has been using over to our pile of nails. And we've been making great progress ever since. So that was a lot of fun. Well, congratulations on the success. And I think it really points to some of the benefits that you get when you're able to forge these collaborations and look outside your field for some of the answers instead of trying to do everything yourself. Absolutely. There's nothing new under the sun, right? Somebody else is already building the wheels to don't invent it yourself. That's right. And in addition to some of the amazing work that you've done in research, I mentioned in our introduction that you're also co-author of a book. So can you tell our listeners a little bit about your book? Yeah, it's a really fun project. The book is called We Have No Idea, a Guide to the Unknown Universe. And it's a popular science book, but it's not like your typical popular science book about physics, your Neil deGrasse Tyson book, which is telling you all the things we have learned about the universe. This book is telling you all the things we don't know about the universe. I'll be unanswered questions, all the things that are open mysteries. These are the kind of the questions that I hope we will unravel one day. And that if we do, could represent revolutions in physics, things like how did the universe begin or what happened before the big bang or what is time? These are kind of big, basic questions that I think everybody wants to know the answer to and science doesn't even really know how to approach some of them because they're so big and so vast and so deep. So we wrote a book, my co-authors Jorge Chán, he's the famous cartoonist behind PhD comics, well known to everybody in research in academia because he's really captured the existential angst of being a researcher or being a graduate student. It's mostly text like your normal book, but Jorge is a great visual artist and comedian. So he wrote a bunch of comics that go in there and augment the book and help explain things and also to give the reader the sense that this is a book about big questions, but it doesn't take itself too seriously. There's a lot of jokes in there and puns and we try to be lighthearted about it. So the book is called, we have no idea and it tackles these big questions and it includes I think 400 cartoons also by Jorge. Oh, that's awesome. Yeah, it's been a lot of fun. So we will definitely put this out on our website for our listeners to find if they're in search of another book to read. But do you have any other recommendations in addition to this book that you'd like to tell our listeners about? Sure, I'm a big fan of science fiction, which I think is not unusual among scientists. And I'm especially a big fan of very hard science fiction. Most science fiction in my view is actually technology fiction. They say, oh, what if we had this tool? What if we could do this thing? And that's like you invented some piece of technology and you explore how that affects society. That can be fun. But I always wonder, what's the science behind that technology? How was that made? What else can you do with that? So to me, science fiction is when an author invents a new kind of science or the characters in the book develop a new kind of science. And that's much more rare. Examples are like foundation series by Asimov. They're they invented a kind of science where they can predict the broad strokes of the future of humanity in the universe. They can't predict the details, but the broad strokes. To me, that's fascinating. But the book I want to recommend is one called Diaspora. It's by an author to call Greg Egan EGAN. And it's extraordinarily creative in the same way in creating a new kind of science. And I don't want to give away any of the ideas in the book. No spoilers. No spoilers. Because what I read science fiction, I like to know almost nothing and read as the author intended. But I'll say that I was blown away every other page had an incredibly creative idea about kind of science or a new idea in science that I had never considered. And got the part of the book. It was exactly right. And it had also to create ideas. And I was really impressed. Often I would read a science fiction novel. And maybe there's one new idea in there. But this one did a single idea every page or two. So I was really impressed. So for fans of very hard science fiction, I would recommend the book Diaspora by Greg Egan. Well excellent recommendation. And I will absolutely add that to our reading list for our listeners out there. And so far we've talked about a lot of different aspects of your career, Daniel. But one of the things we haven't really touched on in too much detail are some of the opportunities you've had to travel all over the world. And I think this is a wonderful aspect of a career of a scientist. So when you think back to all the places you've been for science, is there one that really rises to the top as your absolute favorite? Well, scientifically, one of my favorite places to go is Aspen, Colorado. Aspen, of course, is beautiful. But the Aspen Center for Physics runs these workshops every summer where they bring physicists together and you go and you just hang out for a couple of weeks. It's not a conference where there's like a talk every hour and maybe a little bit of time to chat. It's like one talk a week. And most of the time you just have an office and you're hanging out and you're working. And it's sort of like they've made a mashup department. One of the benefits of having smart people in your physics department is you have nice people to talk to. You can share your ideas on the chalkboard and they can bounce ideas back at you. It's very constructive and inspirational. But you talk to the same people for 30 years. You sometimes have exhausted their ideas and your ideas. So at Aspen every summer, they make a sort of a mashup department where you get to sit next to people you don't know. And there's people down the hall you've never talked to before. So you can share your half-formed ideas with them and they will have different ideas than your colleagues back home. So I go there a week or two every summer and I always come back with five or six crazy new ideas or new directions to work on just from getting to talk to new people and getting to interact with people who have different ideas than I've ever heard before. So scientifically that's one of my favorite places. But because I'm an experimentalist, I tend to travel a lot to where the particle colliders are. And I have two kids and each of them was born next to a particle collider. Oh wow. So my son was born in Chicago, which is next to the Collider Fermilab just outside Chicago in Batavia, is the Tevatron, which is two terro electron-boiled collisions of protons and antiprotons. And at the time that he was born, it was the highest energy collider in the world. And then my daughter was born in Switzerland because in 2009, when she was born, the highest energy collider in the world was at CERN just outside of Geneva. So it's sort of me and my family have followed particle colliders around the world and I had one kid at each of the world's greatest particle colliders. So of course my kids ask me when's the next collider turning on and are you having another baby? And these colliders take decades to build. So the next one turns on probably in 2040 or 2050 or so. And my wife says she's pretty sure we're not hitting more kids. Might be time for them to have kids then, right? Yeah, exactly. That's what I was thinking. And they turn into particles. We'll see. Oh, that's a wonderful, that's a great claim to fame for your kids there that they were born right next to one of these giant, amazing, powerful particle colliders. Exactly. Unfortunately, didn't give them any superpowers. Oh, that is unfortunate. So in your travels, you mentioned some of the great places you've been CERN, for example, the Fermi Lab. Do you get to actually explore the places that you visit or is it something where you're mostly sort of isolated within the research facility? You usually get to explore and it's a huge side benefit to being a scientist. It's getting to go to these crazy places and then also be a tourist for a day or two. So I've gotten to go to China and all over Europe and South America and all over the US, of course. It's definitely a lot of fun. And I'm a big lover of nature and mountains. So wherever I go, I like to find a nearest tall place and try to hike up to it. So definitely had a lot of great experiences. Switzerland is great for mountains and for tall places. And the American West, of course, with the Rockies and been up to the Canadian Rockies as well. So lots of beautiful places. Wonderful. It's great to hear about some of the places that your science has taken you and throughout our conversation, we've sort of hinted at some of the great people that you've been able to work with over the years. And I think there are so many fun, creative, amazing people working in science, but that's not the reputation that we always get as scientists. So I love breaking some of these stereotypes about scientists on our program by sharing some of the fun and funny things that we do and that happen to us. So do you have a memory or an example of maybe a quirky tradition that you've experienced working in a lab or one that maybe you used today or just a fun or fun memory you've shared with colleagues? That's a great question. Everybody works in their own different way and it's fun to see how people get their ideas and how they collaborate together, how they interact. One thing I do in my research group to try to get this sort of creative juices flowing is that every six months or every year or so we have what I call the crazy ideas meeting. I tell everybody in the groups that they have to show with one or two ideas for a research project that has no limit on cost or practicality or feasibility. Just think of a question about the universe and try to construct the way you might answer it. So people have come up with crazy ideas to build a collider the size of the solar system or stuff like this. Actually our idea for a telescope that looks at cosmic rays came out of one of these meetings. Oh wow. Where both my student and I actually had the same idea but the same meeting and proposed the same thing. Can we turn smartphones into cosmic rate telescopes? We happen to have the same idea and then we look at each other and we thought maybe this isn't such a crazy idea. Maybe we should actually try this. Let's do this. Yeah and I like to do that because it makes my students exercise their creative juices. Sometimes you're stuck in a rut of what you're doing and what they meet and next step is and you're not spending enough time thinking about what the next global step is. What is the next direction for the field or what can I actually do to influence the kind of research the whole community is doing or do I have any new ideas myself. So I think it's important that we exercise that muscle every once in a while and it's always a lot of fun and we always end up laughing. So far we haven't come up with any actual working ideas but I hope that's that sort of exercise and creativity drips down into their daily work and makes them more creative researchers. Definitely and I really like that it creates almost like a judgment free zone where people don't have to feel self conscious about how weird or crazy an idea may seem they can just kind of throw it out there and get feedback. Yeah I think that's important. Very cool. Well that is a great tradition to have in your lab. Wonderful to hear that you are encouraging that creativity in your students because I think it is really important in science for answering a lot of these big questions that you're trying to tackle in your lab and I imagine there's a thing or two Daniel standing in between you and the answers to all the questions that you are seeking answers to. So things like funding staff technology feasibility there's limitations all over the place in science but if we took them all away for you for a day what is the question you would want to tackle most. I think the question I most want to answer to is what is the universe made out of at its deepest level. If you knew what the universe is made out of it was made out of tiny strings or there's one particle or at its deepest level the universe is made out of tiny llamas or hamsters or something. I feel like that would reveal something about the universe. That would be like a truth that would tell us something about the very nature of the universe itself and that's the thing I really want the answer to and the amazing thing to me is we know how to answer that question. There isn't a technological barrier. The only barrier is money. The way you look at the universe at a small scale is you build a collider that has a lot of energy to smash particles up. The bigger the collider the more energy you put into collider the more you can look inside particles. You can break apart the atom and then you can break apart the protons and then you can break apart the quarks. You can break apart what those are made out of. You can break apart what those are made out of. You sort of shred the universe down to its lowest level. So all we need to answer this question is enough energy in our collisions to smash the particles and reveal these tiny little fundamental bits of the universe and we know how to do that. The only thing is it gets pretty expensive. So the collider we have in Geneva right now which is pretty awesome cost about ten billion dollars to build. Oh wow. Not a small amount of money for science but compared to humanity our budget for the military and other stuff it's not that big a number. The next collider we think might cost thirty-fourty billion dollars. The amazing thing to me is that we know how to answer these questions. All we have to do is spend the money so we can buy knowledge. It's like we can go into the universe's store and say how much does this piece of information cost? Oh forty billion dollars. Let's just buy that piece of information. Often in science we have a fundamental problem. Some hurdle we can't overcome or we need some stroke of genius or some new kind of technology to probe. Here we don't. We know exactly how to do it. It's just expensive and we just have to decide how much is this knowledge worth. Should we spend forty billion dollars on an aircraft carrier or on learning the secrets of the universe. So probably when it comes to prize to you is to our listeners where I would put that money. But it's tantalizing to me that these questions have answers and we know how to answer them and we're just sort of deciding not to spend the money on it. That is a very interesting conundrum you've brought about and I love that it's sort of reminiscent of young Daniel smashing rocks together as a kid to see it all comes full circle. That's awesome. Well great to hear about the big questions that are occupying your mind right now Daniel. But in addition to some of these big questions I want you to share with our listeners I'd also love for you to share with them some advice that might help them on their own scientific journeys. So is there a particular piece of advice that really helped you that you can give to them today? When I was a young grad student and I was wasting my time and sort of doing nothing it was that postdoc in my group his name is Marumi Kato he's still a particle of his sister's in Paris and he was a few years older than me and I think he saw potential in me and he's the one who said to me you can do better and I heard what he was saying and I knew what he meant and I recognized that I was not really putting my full effort. I was not really pouring everything I had into this I was not thinking for myself what are the questions I want to answer and how can I do the most every day to accomplish that and I think that was great advice that was the inspiration I needed is to be told that I needed to do everything I could to push this forward and at least if in that moment in my life I need to give it 100% of my effort and my energy and I'm really glad that I did because it's only when I put all that energy in that I discovered that I have a skill at this and that I'm pretty good at it and that it's fun is this excitement in making progress and in revealing things and discovering things about the system you're working on or the particles of the lowest level so that was the most useful advice I ever got is just you can do better. Definitely and I think it is so important to sort of keep pushing yourself and keep challenging yourself to do more so that is great advice to pass on to our listeners is there any other last piece of advisor a last note of inspiration they know you want to leave them with today. I think the advice I would have especially for younger scientists is to make sure they're focusing on the questions they want answers to and not on the career path or what is going to get me necessarily the next job there's a lot of people who try to balance those things and wonder like try to publish a high profile paper or should I think about the questions that are actually interesting to me and in my view you should focus on the scientific questions and what's really driving you because that's going to lead you in the direction where you're the most productive and you're making the most useful contributions and you're going to have the most fun and I think it's not a great idea for people to try to bank for the future happiness. I'm going to suffer today so that later I can have the job I really want. Make sure people are answering their own questions and having fun day to day and enjoying what they're doing that way the career works out great if the career doesn't work out well you still had fun and learned a lot and got to do something you were interested in so keep answering your own questions would be my advice. Well that's excellent advice you've got to enjoy the journey right? Yes exactly. Well Daniel thanks so much for sharing your insights and advice with our listeners can you tell them if they want to learn more about you and the work you do where should they go? They can follow me on Twitter I'm just at Daniel Whiteson they can also send me an email if they have questions about anything just Daniel at uci.edu it's Daniel at University of California Irvine.edu and they should feel free to contact me about physics questions or career questions or anything at all. Fantastic. Well listeners definitely get connected with Daniel on Twitter reach out if you have any questions and Daniel thank you so much for joining us on the program today. Thanks very much for having me it was a lot of fun. Well it was great to chat with you listeners wonderful to have you here as well we'll see you next time on another episode of People Behind the Science.
