Every day discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNally is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone and welcome to another episode of People Behind the Science. I am delighted to be here today with Dr. Kurt Thurumann. Kurt is an associate professor and associate chair for undergraduate studies in the department of biomedical engineering, as well as director of undergraduate studies of the School of Engineering and Applied Science at Washington University in St. Louis. He received his PhD from Johns Hopkins University and completed a postdoctoral fellowship at Brandeis University before joining the faculty at Washington University. Kurt is here with us today to tell us all about his journey through life and science. So today Kurt, we're really excited to get to know you, both as a scientist, but also as a person. So can you take a minute to tell us what do you like to do when you're not doing science? Certainly, so person foremost, thank you very much for having me on the show. It's a real delayed. Secondly, I have a very lucky life right now, in terms of outside of science, I have a great family, I have a wife and two kids, and I of course love doing lots of things with them. And in particular, write this very moment, the two kids finished school yesterday, their school year, and so we're segueing into summer. So of course that means both new opportunities, but also new challenges in terms of co-parenting and managing all of those. But when that is not challenging in terms of scheduling, it's just great fun to be with the three of them. Elsewise, I would say my number one hobby right now is just breathing and relaxing and realizing that I don't have to run full speed, and I will get into why this moment is more full speed than typical. Beyond that, I have spent quite a bit of time in improv theater, and very locally, I'm taking a little break from performing, but I am trying to figure out how to get back into that again. That's fantastic. So Kurt, how did you get into the world of improv theater, if I may ask? Of course, I have a graduate student named Rungin Khan. He was extraordinarily active as a college student at the University of Virginia, and then maintained his activity when he moved here to St. Louis. So he was my first introduction to at-Furst shows and then classes here in St. Louis. And so thereafter, I joined and completed a training program here in St. Louis. I've since taken part in workshops both locally, and I had an amazing opportunity to train for three days at Second City in Chicago. And so right this very moment, I have so many things going on professionally that I've stopped at to be bluntest. I do have a team of folks that I have performed with in the last year, but I've needed to stop out of that group to be able to focus on all the rest of what I'm up to, but I'm thrilled to have that on my back burner. And certainly, I hope to bring that back to the friend burner at some point in the near future. That's really exciting. Hopefully, you're able to bring that sense of humor then into the crazy world of your life. Well, yes, and improv theater, certainly for those that aren't aficionados, is so unlike professional work, in a sense that as professors, we are asked to focus on issues that will arise a year, three years, ten years from now in terms of how we manage everything. And to do well in improv is just the opposite. You need to be absolutely positively in the presence to know what is going on in the scene, what's going on with your partners. And if you're focused on what you think happened five seconds ago, or what you think will happen five seconds from now, you've lost it. So that just in and of itself has been an amazing counterbalance to all of the rest of these things we'll talk about today. Absolutely. Well, Kurt, it's great to hear a little bit more about your family and your hobbies and things you like to do outside the world of science. But now I'd like to learn a little bit more about your scientific side. So can you tell me how do you describe what you do to someone who's not in science? Sure. And even here, I'm going to have two-part answer. And so hopefully we can delve into the both. I have a lab. And in shortest story, I am very interested in the human brain and how the human brain computes. And so in our experiments and in our very computationally intensive analysis and modeling, we are most interested in how the brain processes and predicts. So if we give human participants in our experiments, experiences that are unusual, how do people take in those experiences and then produce different motor behaviors afterward? And for us, that input outputs, the inputs of sensory experiences that are unusual, that wouldn't be experienced outside our lab. And then how people behave through their movements thereafter has been a perfect window in that we can be very quantitative about the input side, quantitative about the output side, do very classical reverse engineering and figure out the stuff in the middle. And most often, that stuff in the middle that we care about the most is the brain. That is fascinating. So you said you were two hats in your professional life. Tell us about the other one. So that certainly is still a very substantive part of what I do. But I've been so, so fortunate over the past handful of years to meaningfully invest in education research, both in science and engineering broadly and certainly within engineering education proper. And the simplest notion there is I get to invest in lots of opportunities that are truly student-centric to be able to care very directly and engage very directly with student level interests and concerns. And my achievement thus far, and I will keep saying these sentences until someone proves me wrong, but no one's done so thus far. As far as I know, I am the inventor of the world's first online learning environment to support students throughout the major rather than in an individual class. And so all of the forest for the trees problem, the issue of so many students feeling so isolated during those first couple of years of science and engineering education, focusing on those individual classes instead of the big picture. We have an online environment for the big, big picture to help those students find real world connections and personal connections when else wise that would be very strongly pushed to the side. So that's a snapshot of that side of what I'm currently engaged with them. Absolutely. Well, it sounds like you are doing amazing research in your lab and also doing just incredible work here with these students and creating this community and platform for them to be guided through their early stages of their education and their career that's fascinating. And I must say I'm always impressed with how well people are able to balance all the different obligations and responsibilities they have. And I always wonder, is there a particular, maybe motivational quote or a saying that you really keep in your mind as you're going through your day that keeps you motivated? So here's the shortest story. First of all, no. Secondly, when my kids were growing up, I would walk them around the house singing a Steve Martin song to them. And the Steve Martin song has the line, the obsequious purple and clairvoyance is kind of anti-advice. And so in terms of what I actually want to do though, I also raised my kids on a steady diet of muppets. And at the very end of the first muppet movie, there's a line from Kermit in a song which is life is a movie right your own ending. And I suppose if I were to be pithiest, just that I think is a fine credo through which I try to live. Absolutely. I think that's really interesting keeping that idea in your mind that this is your life, this is your own movie that you're creating and you're in charge of making the ending that you want to see. And to spin that into a digression that just over the past couple of weeks, I have the opportunity to present to some assistant professors in my school who have self-organized, who have said to themselves, we need to know more about what we do in terms of our research, in terms of our aspirations. And so let's organize a half day working meeting and I have the opportunity to present to them. And this is them living out that aspiration of Kermits. They saw opportunity, they saw we want to do better than what we have right now in terms of the way we can network and be productive in many senses of the word productivity. And so I would offer that that is service. Those folks that are serving on that committee and organizing that committee are generating extraordinarily valuable service to their academic community. And so that hopefully will be appropriately self-trasured by those folks that have organized and are now participating in that. And so the life is a movie maker on ending certainly applies to what we aspire to do over again years or careers or what have you. But applies to this smaller stuff as well. And I hope they value what they're doing right now in exactly that term. What we do that is valuable in terms of research and teaching and service is not just answering the call that others put forth for us. It is in so many ways not only as meaningful, more meaningful to see there is this gap through my own generated service. I can fill that gap. And it's up to those assistant professors to self-value that continue to invest in that so that it becomes something that rises to the level of others seeing, oh wow you that have pulled this off have generated something of real value. Certainly I think it's amazing they're able to participate in this project and really reach out to other faculty members and create a community for everyone to do this service and think about where they want to be, how they want to develop their careers and create their own endings. That's wonderful. You bet. So Kurt when you think back on your own career as a scientist, are there particular people that really rise up in your mind who really inspired you or served as role models? That certainly starts with folk that are directly in my CV if you will. And so my doctoral advisor, Riza Shedmer at Johns Hopkins and my post-doctoral advisor, Eve Marter, that Brandeis were very formative. And indeed I imagine that we'll loop back to some details about the two of them. But there certainly were a couple of other folk and one that was not only important then but remains important to this very day as in I emailed him over the past 24 hour is Larry Schram. So he was the head of my PhD program at Johns Hopkins University. He was an amazing mentor even before I showed up just during the interview process to help me understand what is valuable because all of us know in our sub sub sub disciplines of our scientific enterprises that there's a lot that is disperting. There are lots of things that will go wrong. And so what is it amongst all of this that is sustaining that keeps one going and what are the true important features of all of this. And so I would say he not only has been but continues exactly to this 24 hours to be important. And so I'm so fortunate that here's where I wish you and I had a couple of hours instead of 45 minutes, whatever the sense of being. I am so fortunate to have a lot of folk I've run across and talk to along the way. As I take on this engineering education responsibility, there are some folk that have served as national mentors for me. And so a couple that I will just name off the top of my head, Rob Linson Meyer at Northwestern and Mora Borrego at Virginia Tech are amazing human beings and have just been so generous in terms of sharing their experience and seeing that I want to launch myself truly a decade into my professorship into a new professional realm. And their sharing of experience of intellectual resource of just being able to show me ways and means has been amazing. And so that's just a smattering of folk that come to mind right away, but I'm very lucky to have them and others along the way that it been just spectacular. I'm sure other names will come to mind as we talk about other topics. Definitely. Well, Kurt, I love hearing about these people that shaped the lives of the scientists that I get to talk to. And I think it's great to hear that you have these amazing mentors all along your journey. And some that you're even able to, you know, like you said, reach out to with quick questions and requesting advice even today. So that's great that you're keeping in contact with them. Well, thank you and a whole heartedly to them. It's meant the world that all of what we've talked about already, I can share with them extraordinarily openly and get lots of sage nuggets, if you will, to help me through the littles and the bakes. And so to have a whole network of folk toward that is invaluable, just amazing. Definitely. Sage nuggets kind of sound delicious now that we've talked about. That's wonderful. And I'm interested to hear now. How did you get interested in the world of science? What peaked your interest in the beginning and tells how you got interested in this particular field that you're studying now? Sure. So in terms of something that happened quite a while ago that launched me into all of what I do these days. And in many ways, I do see my traditional research and my engineering education research as having surprising parallels that get stronger the deeper I get into my new work. Nevertheless, I went to Johns Hopkins University as a graduate student with, of course, experience, but a limited vantage point given what I did through college. And I was a physics major at the University of Chicago. So I entered college with a very traditional biomechanical vantage point. I thought that would be my research when I went there. I spoke with Ken Johnson, who unfortunately passed away a handful of years ago now. But nevertheless, Ken was one of my early rotation mentors. And so I got to spend some time in his lab. And there are a couple of folk there that taught me how to graduate students. And so certainly Amy Brisbane is one of those folk that's been helpful through many of these years. Nevertheless, and Ken Johnson's early discussions with me, Ken said, there are many subtopics within biomechanical engineering that one can study. But the brain is special. And I'd say that this next paragraph that he shared with me was particularly true then. I'd say it's less true now, but certainly still has lots of truth to it, which is across biology. There is a movement to be reductionist. That if you want to best understand how organs work, there is a natural movement to understand how the cells work. If you want to understand how cells work, you want to understand how subcellular mechanisms work. And that, of course, leads very naturally in lots of fields to genetic level manipulations and understanding. That certainly is very vibrant within the neuroscience community. But what Ken taught me all those years ago is that the brain is so large in the sense of so many heterogeneous components all working together to generate meaningful, organ-wide outputs that there will always be places within neuroscience for large questions, large-scale approaches. And what spoke to me extraordinarily directly is big idea math. And to be really bluntest, I am a math geek. I'm a math geek that really cares about people. And so human scale neuroscience is a place where I can be a math geek. And do so in scientific questions that have very human scale connections. I am very thrilled with the fact that here at Washington University, I have a joint appointment not only with anatomy and neurobiology, but with physical therapy. And not only conversations with the emerging research projects with physical therapy is something that is right within the realm of programs and projects I can think about. And I am always drawn toward those problems that on the one hand are certainly math geeky. And when I discuss this upcoming podcast with my kids, I play the liberal game with them to think through what quotes I might say in response to your question. And there's a famous University of Chicago quote which is that is all well and good in practice, but how does it work in theory? And so they thought that that would be my, and indeed that's kind of a guiding quote of mine. So I will always be drawn to the very heavy math in this fall of this. But I'm equally drawn to the very human scale part of all of this. So Ken Johnson was the one very early on who showed me all of that would always be possible in brain research. And within brain research, I have certainly been always drawn to those issues that are relatable to human scale questions. There's quite clearly that detour through Eve Martyr's lab in the crap and lobster neurophysiology. But with the exception of those couple of years, I've always been engaged in very human scale questions within neuroscience. It's really fascinating to hear how you were kind of along your scientific journey being able to bring all your different passions together into this research program that you have now. So being excited about the human level of things, but also incorporating sort of the math in the physics and things like that into the engineering background. And then just this idea of the neuroscience and the brain being so large in terms of things we need to comprehend about it. And all the work that needs to be done and the different systems working together, I think that's fascinating. Well, thank you. And there's even a very specific research question in my lab that hopefully will resonate with your listeners in terms of what is very typical on a human scale, but from a neuroscience perspective, it's very strange. And so we have a picture that we snatched from the web that is a standard picture that we talk about now in regards to a particular behavior. And so Albert Coohol's was a baseball player here in St. Louis and of course was extraordinarily popular. We have a picture of him preparing to swing a baseball bat in a gym in front of very attentive middle schoolers. So all of these kids have all of their eyes transfixed on Albert as he's about to swing. And we imagine, we of course don't know, but we imagine that those kids think, oh, I get to see really up close how Albert swings, that will help me as I try to swing a bat. So if that is true, if that is what those kids are thinking, that is very natural in our daily living when we think about coaches in sports or therapists in a clinic, you can watch someone do a movement well and we ourselves can learn from that. From a computational motor control point of you, that's really weird. Because when we generate movements ourselves, when we engage in physical practice, there's so many signals that's going through our nervous systems. And we have so many levels of feedback that arise from yes, our vision, but so many other things as well, direct feedback from our muscles, what are sensed within our joints are telling us of what our body is doing right this very moment. And when we watch Albert Cole-Full swing a baseball bat in our middle school gym, we get none of that information. And even our visual capture is really poor. We don't have a full 360 degree view of what Albert is doing right now. We just have our personal perspective. And it happens so quickly too. And it happens so quickly, right? All of these things are horribly wrong. And yet all of these kids are transfixed. And from our daily experience, we know these kids are probably right through coaching and sports, through therapy and clinics. We know that watching folk do movements well helps us. And that's very confusing from a computational motor control point of view. And so Paul Gribble about a decade ago at the University of Western Ontario took this daily life finding and applied it to a domain in which I work. And so he showed human participants videos of other human participants practicing moving a robot around. And so we use robotics to generate forces that are unusual that you could never experience outside of a laboratory. And he found that watching others learn on the robot helps you later on when you try to move the robot with those specific forces being generated. And that was really weird at the time. And to a degree stays weird in my brain. And we ourselves in our lab are now active participants in this sub-sub-sub-the field. And so how in very contrived situations, not watching Albert Hujol's in the gym. But in contrived is one way to put it, but controlled would be another where we have very direct control over what a participant can watch in a video. How that in a very quantitative way influences the next thing that you do. That is a microcosmic story of how all of this comes together in my life. So there's something out there in the real world that makes perfect sense as we're living in. But when you get to a computational brain point of view, you're like, hey, that makes no sense at all. And so to unwrap layers of that and to get to some core questions. And then to build back up from that and to hopefully, and again, I do have this direct relationship with Catherine Lang in physical therapy where code-eveloping questions now based on this shared work of how better knowledge of learning through observation can lead to clinical analogs in a way that my other more theoretically driven work, if you will, probably would take a lot longer to get into a clinic. Definitely. That sounds like a really exciting line of research and really an insightful point. Yeah, that's something that I never really thought about. I took golf lessons. And yeah, they show you videos of tiger woods. Oh, yeah, clearly, I just have to do what tigers doing and everything's going to be fine. It's never quite that easy. But that is something that you definitely learn from watching these videos and you're able to perform better. That's fascinating. Well, thank you. And hopefully that brings to your listeners to some connection between a personal experience and something that is very right now in lab. And I offer that that takes some doing, of course. It's the whole of those energies that take something that seems, as you say, oh, I'm just watching tiger woods in an all video. That certainly will be of help to me. But if you slow down and think of the scientific consequence, you're like, wait, if that's true, then these other things must be true. And you don't know what tigers thinking of when he thinks through all of those swings. And so the fact that that works is great in terms of a personal life. But we have so, so much to learn in just that sub question. And so if you multiply that beyond in terms of the in parlance of physical therapy activities of daily living, there's so much that we just don't know. And so that's where I'm so fortunate to be in a sub question where I know that there's so much work we need to do. And I know that we're not going to run out of questions in my scientific lifetime. And hopefully, of those that help train and help launch into their own curves as well. Well, Kurt, we have talked about so many amazing things about your career, being your researcher, things like that. We haven't yet touched on. I think some of the low points, but I think every scientist goes through these periods where you struggle or you have a major failure. Can you take us back to one of your own points where you struggled or you had a failure and tells what happened and how you worked through that difficult time? You bet. So yeah, what failure can I talk about at first? So I am very fortunate to be an associate professor at Washington University in San Luis. And that does mean at our institution that we have tenure. So in my department, I am with other peers. There was a group of faculty that were hired at about the same time. And I was sixth out of sixth that were hired in this bundle. And all of us grew up together and all of us got tenure together. And one of my peers, Dave Sett, who has since moved on to the University of Michigan, put most succinctly that to a degree, getting tenure is not falling off a cliff. So if you don't get tenure, then that's obviously really bad, if you are going up for tenure and you need to move, that's the reality of the situation. That the tenure-based system is up or out. And you certainly don't want to be out. And up really, truly is up in terms of status, in terms of monetary reward, not as well, be called a spade, a spade. But in terms of the daily life, the teaching, the research, the work that you do, there are no magical Wizard of Oz curtains that open up. There's no doors that are newly flung open for you. You continue to do the work that you were doing. And there is sometimes unspoken, but sometimes spoken. Understanding that the next things you do will be from this more rarefied station. So you're supposed to take on more institutional responsibilities. You are supposed to be more senior in terms of your scientific product. And what have you? And I took that hard. I was not a happily newly ten-yeared professor. It took some time and energy is to figure out how to live that life happily. And to be super blunt, I reimagined my ten-yeared life to probably be too different than my just before ten-year life. I said to myself, self, now you have this new position. To date, you have had this level of influence when it comes to the Mathiness and the formal theory. You now have some new academic freedoms. Let's use those freedoms to be even Matthew and even more formally engaged and the more theoretical side of what you do. And I had certain successes in that sphere, but all of us are one. I am one human being. And so when I was investing in this new enterprise, I couldn't keep up all of the enterprises that I built up to that date. And that took juggling and to folk outside of my world. It probably would have seemed as if I wasn't changing much. I was going from analysis that was very computationally informed to explicit goals where I was not only using theory, but developing theory. And so that's pretty subtle of all of the humans on the planet. The vast vast majority would say, you're doing the same thing. But to me, in the actual living... But it feels different. Yeah. I needed to engage with my peers differently. I needed to recruit different sorts of folk to my laboratory. I needed to aspire toward different grand mechanisms, different journals in which I would publish. And so in a scholarly life way, I saw this as a sea change when it probably should have been more incremental. But just in terms of my own vantage point of what I should be up to and what I should advise my students to be up to and how all of this fits into what we do. Was struggleful and is less struggleful these days than it was right at that turning point. And so what to a lot of folk would have been a really truly joyful event. The occasion of getting a 10-year position was a lot tougher than I thought it would be. And indeed took some missteps to realize, wait, that was probably an overstep. I need to reestablish the strength that I had built all along. And then make sure that the additional aspirations are added in doses that still maintain that core strength. Absolutely. Well, I think it's fascinating that you're discussing the struggle of, you know, kind of coping with 10-year when I feel like a lot of people are so focused on sort of the struggle to get there. So I think it's a really interesting perspective that you brought, which is great. Well, and here's where to go really far afield for a second, near the end of the Kevin Spacey inside the Actors Studio when they open it up to the audience questions. There was a question from the audience of, here you are, Kevin Spacey and your seats where you have all of these amazing opportunities. Here we are still in school. What is your advice to us given that you are sitting up there on stage? And I'm down here on the audience, if you will. And Kevin Spacey's initial advice was, you fool. Okay, he probably didn't use those words. But the spirit of Kevin Spacey's message was you fool. Because you and I are already doing exactly the same thing all the time. What both of us are doing is acting. And what both of us are doing is living out our life as actors as true and as pure and as mindful and as energetic and as best we can. Regardless of station, regardless of bonnifieds or credentialing or what have you. We're all just doing right now the very best we can with this stuff we have in front of us. And so again, those that are some motivated listening to this. So you've got to do that now and you've got to always do that. And that's tough. I am not saying that any of this comes easily. But having enough of a foundation underlying your daily activities to go, you know what, there's going to be a huge amount of toughness through this. But this is why I'm doing this. This is the core that means so much to me that it'll get me through the days where in my particular life, I end the day with my face having keyboard shaped indentation as I've been banging my head against the keyboard more than I've been actually using my fingers on the keyboard. And it's up that with a little more flex, a little more give. Are you talking about my face? Well, it's really interesting to hear about how you kind of struggle the balance, all these responsibilities. And I know that doesn't always leave a lot of free time in the world of a scientist. But I always like to ask people, is there a particular book that you've read recently that you have really enjoyed and would recommend to our listeners? I was afraid you would ask that and this answer is not really a double in books, but I came from families. You know, you had a multi-family upbringing, but nevertheless that was not book readers. They did other things as well. And so rather than read books, I do very much greatly enjoy museums and music and film and what have you. And I hate to say, right, this very moment, I don't get to enjoy all of those as much as I do. And so I live vicariously, AVclub.com is certainly my first go to in terms of keeping up with all of those cultural what have yous that are not museum-y. And the museum-y stuff, you know, just capturing what I can from New York Times, vantage points, or what have you. But taking my kids to our local museums whenever possible, there's something called the La Mire sculpture garden on the outskirts of St. Louis. That's absolutely world class. That's absolutely underutilized. And so I stay cultural through those meetings rather than just holding up in a corner with a book, because to be blunt, that doesn't come naturally to me. It's great to hear that you're able to kind of share those cultural experiences then with your family rather than like you said, kind of sitting in a corner by yourself reading a book. Well, you bet. And then furthermore, in terms of reading, rather than reading novels for pleasure, if I do find myself with moments where I can read, I do so in ways that bolster these other stuff that I'm up to. And so in terms of the engineering education, I certainly have a huge amount that I have to read because in so many ways, I'm a startup professor just in these last couple of years. And so I very much have to get back up to speed or up to a speed in that domain. The other unsolicited advice that I'll offer to your listeners is I did mention that Eivrater was my central postdoctoral advisor. And she for years has written just the most wise essays about her life in science. And so she does so now for an electronic journal called E-Life. She did so for a number of years for current biology. And so in lieu of a central book, I would absolutely advise all of your listeners to look at some of Eivrater's essays because she's just so wise and has such an amazing perspective about the whole of this, about living through the ups and downs of the federal cycles, living through the ups and downs of your own laboratory and peers and peer pressures and publishing and not publishing and being productive and not being productive and all of those things. Eivr is amazing. And if you have opportunities to talk to Eivr just about anything, certainly I would recommend that. But in lieu of that, looking online for what she writes for E-Life right now and what she wrote for current biology previously, I extraordinarily strongly recommend. Well, that sounds like an amazing recommendation. So one of the things that we haven't yet talked about that is amazing in terms of the life of a scientist are these opportunities for travel. So Kurt, can you tell me about a travel experience that you've had that was just the most memorable for you? Wow. I'm not going to shoot for most memorable. I'm going to shoot for recently memorable. And so I have shared this new world of engineering education research and I'm so so fortunate that such amazing people in the field have been so generous with my embryonic projects and just getting going in these domains. And so I did mentioned by name, Rob Linson-Meyer at Northwestern University and Mara Barrego at Virginia Tech. And so it's from the circuit that I first met both of these individuals. And so a similar story was there's a conference called Friends Here's in Engineering that was an Oklahoma City last fall. And so I threw my network of contacts emailed Jeff Freud who is at Texas Annam University who was a real superstar. There was an initiative through the NSF in the 90s toward engineering education. There were 80 plus schools that all came together to study all of these different facets of engineering education. And Jeff Freud was the head of the foundation's version of this and then came to write summary statements for the whole of this decade long NSF project. And so in my mind he's a superstar. He just has such amazing knowledge about decades upon decades leading all the way up to the very present in terms of the cutting edge of engineering education research. And so I wanted to share with him just for 15 minutes what I am currently up to. And we ended up sitting at a round table for well over an hour close to an hour and a half. And it was magic to be super blunt that someone of Jeff Freud's status would take a newbie under his wing to say okay here's what I've learned over this decade of working NSF. Here's what I've learned since then here's who's really good in the field. And the intervening here is here are some people you should look into. Kurt I see on your business card that you are a director of undergraduate studies. You know what that really means you can do one thing and one thing only and so it can be really direct advice about what I can do institutionally for all of my peers here. And so just to be in that world to be able to go to a conference where I'm at a drooling toddler if not an infant right. I don't have a track record there. I have a substantiated project or something that I've been working on for a couple of years but so many of the things that I wanted your aspirational rather than proven. And the fact that Jeff Freud would sit down with me for 80 minutes to talk to me about the whole of this is so heartening right. And that's the thing for me. Yeah I was able to a handful of years ago go with some peers around Jerusalem and then the desert of Israel. And thank you so much to Overtoncin and I'm your carnal to be able to pull that off for us. Yes I just was with you for today that I get to go to my dread for a conference. And I've been able to through my work go to places overseas and places domestically. And that's briefs. I don't want to discount those opportunities in that life experience but that sort of conversation with Jeff Freud is exactly that kind of thing that I was mentioning a little while ago that I am now into fields both the traditional motor control and this engineering education research. Were these amazing amazing folk so care about the same thing that you so care about. And they're willing to share. They're willing to really deeply get into exactly what you get into. And so that applies to the new life I'm living. It applies to the life I've lived and folk that I've grown up with Bob Shite at Marquette University invented so many things that have become so cutting edge across all of our labs. And to be blunt I don't think you get credit for it. And so to be able to talk with Bob just about anything and sit through for a full hour and a half Skype conversation stuff that I'm currently working on just to make absolutely sure I've thought through all of the new gritties and he goes you know just to be absolutely sure you might want to do this other secondary analysis but other rest really does seem to be spot on to have peers that are willing to invest with you in that way. That's the most special thing about travel. You get yes it's great to go to these places yes it's great to get these other cultural experiences but to be able to meaningfully share face to face all of those sorts of conversations that's where you confer that's where the conference takes place yeah. Certainly I think you've described some amazing experiences and I really like how you're talking about getting to sit down with these science heroes and really kind of pick their brain and get lots of advice and wisdom from them. I think those are really formative and really memorable experiences so I'm glad you shared them with us today. Now I think we've talked a lot about the people who really inspired you in science and the people you've gotten to work with over the years and I think these lab groups and these people that you get to work with are amazing oftentimes very funny and creative people that you get to meet. Can you tell us Kurt about one of these funny science memories that you've had or maybe a quirky lab tradition that you've participated in over the years? Yes Marie Smith at Harvard was the one other PhD student with me as I was training with Resa Shudmair at Johns Hopkins and so of course I've known Marie Smith forever in science in the terms he ranks right alongside the very small countable number of people I know both in the sense of being just the smartest and the most able to think through all of these nitty gritties and make connections that no one else thinks connections about he's he's at the very top of his game. I think you need a Kurt award for this I think you do. Well and he is the most personable person possible. I don't think he's literally given the body pernge but he's that kind of person that he would give a body to someone if he knew about any issue and if he knew that giving a body part would truly make a difference. So he's that sort of amazing intellect and that sort of amazing human being and he has the focus radius of about a millisecond of angle and so if he's really focused on something that's what he's focused on and so kind of the story that I'll share is the person named Elizabeth who had been extraordinarily happily and luckily married two for 16 years and who I've started this amazing family with. So Elizabeth called lab back when I was working in my doctoral lab and it was Marie Smith in that we didn't have a gigantic lab back then and said hi Marie's is Kurt there and raised it saying uh um Kurt let me chat so I was the only other person there and he sort of reached out and touched the computer at which I was working but but it took him not a full minute but many many many many seconds to disengage from whatever he was extraordinarily focused on and come out of that and go okay I'm in a room and there's this other person who else might be here and I'm the only other person that was ever there and indeed I was there so to be able to have such meaningful training with him along the way and to live out this life and parallel with him has been great and so he's a great peer to having that regard and of course I laugh at that but I'm also somewhat envious that he is able to see. Right, I'm gonna say I'm jealous. So so so so nearly focused in on the question and that's just how to be blunt as I think in both of those spheres both on the professional side and on the personal side he's just so amazing he can give so much of himself because he can focus in that level of focus. Very impressive. Well Kurt it sounds like you have made so many amazing science friends along the way and really had these great experiences of this particular funny memory I think is amazing as well and there's one question that I like to ask researchers and this one is more of a hypothetical question. Can you tell me Kurt if funding, staff, technology and feasibility all of these things were not an issue is there just one research question that you are dying to know the answer to? It's certainly not something that I think about a lot to be bluntest but here we go across both my motor control work and this putatively non-traditional and you and I I'm Adricidevil another hour of just why here I'm in an academic setting and somehow paying lab time in a traditional way versus this educational way the latter is viewed as non-traditional I find that to be vaccine but nevertheless in both of those spheres I absolutely know that we as humans can have inputs stuff that comes into our brains that we process and value and then act upon in extraordinarily different ways given surely lots of things that have led up to this moment but also what's going on right now and the flexibility within which we can set our own minds to be willing to take in stuff versus unwilling to take in stuff I mean that's relatively easy to demonstrate but far settler in terms of if we take in experience and learn that that is relevant for us locally or globally and so what we're currently experiencing could help us out in a very long term way and something that will influence a lot of the things that we take on or that we should keep relatively local we think you know this is going to be useful but only for this little chunk of my experience and that might help me this very moment or if I happen to come across something extraordinarily similar to this but I'm not going to generalize it broadly and all of us in our lives have experiences where both of those choices are appropriate we don't want to over generalize we don't want to think this thing that I'm doing right now will be of use when I do something very very different but it's also really important for us to generalize appropriately and so both in motoric sense if I learn something in a rehab clinic we of course want that to influence the rest of your life it's central to the educational mission if you learn something in a classroom of course we want you to be able to apply germane ideas and skills to what you do the rest of your life in both of those research questions how people in their brains choose to localize context versus globalizing context is the really broad issue that unites my two feet ones that I'm absolutely sure it's going to take us a long time to figure out the ins and outs of all of that so that's the big question in both of my domains and if I could have the best way to make that from a really hard question to something extraordinarily simple that we could help people understand how to usefully use something globally versus usefully use something locally that would be so meaningful both in the motoric research and in the educational research I think that is a really interesting question this way people are classifying these local versus global experiences and applications of things that's really fascinating and I like how you're able to apply that like you said to your research in the lab as well as this educational research which I think is really great well thank you that was very off the cuff so no that was wonderful well Kurt I have really enjoyed our conversation today can you let our listeners know a way for them to reach out and contact you if they have questions or want to learn more about you in your research yes the most straightforward longest term answer is my first name is K-U-R-T my last name is Thuroman so Thurro like you're doing something well THOR O-U-G-H-M-A-N if anyone wants to email and that really doesn't mean anyone my email is simply Thuroman at whistle.edu but beyond that the prospect of this other stuff that I'm working on my web presence is in flux to be bluntest and here again is this strange divide the traditional work is pretty easily findable through my professorial alliance or what my job title is what have you the other stuff is hard to find and I'm trying my darnedist to make that more sustained and out there but if you google me just remember that I am K-U-R-T Thuroman and then keep in touch with what I'm up to you by googling me once in a while that's kind of the shortest term and longest term answer absolutely well listeners feel free to reach out to Kurt and Kurt thank you so much for joining me today well thank you so very much it's been a real joy thank you certainly and thank you to our listeners for joining us today as well if you love meeting amazing scientists subscribe to our podcast on iTunes to make sure you don't miss hearing from your colleagues or your science heroes join us again next time for another episode of People Behind the Science science fans your voyage has just begun if you want to continue your exploration of amazing researchers download our free ebook that highlights 10 inspiring scientists of today including one of our own personal heroes visit people behind the science.com slash guide and download it today we'll see you next time on People Behind the Science
