Hey, science people. This is Dr. Marie McNeely, welcoming you to episode 132 of People Behind the Science. Today we'll be chatting with Dr. Ralph Muleisen. I am glad to have you join me today. And I want to give a special thanks to all of you out there who have reviewed our podcast on iTunes or reached out to tell us about your favorite scientists. It is great to meet you. So if you haven't introduced yourself yet, find us out there on Twitter at PBT Science or tweet to me at PhD Marie. You can also check us out on Facebook or email us at contact at peoplebehindtheScience.com. Now let's get rolling. Ralph has some fantastic stories to share with us today. So get ready to meet another one of our amazing people behind the science. Every day discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNeely is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone and welcome to another episode of People Behind the Science. I am thrilled to be here today with Dr. Ralph Muleisen. Ralph is a principal building scientist at Argonne National Laboratory. He is also an adjunct associate professor at the Illinois Institute of Technology. Ralph completed his undergraduate studies in electrical and computer engineering as well as physics at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. He received his PhD in acoustics at Pennsylvania State University and completed post-doctoral fellowships at Penn State and applied research and also the Naval Postgraduate School studying physics. Afterwards Ralph served on the faculty at the University of Colorado and then the Illinois Institute of Technology. And during this time he was also president and principal consultant for Muleisen Consulting. Ralph is here with us today to tell us all about his journey through life and science. So today Ralph we are so excited to take it to know you both as a scientist but also as a person. So can you take a few minutes to tell our listeners what you like to do when you're not doing science? Well when I'm not doing science I like to do science. So aside from my work there's a few things that I like to do outside. So there is my family I'm married my wife and my daughter who is now just starting her life as a teenager. She's 14 years old just starting high school. And I figure I better get in quality time with her because as she's starting to be a teenager she won't want to spend time with me. I'm hoping that won't be the case but she's a teenage girl so we'll see how that goes. Understandable. So as I said I like to do science outside of science. One of the things is I like to cook. I'm a little bit of a foodie. And a lot of people ask me why did you get to become such a cook? I just like if this is just like a science experiment. So I actually like cooking and looking at food. It's another form of chemistry. So I like to do science and I like to eat science outside of work. I don't do as much consulting as I used to do outside of work which tended to have to do with noise control and acoustically related things. Simply because I have a little bit less time with my position here who are doing outside consulting. Another thing that I actually like to do an awful lot of is spend time on computers. Both trying to set up and run and install computers. Well that is very interesting. It's great to hear how you spend your time with your family, a little bit of kitchen chemistry and certainly tinkering with computers. All fantastic ways to enjoy your family and explore science outside of your world of science. I like that so can you tell our listeners now a little bit more about your scientific side? Can you tell them how you describe what you do to someone who's not in science? So what I'm doing here is engineering as much as science. So I guess it's worth talking to your listeners who maybe want to be different. Science is answering the fundamental questions of why or how. And engineering is the answer of how do I solve a particular problem using techniques of science to try to get to an answer and develop a new technology or apply what I've learned in science. So I do a crossover between science and engineering and in fact it's probably as much engineering as it is science. What I'm studying right now here at Hardon is looking to develop technologies and tools to improve energy efficiency of buildings. And in particular I say tools that's ideas that will help break down the barriers of people choosing energy efficient technologies for the building. I actually think the latter tools to break down the barriers is really more important. We have a lot of technologies, a lot of good science of what makes something energy efficient. There's a lot of good technology out that has air conditioners in or more efficient, windows that are more efficient, lights that are more efficient. And what it comes down to is we could right now do what are called net zero buildings, a building that uses no more energy than it would be able to produce on site from wind or solar power for most small buildings. We could do what's called a net zero building for not much higher cost than the conventional building. Really? The technology is there to do it. There are some people in areas of the country where that's becoming I can say fairly commonplace but it's not just an oddball situation. But we have a society that values cost more than environmental impact. And when it comes to existing buildings, people are worried about bottom line and their commercial building. When it comes to small buildings and houses, energy costs are such a small part of their overall budget. They just don't worry about it. Or if it's such a significant part of their budget, if you're talking a very low income person, they don't have capital to be able to do energy efficiency. But for the people who do, they've got higher priorities. So one of the questions is how do we overcome the barrier of them making the choice to change their windows, change their lights or if they're designing a new building, choose the more energy efficient technology. And that really comes down to education, understanding the choices and I guess one of the big things is understanding the risk that's associated with choosing one technology over another. Well, that sounds fascinating. So being a bit of a tinkerier, it sounds like yourself as well as really being in this world of energy efficiency. Do you find yourself applying a lot of what you're working on in your own home? So there are the people who like myself, they do this every day and they are really hardcore. They will go out and regardless of the cost, they will go ahead and look to put in the most efficient, the most efficient that put on solar panels. And as I sit here and go over things with my wife, the spirit is willing but the flesh is weak, I think is the appropriate response. So we want to do much better, but our pocketbooks says maybe we don't want to do a quite right now. So we've done some window changes. First we changed all our in-tandescent bulbs to CFL and now in rooms where they tend to burn out quicker, where the lights go on and off lot namely kitchen and the bathrooms. We're changing all those to LEDs. We haven't gone and changed the boiler in our house. We actually have a house from 1922, a fairly old house that has a lot of things that need upgrades. But one of the things actually that I do study is when is the right time to do an upgrade? And in most cases, if you look at the actual overall environmental impact, it's better to wait until you have a reason to do an upgrade and to just do an upgrade for the sake of doing an upgrade. If you look at the embedded energy of a piece of equipment, an air conditioner or a furnace that is still working, you're actually almost always better off waiting until it has a major breakdown. You need to do a major repair before you would change. White bulbs, there's no reason to change a light bulb to CFL to an LED until it burns up. It burnt out. Go ahead and make the change. But just going ahead and changing for the sake of the small bit of energy you save right now usually makes no sense. Wait until a piece of equipment is changing. So when our washer and dryer need to be replaced, which we've been expecting for the past actually 10 years, then hanging on, we'll go ahead and get super high efficiency. When our boiler goes, I will get the most efficient boiler. We actually did put on a white reflecting roof, so it's a cool room. So when it comes time to make changes in my house, I try to do the energy efficient change, but I haven't gone and made major changes all the way through. I do have a Prius. Actually, we have two hybrid cars. I've got a Prius. I also have a Honda Civic hybrid. So we try at home to follow my mantra. Absolutely. Well, I think that is a great approach and really good to know. You know, it kind of makes me feel better with my old furnace that it's better to wait rather than try and replace it now when it's still working. You have something major that breaks and you're like, well, should I repair it? Should I replace it when you're sitting here? Should I repair it? And it's not just a 50 dollar repair. Actually, it comes $150. Because you have to pay $100 for the person to come out. If it's not a small repair, then you start thinking, oh, is it time to replace it? Then if you're replacing, I'm always in favor, even if it costs 10, 15% more, get the higher efficiency one. You better off in the lower left. Well, Ralph, it sounds like you are just keeping so busy outside the lab, but also answering some amazing questions inside the lab that have great applications to the real world. Now, can you tell us with all of this stuff on your plate right now? Is there something that really keeps you motivated, keeps you going? Maybe a motivational quote or a saying that you really like? Yeah, I've got a couple here that come to mind. The first one actually is the more thing of something pastor said. It's serendipity favors a prepared mind. Pastor said in the field of observation, chance only favors a prepared mind, but a lot of people have changed around. So when chance is going to happen, you'll be able to notice it much better if your mind is prepared. So I like to keep up to date in other areas of math, science, engineering, I'm a curious person, right? So I'd try to look at things outside my field or look for opportunities to apply what I know outside my field. The more that I can learn, the better chance that when an opportunity arises, I will be able to, and this is where engineering comes in, find a solution. So keeping up to date in areas of science, what's going on in nanotechnology, what's going on in energy storage technology, what's going on even things like high energy physics, the work that's being done there, you don't know when you're going to have a chance to apply it. So trying to keep an eye on what's going on, I think is important to look for an opportunity to make use of it. The second one is a low-end stone song. You can't always get what you want, but if you try some time, you might find you get what you need. I like that. Those are both amazing sort of motivational forces or quotes to keep in your mind. And I think the one always being prepared is incredible for science. And really keeping an open eye and an open mind too for some of these intersections of different fields with what you're studying and being prepared to really take advantage and leverage them to advance your own field. I think that is a fantastic way to go through the career as a scientist. So Ralph, can you tell us a little bit more now about maybe some of the people who've inspired you or people who've motivated you along your career? And maybe some of those people who's really served as role models for you. Yeah, I guess in terms of, we look at early motivation as I was learning physics, actually took a lot of history of science when I was at University of Wisconsin. When I was looking at the end of my undergraduate career and I was trying to figure out what I wanted to do, I was actually torn between going into what I ended up doing acoustics, high energy physics, and history of science. When I sat down and realized that jobs and money and history of science were not the easiest things to get, but I moved away from that. And then I realized I didn't think I was smart enough to become a high energy physicist, so acoustics is where I decided to put myself. In that earlier thing, I think I had some motivation and I would look up to sort of the classics of physics, Newton, Einstein, and then getting into all the people who would go through, I guess the legacy of what happened with quantum physics. Of the people in terms of the classical scientist, one of my favorite was Richard Feynman, because he was such an interesting guy, besides being a brilliant scientist, he was a really good communicator of science. And that was something that I really found not only interesting, it was rather inspiring. But he was somebody who I never met and only got to know through books and lecture notes. So in terms of a more day-to-day direct role model, actually it was my PhD advisor, Dr. Dave Swanson. So David Swanson, he actually had gone through the acoustics program that I joined into as a graduate student, got his PhD in acoustics, had gone out to work, and the defense industry, actually, for a while. And came back to Penn State to work as a scientist at the Applied Research Lab and also teach within the acoustics program. And he wasn't somebody who was a famous scientist or a well-known engineer. But the biggest thing was his sort of underlenting curiosity. As I just said, the idea of trying to keep up to date, he would always look for interesting problems and look at interesting news, science, and technology, and say, how can I use this somewhere else? So one of the things that he always ended up doing was taking pieces of information, science, and mathematics from one area, applying it to another to really push the envelope. He was never somebody who did the foundational research in any area, but he was always a person who took things to the next level. He has worked in areas of signal processing, noise and vibration control. He took a lot of that work when he started working on some other sensor systems to actually look at methods of doing scent detection. So all factories. So he started doing some science. They were looking to develop artificial noses. People who were in that area were a lot of chemical engineers who would develop sensors and know that side of things. But he came at it and said, all right, some other people can do sensors, but they don't know the signal processing. The signal processing I've been doing in various forms of acoustics are really completely different. And so he was able to make some big advances by taking science in one area that he knew acoustics and applying it over to artificial scent detection. He did a similar sort of thing that was looking at really small sensors, basically drones that would fly around that were almost the size of bees. And so he was developing signal processing algorithms to reduce the data rate that came from the sensors that were using, again, techniques that he learned in acoustics. That was one of the things. Looking here at the interrelation between sensors and controls and signal processing and applying them to new problems where the people in those fields had different backgrounds. It's something you have had some amazing people to look up to throughout the course of your career, kind of starting with your interest in science history and those historical sort of huge names in the field. And then certainly coming back to someone who you were working closely with this advisor. And I love how you're describing this approach of integrating all of the different fields and really finding those intersections of the field and using them to develop something new and really innovative. I think that is amazing. So can you tell us about where it all began Ralph? How did you get excited about the world of science to begin with? Well, actually as far as I can remember, I always like science in school, but it really actually started when I was in elementary school. But I got my first computer, it was a TI 994A for those of you who are older listeners who have an idea and have actually heard about one of those computers. That I was programming basic and I saved everything on a cassette because that was how things went back then. And I started doing a little bit of programming and it was that beginning interest in that as well as audio systems. When I was a kid, my dad put in flooring for living and he had a side business that he put in flooring with his friends. And from the time I was about six or seven years old, I would go with him on weekends and work with him. And as soon as I was actually useful, I started to get paid. So when I was a 10 year old kid, I actually had a lot of disposable income. So I used to buy audio equipment. Really? Yeah, I bought stereo equipment. I had bought a couple small studios and I got interested in becoming a little bit of an audio file. I had my record collection and I had my cassettes and eight tracks because it was back in the eight track time. And my father was working with an architect who also had an art gallery. In his art gallery, he sold bang and olives and equipment. Bang and olives and is a Danish audio company that sells really high-end audio equipment that is incredibly gorgeous. It's works so much. They have an on display in the Museum of Modern Art in New York and there's some other one over in Europe that is displayed at. And I remember drooling at this equipment for a long time. And the new equipment came in and the old ones got taken off the shelf and I asked what happened. And the guy said, well, the new equipment came in. I took it off the shelf. I don't know what to do with it. My dad owed me money. The architect owed my dad money. And so I basically inherited when I was 10 years old, a bang and olives and stereo, which at the time was several thousand dollars worth of equipment in terms of list price. And this was 1980. Oh my gosh. I had this incredible stereo system. So I got interested in audio. I was interested in computers. And that's kind of where my curiosity moved in more engineering, audio design. So as I was in high school and I graduated from my TI-994A, I was able to, again, working with my dad by myself, an Apple 2E computer. So I had an Apple computer for a while. And what I wanted to do was design computerships. I really got interested. So I went out and luckily the University of Wisconsin-Madison was an excellent school. So I made sure my grades were high enough. I got into UW, started out in electrical and computer engineering. And my senior year at high school, I had taken physics and had a little bit of interest. And as an electrical and computer engineering, I started taking physics. So I started taking physics class. It was also at the same time that I started dating my wife, who was a math physics astrophysics major. So in order to take more classes with my wife, that I started taking extra physics classes. That is adorable. And well, it was really kind of a bummer because she always got better grades in me. Well, you had a perfect tutor right there. So it's a matter of maybe I was spending too much time looking at my wife and not the board. But if you were to an A, I'd get an A. I guess there was times we got A's together, but I never got a higher grade in her. So I was taking my electrical and computer engineering focusing on computer engineering. So I could actually design computers and computer chips. But then I started taking some extra physics classes, got really interested and said, okay, maybe I'll just turn this into a major. And it's fairly easy at university Wisconsin. So I got the double major in order to take some of my humanities credits. I started taking history of science classes. I just really got fascinated with the background of how we got from the beginnings of science in Greek times all the way through where we got to the nuclear age. Which is basically what you study if you go through a sequence of four or five or six history of science classes. And I was very interested, as I thought hard about doing that. I got really interested in plasma and high energy physics. And then I continued on with my interest in audio design. So I had moved on from computer engineering really getting interested in audio system design. And it was with my physics background, I actually realized I was more interested in the physics sound, which is acoustics rather than the design of audio systems. I still go ahead and play with designing loudspeaker systems on occasion. But I got really more interested in the acoustic side of things. The generation of sound, the traveling of sound, or propagating of sound as it goes through the air. And then the reception of sound, whether it's your ears or microphones. And as I also mentioned earlier, I realized I didn't think I was smart enough to stay into high energy physics. Either my background was not good enough, or I just didn't get enough of the physics. So I said, I think I'll go into acoustics. And my wife and I were then looking for a place where she could go into astronomy. I could go do acoustics and then that being Penn State. We almost stayed at Wisconsin, but we went out to Penn State. So at Penn State, I focused on acoustics doing mostly active noise and vibration control. Active noise and vibration control is where you try to cancel out sound using sound. Some people haven't called anti noise. Most people are familiar with noise-canceling headsets that you can buy. Boas makes one of the most famous ones that you can go ahead and pop these on your ears and they cancel out the sound. Sound are oscillations of pressure. If you have atmospheric pressures, when the sound comes by, the pressure will go up just a little bit above atmospheric pressure and a little bit below. And what you end up trying to do with anti-sound is play back a sound way that would actually cancel. Everywhere where the pressure would be going high, you try to make the pressure low. And so you basically have superposition of two waves where the peaks of one wave cancel the troughs of another. And so that's what I was doing in terms of sound and vibration. As I started my work in active noise and vibration control, I actually found I was trying to do this for heating ventilation and air conditioning systems or HVAC. And I realized that people had worked out the actual basic physics of sound propagating down ductwork for HVAC very well. And that became my thesis. Although I was doing active noise and vibration control, the thesis work was actually indexed. While I was at Penn State, I got interested in another area called Thermal Acoustics, which is the conversion of heat to sound and sound to heat. So as I was finishing up my PhD, my wife wasn't finished yet. So I was able to get a postdoc at the applied research lab at Penn State and stayed there for a year. And there I was doing mostly active noise and vibration control on vehicles. I can't tell you what type of vehicles they work because this was mostly work for the Army. Gotcha. But it's not a Prius. We were doing outdoor sound propagation, which was related to noise that would come off of those vehicles. So we could figure out how it would travel through forest, through the atmosphere, long distances. Interesting. I did that for a year and of course found it very interesting. My wife then finished up her PhD and we were looking for a place that we could either, one of us get a faculty position, one of us do a postdoc or both do postdocs. She got a great postdoc offer from Lawrence Livermore National Lab, which is out in Livermore, California, the Bay Area. And I actually got an ONR office in the Naval Research and AS-VLE American Society of Engineering Education postdoc fellowship. That was at the Naval Postgraduate School in the Physics Department. And there I started working on thermoacoustics. And there was some basic science that thermoacoustics understanding this transfer of conversion of sound energy to heat. And there's thermodynamics I close with it, fluid mechanics and heat transfer. And actually the development of devices that do this. So if you go ahead and use sound to move heat, you can actually have a sound driven refrigerator called a thermoacoustic refrigerator. So we're studying those. And there's also things that if you have a large temperature difference, suppose you have a furnace. And if you put one end of a device in a furnace, it will get really hot. At the other end, out of the furnace, it will be cold. You have a temperature difference. And you can take that temperature difference to create sound. So actually thinking about this, you could take something like a heat source to create sound and then use the sound to move heat. So you could have a heat driven refrigerator. That is amazing. It's like a lot of thermodynamics as you can't end up cooling it down more than it did. But the idea here of the Navy was very interested in this because they were looking for alternative ways of doing refrigeration for cooling electronics on ships. And they got a lot of waste heat. They got big engines. These are engines, we're nuclear reactors that have lots of waste heat. If you can use that heat to do cooling, there are a few different ways to do it. But the idea was, can we do this through acoustics because then we can have no refrigerants and actually you can develop a refrigerator that has no moving parts. Interesting. You can use heat to create sound, the sounds in the tube. And all the moving systems that you have are replaced on the soundways. So that was what I studied for quite a few years. I started at the postdoc at the Naval Postgraduate School. Then I got a faculty position at the University of Colorado, which was in the civil environmental and architectural engineering department. So they were looking for someone who could teach architectural acoustics but do research in something which there is research money in. There is no research money in architectural acoustics. It was really hard to come by. So they said, you're doing thermo acoustics. You can teach building acoustics when I applied to the position. I said, yes, I can teach building acoustics. I can teach thermodynamics for you. I can do research in something in which there is money, which was thermo acoustics. So that's what I moved on to University of Colorado. Very closely associated with the thermo acoustics is the need to get heat in and out. As I'm doing all this conversion of heat to sound and sound, you still have to do some of this coupling. And one of the ways of doing it is porous materials. So things that have open cell holes. Most people think of this as foam, which is used as an acoustic absorbent. So they have ceramic foam. So basic ceramic had lots of holes in it. Metal foam. And one of the most interesting one, carbon foam. So something called reticulated vitrious carbon is 97% open space. And just lots of little carbon filaments connected together. So I was studying the acoustic properties of those to be able to use them in thermo acoustic devices. That was a new area of research I went into. Looking at porous media acoustics. I was doing at University of Colorado. When I was there, I was also looking at the people who were doing illumination engineering or lighting engineering. They had developed techniques for doing prediction of light levels in looms. And I said, you know this would be really neat. It could be really well applied to sound. People hadn't been using this technique in sound. So I started working with a student to apply these illumination techniques called radiative heat transfer or luminous radiose transfer to acoustics. I ended up using a turn that was used in computer science because they were getting more money from the National Science Foundation than lighting people. And called it acoustic radiosity and helped develop the basic techniques for predicting sound levels in rooms. And at that time, I ended up moving out to Illinois Institute Technology. So before I had come up for tenure at University of Colorado and moved over to IIT, which was in Chicago. So much closer to my home, my mother was much happier than I could able to home with my daughter. My daughter at that point in time was three years old. That's it. I wanted to be able to see her granddaughter a lot more often. So she was very happy with me moving out to IIT. And as I moved to IIT, I was teaching architectural acoustics, doing my research in porous media. At this point in time, my thermo acoustics had kind of dropped off. It was doing porous media acoustics and this architectural acoustics research. And as soon as I got over to IIT, I realized that they needed me to be teaching some other stuff. So I went back to my electrical engineering and started teaching building electrical systems and teaching basic building science. So the beginning building science was really thermodynamics, and fluid mechanics of buildings, and mostly of building enclosures. So he transferred. The sun comes up and you've got outside temperatures and that's going to make the inside of the building hotter cold. And trying to figure out how much heat and moisture and air gets transferred inside through the building envelope. How much solar heating is going to increase the temperature inside the building. The sun goes away and you've got the dark sky at night. How much heat you're actually going to lose through radiation transfer from your roof to the sky. So I started teaching in those areas and as I was doing the teaching, there was a lot of interesting questions I started doing research. And in particular, it was looking at building energy modeling. How do I actually do the calculations of thermodynamic balance and then how much energy it's going to take to heat and cool the building systems and how much energy that's going to take. Absolutely. So it's kind of a very long move over into building energy. At the same time I was doing that move over into building energy. I started learning a lot more about green buildings and I realized that there was a problem with acoustics and green buildings. So green buildings are energy efficient buildings and green buildings tend to use a lot more glass. They have a lot less porous materials because you do things called radiative heating and cooling where you actually heat up or cool down the entire floor slab. Then the floor slab has to be completely exposed. You can't necessarily put carpeting on it or if the slab is your ceiling you can't put a drop ceiling underneath the floor slab from the floor above. Because you have to have it exposed for heating and cooling. We went from offices that were enclosed to a lot more cubicles. And so when you have these big open offices with lots of glass and lots of exposed concrete, they're really awful in terms of acoustics. So I was studying the problems that are involved and how you could try to deal with this, how you could try to design your rooms to minimize the noise control problem and became one of the foremost experts on green building acoustics. It was at that point in time and we'll get to this a little bit later on when we talk about a failure. But I left IIT growing into these different areas of buildings. The teaching that we do in architectural engineering is really developing and trying to teach the people who are the engineers of the commercial buildings. In particular, people who are doing lighting engineering, people who are doing plumbing engineering, who are doing heating, ventilation and air conditioning engineering, who are doing structural engineering. I have to know all about the building code. And I have to know about the standards to which the engineers are going to have to design. So I learned a lot of that and was teaching a lot of that. And at our bond, they just started doing building energy research. And they wanted somebody who knew about building science, knew about the building codes. But would be very comfortable in a government research situation. So although when this was 2010, there were a lot of good engineers and architects who were out of work. None of them had experienced writing proposals and working in a government research environment. So I was the one who was probably most qualified, having the right background as far as the science and engineering. But also having come from an academia environment that's very similar to working in the government lab. So there we go. And that leads me to where I am today, as the principal building scientist at Argonne National Lab. Absolutely. So I'm curious now about this teaser that you dropped in there. We've heard about your amazing journey through science and how you started just being interested in acoustics and sound and how it has transformed now into this energy efficiency kind of interest. Now can you tell us about one of these times in your career where you were struggling or you had a major failure and then tell us how you worked through it? All right. Well, the failure is pretty short to describe. I didn't get tenure at IIT. So the story is really long. But we can set this up. At the time that I had moved over from Colorado to IIT, I already had a few years. And there was a question of whether I wanted to go on sort of the advanced tenure track where you say, I'm only going to go for three or four years instead of the picks years that you normally go at IIT. You try to go up early. Or should I just wait the six years? If you go up early, the expectations are a little bit higher. So I got out to IIT. I had research coming in. I was doing my research papers. I had started teaching and was getting really good reviews from teaching. And there was a discussion within my department. Should I try to go up early? And I was on good terms with my department. I liked what I was doing. The Dean of Engineering liked what I was doing. As far as I could see, the higher administration really liked what I was doing. But somebody not too long ago had gone up early and they didn't make it. And if you don't make it, you don't get a second chance to go up. So it was like, maybe the best thing is wait until your normal time would come up. Because if you had started as a new faculty, it will give you more chance to be in more research dollars, write some more papers, and do some more teaching. Which is something that IIT value. At some research universities, they don't tell you. Well, in year five, right before I'm about to come up, we had a big change of administration. The university was actually very close to bankruptcy. The old president, I don't know if he was pushed out or if he just decided to quit. But he quit. We had a new president, a new provost, and a new Dean of Engineering. So the president comes in and finds a new provost. And actually the search for the new Dean had failed. So the provost was the Dean of Engineering as well as the provost. I'm going up for tenure. What it means is although I've got my department, and the way that tenure first goes, as you get recommended by your department, then it goes to a college or university level. And at IIT, they didn't have a college. They just had the university level. So I went through and had great recommendations, highest recommendations from the department. I went up to the university level. That was the very high recommendation. And then it goes over to the Dean of Engineering, right to your letter. But my Dean of Engineering wasn't there anymore. So my Dean of Engineering was a provost who didn't know me at all. That's true. As things go up to the provost level, there was a lot of politics involved that there was rumors that he had been doing. There was rumors that he wanted to kill our program because he didn't understand what architectural engineering was. I don't know what the case was, but he denied me tenure. Oh no. I didn't have an advocate from the Dean, even though the university had recommended me and my department recommended me, with him being a new provost. The president wasn't going to jump in on my behalf because he was brand new, didn't know me, and it just hired the provost. So I got to an tenure. So as I'm there, I start talking with my department chair. And actually, as soon as I got the 910 years, they hired on a new Dean. The new Dean came in and actually looked at her books, what was going on. While I was the head of the architectural engineering program, and it grown from 40 undergraduate students and no graduate students. So this was over about four years to about 150 undergraduate students and 50 grad students. Most of the grad students weren't working on master's thesis. We didn't have a PhD program. They were just getting what's called a professional master's just taking coursework. But with that many students and with that many graduate students, most of who were paying full tuition, there wasn't huge tuition discounts. The program I was in was making a huge amount of money for the university. Far more than just about any other program. Far more than any research program. Far more than any other academic program. So the Dean of Engineering said, if we get rid of this program, it's probably going to collapse or at least shrink down the size. I can't afford this. So what can we do? And I said, well, you can't give me tenures. Can you basically give me the same position I had at the same pay rate? Doing the same stuff I was. We just have it as a non-tenure position. And so that's what was done. I became a clinical associate professor. I was still the head of the architectural engineering program. I was doing same amount of teaching. I had a little bit more administrative work because we had lost faculty members and with the budget crunch we weren't able to replace them. So I was doing a little bit more administrative work. And I didn't have a chance to do so much research anymore. But I was in a stable position that as long as either I brought in enough research money to pay my salary or the program was thriving like it was, there wasn't a question of whether I was going to be kicked out. My contract was going to be paid for by the department or by my research. I was no longer loving my job. I was just liking my job. But there we go. That was a failure that happened. And I just dealt with it in the case of what could I do to make the best of that situation. At that point in time, a lot of people would have looked to move to another university. I just already moved from University of Colorado out to IIT. I wasn't looking to uproot my family. And this was one of the things I talked with my wife. I basically had a choice of trying to stay in academia or do consulting work. I had my own consulting company on the side. I could have made that bigger. And actually as a consultant, I probably could have made fairly good money. It's very up and down when you're talking to small private consulting firm. One year, you make 300,000 and next year you might make nothing. And she wasn't so keen on that, which I can under. Stability is a good thing sometimes. So I've got actually a number of friends in town who have consulting firms going to work from one of those, which is a definite possibility. But as long as my salary was still good, as long as I was still able to do work that I liked, I was going to be staying here at IIT. And it was then that the opportunity came up from Argonne. And I think when Argonne sent out the information I'm looking for people, they sent to me, I think they were actually looking to see if I could get them in contact with a student of mine who had graduated. But it was at that point in time. I said, you know, maybe now's a good time for me to move on to Argonne. And I guess I didn't. Absolutely. Well, that is an amazing story. And I think something that's really going to resonate with a lot of people out there who have gone through this 10-year process. And it's hard. And I think a lot of it is strategic. I think a lot of it is the politics being at the right place at the right time. And it sounds like in your situation, all of the cards were not falling in your favor at that point. So certainly it's great to hear that you were able to really turn it around, look at all your options, make the best choice, and really make the best of that situation that you've been put into. So great to hear how you got through what is, I think, a really, really difficult time. And a lot of people's lives. So we don't just want to talk about some of these dark aspects of careers in science or some of the struggles that scientists go through. We also like to talk about some of the amazing opportunities that scientists have. And I think one of these amazing opportunities that a lot of scientists really enjoy are some of the opportunities to get out and see the world and travel. So Ralph, can you think back on your scientific career and can you tell us about your favorite place that you have traveled for science? And why was it so memorable? So one thing I will actually tell your listeners, as they're looking at this career, unfortunately it's harder if you're working for the Department of Energy now to do foreign travel. That's a drawback. I used to be able to do a lot more foreign travel. It's a lot more difficult now. I get to do a lot more domestic travel, although many of these are trips to Washington DC to talk with my sponsors. However, I will tell you, I'm still associated with the Acoustical Society of America, ASA. And the ASA has started doing joint conferences almost every 10 years, have one with the Acoustical Society of Japan, which is in Hawaii, which is always a great trip. They now have one with the European Acoustical Association, and they've had them in Germany and France, and then last time was out in France. That was an incredible trip. They also do one with the South American Acoustical Association, and they've had two of them. Both of them have been in Cancun. And Cancun is a bit of a touristy place, but it's easy for everybody to fly into. First one that was in Cancun in 2002 was a rather special event. My daughter was two and a half. This was one of her first trips out of the country. She had been to Hawaii before, but this was her first trip that we took with her out of the country. She and my wife and I had gone out for the conference, but one of the things that was associated with the conference was a trip to Chitzenita, which is a Mayan Archaeology site, one of the well-preserved Mayan sites. One of the things that's special, and the reason why this is a special trip, is one of my good friends actually does Archaeo Acoustics. He looks at the acoustics of archaeological sites, and he had been to Chitzenita several times. The study, the acoustics of two things. One is the Cucocon, which is the tall pyramid right in the center of the Chitzenita site. There's a set of staircases, and if you actually stand away from the staircases and clap, you get back a sound that sounds like the chirp of the Cucocon bird. There's a question of, was it really designed this way or was it not? So there's an analysis of looking at the sound spectrum of the chirp that you get from clapping your hands or if you hear the bird. So at the time when we went down in 2002, you could actually still climb the Cucocon. They now have roped it off. It was actually about 70, 60 steps, so it's probably about 50 to off the ground. So I went up, my wife went up, and my daughter went up. At this time you just had a little rope handle, and I think this fell down, and the fact that people were starting to destroy it a little bit. It's now closed off. But at that time we all went up, and we were able to run up and down. There's also a ball court there. So one of the Mayans played ball, and the ball court has some very interesting acoustics. So we got the special trip out. There's a lot of tours going on. We got a special tour because my friend who had done some of the acoustics was able to get a much smaller group. He was part of the tour guide along with the normal tour guide. So that was really a great event. And we got an incredible, super incredible picture. So my daughter is two and a half years old running down the middle of what's called a thousand columns. It's near a temple of warriors. It's not really a thousand. I think it's a couple hundred columns. There's a picture of a little girl with these huge columns way off in the distance, and her running down the middle. It's just an incredible picture. So the science of actually going in hearing the church and hearing the discussion, and hearing the ball court, and the echoes and the reverberation that goes on in the ball court was pretty amazing. But it only happened that we got to go out to this trip with a special tour because of scientific reasons. But it was more of a vacation. Well, that sounds like an incredible experience. And I love that you're bringing in the science into this vacation, you know, having that behind the scenes almost acoustic tour and really being able to experience this sort of clap turn chirp experience. And I think those are some of the incredible things about being in science. Even when you're going on what feels like more of a vacation, you're sort of still thinking about the world in a scientific perspective. And definitely being able to appreciate all these things that I think a lot of people, they might not even think about it. They might not be as familiar with. So that is amazing. The next question I would like to ask you is really about some of these people that you've had a chance to work with over your career. So can you tell me a little bit more about these research groups? And I know a lot of research groups that you work in tend to develop their own personalities. And oftentimes there's some maybe quirky traditions or just really funny memories that you can look back on fondly. Can you share with us today Ralph, one of your own maybe quirky traditions that you've experienced in a research group or in a lab, or one of your funny science memories that you like to look back on? Yeah, actually thinking back here of course, it goes back to the acoustical society. And I think it may have already been starting back at that end of the trip. The acoustical society in America used to have a little laser display. So it was a matter of the laser thing that they put up in the lobby of the conference hotel that would shine on the floor. You have it at the entrance of the door. So you walk in and you see on the floor the little laser display of the ASA logo. And I don't know how this started. It probably involved alcohol somehow. But people started taking a picture of me laying down next to the laser display. So we'd come in late after having been out for a few and someone was like, we got to take a picture of this display. It's so cool. I said, well why don't you get a picture of me laying down next to it. This is how it started. And so I don't know how many years in a row until I took it away. They get a picture of me laying down next to the laser display on the floor. So that's one. That is amazing. So I've got a friend who's like, we got to get them to bring this back so I can get a picture of you in front of it Ralph. Well now we try to find a picture of something else that has a logo with me next to it. There's also another one. This started before that tradition. That he's a friend of mine who likes to play guitar and he would often have his guitar. He'd do one of these jump up in the air, air guitar things. Yep. Yep. And so they get a picture of him at every conference jumping up in the air doing his air guitar. So this is now a tradition that we always had to get a picture of Tony in the air. Now it's gotten to be of everybody has to go and get their picture taken jumping in the air. Having tried this myself, I know it is challenging to get the timing right. So that is impressive. There's a fellow Ken who does a great job of catching Tony. They've got the timing down. It may take three pictures but it only takes three before he's got the great picture of Tony in the air. And he's kept those on his phone. He's got like 15 years of the Tony jumping picture. Wow. Well, that is incredible. I love that tradition. And I love the thought of just sort of chronic laying a year after a year your experiences at this conference. Then being able to kind of look back at all the years of jumping or the years of standing or laying with the logo. I think that is an incredible way to kind of commemorate each of these conferences that you've been to and some of the amazing people that you've traveled with. Very quickly noticed that the beard turns gray and the stomach gets large as you go on in time. And then you get glasses and all these things sort of add up along the way. Well, luckily I'm laying down on the floor so you can't see the bald spot getting big. Gotcha. Gotcha. You got to work on the flattering angles, definitely. Well, that is an amazing tradition. And great to hear that that's the sort of thing that you can keep up over the years. And in addition to some of the amazing research that you've done that we've talked about today. I would like to talk to researchers about some of the questions that they haven't yet had a chance to answer. So one more hypothetical scenario I'm going to put you in today Ralph. Can you tell me if things like funding and staff and technology and feasibility, all of these things were not an issue? Is there one research question that you are just dying to know the answer to? Yeah, fusion. How do we create fusion here? It's a science question, it's an engineering question, and it's an answer to so many problems. Fusion is always 50 years off in the future and still 50 years off in the future. We have fusion and we develop fusion reactors that are like our current nuclear reactors except for the less waste problem. That still really doesn't help our situation all that much because right now as we bring renewable to them, we bring solar power and wind power that fluctuates hugely during the day. I mean as easy you can have factors of 10 in the power output of a wind farm over a matter of minutes and the solar farm as the cloud goes over. You have to have fuel sources, other sources for generating power that you can easily turn on and off or ramp up and down. You can't do that easily with coal, you can't do that with nuclear reactors. So you end up using a lot of natural gas. So I would want to have not only fusion, how do we do fusion that we can ramp up and down very quickly to be able to handle the varying loads and integrating with renewable energy? You might say if we have fusion, we don't have to worry about renewable and all the stuff that goes along with renewables. We still have varying loads. We don't have a constant requirement of power and the way that a power grid works is we have to absolutely always balance the amount of electricity generated in the electricity consumed. Unless my other kind of caveat, the other possible for the other thing I'd love to have money on is generating storage. And actually I work here at Argonne National Lab that's home to what's called the Joint Center for Energy Storage Research. The Department of Energy started Research Hubs, which is a very large funding mechanism. It's over $100 million over five years. And there's specifically tasks with developing the next generation of batteries. For huge storage on the grid, if I had money, I'd still love to pour even more of it into that. Because we can solve a lot of the problems that have to do with the deterioration of a grid, the integration of renewable resources by having better energy storage. If we can find batteries that are cheap enough, small enough, and safe enough, and environmentally friendly enough, either they don't wear out or when they wear out to dispose of their environmentally friendly enough, we could solve the problems that we have with integrating in renewable energies. Or just go to a complete renewable energy. When we can store all the energy with lots of solar when the sun's up during the day, and we use it from the batteries that night. And when the wind's blowing well at night, we can store that energy up and use it during the day. So if we can fix fusion and batteries, that's what I would love to do. Definitely. I think those are two amazing and really important questions. Who's in batteries? We combine them together. Yeah. I like bringing that integrative approach and getting the fusion going, the batteries going at the same time. Perfect. Well, I think those are really important questions and really fascinating to think about the options that are out there for the future of providing these sustainable and consistent sources of energy. So very interesting questions. And I know scientists stay so busy with all the research questions that they're asking and catching up with the literature, which doesn't always leave a ton of time for maybe more fun recreational reading. But Ralph, can you tell us today about a book that you've read that you would highly recommend to our listeners? Oh, I think that's a much harder question to ask because of the wide variety of different types of books that I like to read. Interesting. I'm actually going to go back to one of the ones that got me so interested in history of science. And it is the foundation trilogy by Isaac Asimov. And so for the readers who don't know, this is science fiction book. And it discusses something called the science of psycho history. And the idea is if we know enough about psychology and we study enough people and mass, we can predict what is going to happen in the future because of the psychology of people. And I really think psycho history is one of the coolest ideas. And I guess that was one of the things that also helped draw me into science. The idea of trying to understand the world around you and make predictions. And that's what scientists do. And now engineers go ahead and say, all right, I'm going to use those predictions to make something useful. So I would say that the foundation trilogy, just from the standpoint of the idea of psycho history, I think it is such a brilliant concept at the beginning of a book. It has been inspiring to me for a long, long time. That sounds like an incredible book recommendation. We'll be sure to put that on our website, on our resources tab for our listeners to go check out. And great to hear that there was this book out there that really sucked you into the world of science. I've got you really inspired to ask more questions. I think that's fantastic. Now, Ralph, we have had some amazing conversations today. Is there any last piece of advice or maybe the last piece of inspiration that you want to share with our listeners from you personally today? Yeah, well, always stay curious. And as you've heard with my background, look for opportunities to apply what you know to a different field. Don't be afraid of jumping into a field that you know nothing about. Because even if you don't know anything about it, and there's people who know a lot more in that area, there are stuff that you know that they don't. That's the big thing. The idea of cross-pollination. If you're not afraid to talk to somebody who's smarter than you in an area, and tell them what you know that they don't, you can become a great scientist or engineer. You have to not be afraid of asking a stupid question. This is something here that may be very controversial. I tell kids, there is such a thing as a stupid question. They've been told to high school, there's no, no, there is. But in order for you to get ahead in life and to become a successful person, you have to be willing to ask the stupid question. Stupid questions are ones that you should know the answer to because it was something that you were supposed to have read. Something you were supposed to have picked up, something you were supposed to have known before. You have to be willing and not be scared of asking a stupid question. This is the same thing that comes into working with other people that you know are more knowledgeable than you in an area. If you're not afraid to ask a stupid question, you're never going to be able to talk with them. If you don't talk with them, you can't find out what it is that they don't know and what they need help with. The whole key to cross-pollination is bringing what you know that somebody else doesn't and learning what they know that you don't. And when that works together and you're willing to ask stupid questions and not be afraid, great science can happen. Absolutely. I think that is amazing advice. And I think so important for forming these integrative research teams and collaborations among scientists and being successful in them is being able to ask those questions that you know you should know the answer to. But you don't. And I think it's much faster way to get to the real questions that need to be answered by combining everyone's knowledge and working together on that. I think is amazing advice. So can you share with our researchers now Ralph, a way for them to reach out and contact you if they want to learn more about you or your research? Yeah, the best way is via email. And my email address is my first initial last name, which is our MUE HLEISZEN SAM EN at ANL.gov. Perfect. Well, Ralph, thank you so much for joining us today and sharing your story. Thank you. Absolutely. And thank you to our listeners as well for tuning in. If you love meeting amazing scientists, subscribe to our podcast on iTunes to make sure you don't miss hearing from your colleagues or your science heroes. Join us again next time for another episode of People Behind the Science. Science fans, your voyage has just begun. If you want to continue your exploration of amazing researchers, download our free ebook that highlights 10 inspiring scientists of today, including one of our own personal heroes. Visit peoplebehindtheScience.com slash guide and download it today. We'll see you next time on People Behind the Science. You
