Transcription for 180_Brian_Romans_Final.mp3: Hey everyone, this is Dr. Marie McNeely, welcoming you to episode 180 of People Behind the Science. I am joined today by Dr. Brian Romans. And I want to take a moment here to thank you for listening today, as well as in particular, thank everyone who's been sending us emails and reviewing our show on iTunes. Now I read every email and review that we get, and I love getting to meet you. So if you haven't introduced yourself yet, you can find our show on Twitter at PBT Science, or you can tweet to me at Ph.D. Marie. You can also find us on Facebook, or you can send an email to contact at people behindthecience.com. Now we have eight great show in store today, so I hope you're ready to meet another one of our fascinating people behind the science. Every day discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNeely is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries, so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone, and welcome to another episode of People Behind the Science. I am delighted to be here today with Dr. Brian Romans. So welcome to the show, Brian. How's everything going today? Really great. Thanks for having me. I'm excited to talk to you. Wonderful. We are excited to chat with you today. listeners, Brian is an assistant professor in the Department of Geosciences at Virginia Tech. He received his Master's degree in geology from the Colorado School of Mines and his Ph.D. in Geological and Environmental Sciences from Stanford University. He then worked as a research scientist at Chevron Energy Technology for a few years before accepting his current position at Virginia Tech. Now Brian is here with us today to tell us all about his journey through life and science. So Brian, today we want to get to know you, both as a scientist, but also as a person. So can you take a few minutes here to tell our listeners what you like to do with your time when you're not doing science? Yeah, sure. I really enjoy music and I actually, I used to play music a lot more than I do now in college and in grad school. I was in a few different bands, I played drums, and then I took up piano. I haven't had as much time in the last few years to really get into playing music, but I still enjoy it. So nowadays, you know, hanging out with family a lot is what I do and I'm not working. Just had my wife's sisters and their families move to our town, which is great. So now there's more family around and my wife and I like to cook and you know, pretty basic things to do in our free time. She's also a professor here at Virginia Tech. So when we're not working, we like to, you know, relax and take it easy, basically. Certainly. Well, Brian, it is great to hear what you like to do in your free time. Definitely a little bit of cooking, some family time, and I love that you have this interesting music as well. So you mentioned you played drums in piano. So did you play classical piano, jazz piano? What's your style? Well, I wouldn't even say I really know how to play piano. I just get up and you know, fool around with it, but I really like jazz and all kinds of rock and pop. So, you know, it was something to do some years back just to get my brain going in a different way and never really got that proficient at it, but it was just fun to sit down and work on a musical problems out on the piano. And drums, it's fine and it's great. They're just, I guess, a little impractical to set up and make all that noise, but I'd love to be able to get behind the drum set again sometime soon. Great to hear about what you like to do when you're not at work. But Brian, we're going to talk next about how you describe what you do to someone who might not be in science. Yeah, broadly speaking, I'm interested in how the Earth's surface, that is the solid surface, changes over time. And especially over time scales of millennia, thousands of years to many millions of years, so geologic time scales. And how those changes are related to two really important forces on the planet, namely climate and tectonics. So, specifically, I'm interested in how sediment, which is really just the product of breaking up pieces of rock at the Earth's surface, how those broken up pieces move around across the Earth's surface, how they're deposited. And in certain places and under certain conditions that sediment can be deposited, buried, and then more sediment deposited, and over time forming a really thick stack of material that's then turned into sedimentary rock. And then under additional conditions and certain places, we can preserve that sedimentary rock for us to look at and examine. So essentially, those successions of ancient sediment are a record of the Earth's surface through time. And you know, at this point when I explain this, someone may say, oh, that's really cool, that's really interesting. Can you tell me more? Or they'll say, that's great. So what? Smile and nod, yeah. But I think that's so what in question is definitely really important. You know, how is what I'm doing and what I'm interested in relevant to society or, you know, to people more broadly? And so two aspects, I'll just mention here, and we can get into them more as we go, that are really relevant are climate because of the issues that we're faced with in the coming decades to centuries about changing climate. And so how does the Earth's surface system and everything that that supports all the ecosystems and all the human aspects? How is that going to change? And then also natural resources. We get oil, gas, and coal and water come from these sedimentary archives in the subsurface. So that's a practical aspect of what I do as well. And you know, that's the answer to the so what question of why I'm interested in these problems. Certainly. Well, I think it is so great to have that so what answer ready? You know, I think that's something where especially in very detailed complex science, once you start getting into these descriptions, people say, you know, oh, that's very nice. But so what? I think you're exactly right there. So great to have those two things. You can relate point to quickly, you know, climate and resources. So Brian, it sounds like you are answering some incredible questions there with your work. Can you tell us a little bit more now about what motivates you? I think scientists have so many things to get done in a day. And I'm always curious to hear about people's favorite motivational quotes or sayings or maybe forces in their life that really help them get it all done. Yeah, you know, this is maybe, I don't know about my all-time favorite quote, but it's one I heard just this summer. So it's my favorite right now, I guess. And so here it is, jumping from failure to failure with undiminished enthusiasm is the secret to success. I like it. And this is a quote from a scientist who I apologize I can't recall his name on a documentary film just released in the past few months called Particle Fever, which is about the large Hadron Collider and Particle Physicists. And I'm not a Particle Physicist obviously, but it doesn't really matter. That quote just really nicely sums up the scientific endeavor, I think. You know, I'm always telling students, both graduate and undergraduate students, that science is really a lot of failing. You know, I tell my students kind of point blank, you're going to fail a lot. Badly, yeah. And it's maybe kind of scary to hear that, but I think the earlier the better, the key is that you learn something from the failed experiment. That's really the difference is that you try things, doesn't work, why didn't it work, and go on to the next. But I guess what I really like about this quote is that added part of the undiminished enthusiasm and try not to get down when you fail. Because you're going to, you know, I tell my students, I fail every day, sometimes all day long. You know, hopefully they're not major, gigantic failures, but a lot of little ones and you just keep going and that's how it works. Certainly, old Brian, I think you brought up some amazing points here in terms of just being comfortable with failure as a scientist. I mean, it's something that you write every scientist goes through these failures and we'll chat about some of these experiences that you've had personally a little bit later in this interview. But you know, I think it's really important to you, like you said, introduce that early to students, make sure that they are comfortable with it. And I think a huge part of science is, you know, not just how many times you fail or how many times you succeed, but how you respond to these failures. And I think that second part of the quote, the undiminished enthusiasm really captures that, making sure you're bouncing back from these failures, learning from them and moving on. I think that's a great quote. Yeah, exactly. So that's definitely my favorite lately and it may end up being an all-time favorite. We'll see when somebody comes up with something even better. Yeah, we'll search for more inspiration for you. Yeah. Well, Brian, that is fantastic. And I love hearing about some of the people that have inspired scientists along the way. So can you take us along your journey and tell us about some of these people who might have served as role models for you? Yeah, it's tough to pick one person really, but certainly for me, role models have been various mentors. You know, those people that are interacted with personally and over some extended period of time. And you know, I think science has learned in part through this mentor apprentice-like relationship still. A lot can be learned through self-teaching and experimentation and simply just gaining experience, but I think mentors still play a huge role in my opinion. So for me, NYPD advisor at Stanford University, Steve Graham was and still is a wonderful mentor. You know, not just in technical matters. The actual science I've learned a lot from him of how to go about it and actual, you know, specifics, but also in how to educate, how to manage dynamic groups, how to effectively lead, and also how to keep it all in perspective. He's a common force that I look up to. But at the same time, he's really successful at what he does and keeps it all together. And so, you know, it's a good package. And so he's been definitely a role model for me. Brian, it is great to hear about one of these people who has really inspired you, shaped your career, and continued to serve as a mentor. I think that is a great point to make here in science. You know, a lot of these mentors that you point to are people who are maybe at your PhD advisor or your master's advisor. You know, people who you were working with closely for a short amount of time, but they continue to be your mentor. Even afterwards, you know, you stay in contact with these people, which I think is fantastic. Yeah, I think that advisor relationship, you know, you hear scientists talk about it. In this case, it was a really excellent relationship. But at such an important relationship, that's where you hear stories about also how badly you can go. Right. Because the fit isn't good or, you know, other issues. So, you know, that's another advice I give, especially undergraduates that are looking into grad school, is yeah, you got to think about the project and the location and all those details, but you really want to as best you can anyway see how you fit with this person. But it's always hard to predict everything just while you're thinking about that. But to really think about, is this somebody that you can work with for a few years? Absolutely. And someone who will help you continue to develop your career even afterwards. I think that is a great point that this relationship with your mentor and choosing the right mentor is really important along the career of the scientist. You know, I think you can make a break it too. And I think a lot of people, if they have that not so great mentorship experience, they're less excited about pursuing their career. So yeah, and unfortunately, you know, maybe some really talented people are pushed out of it because of that, of that experience. So maybe you can look at it as another kind of failing. Right. Try again and experiment again and sometimes it can happen and sometimes it can't. But definitely. I think that relationship is important. Well, Brian, great to hear that you're able to establish this amazing mentor relationship and really have that persist throughout the years. Now, can you take us back to the very beginning and tell us a little bit about how you got interested in science and maybe in particular geology to begin with? And then maybe what are some of these key moments along your journey that really got you to where you are today? Yeah, when I think back, I haven't really thought about this. I can't think about a time before college years where I sort of embraced geology or geoscience, at least it doesn't pop into my head. You know, sometimes people have those stories that, oh, I knew when I was five years old. Yeah, you've repressed those memories. It's okay. Yeah. So what I do remember is, you know, high school guidance counselors saying, you know, you should go into engineering. You have an aptitude for science and math. So you should go into engineering. And I said, okay, you know, I listened to these guidance counselors and I want to college and this undergrad was at University of Buffalo, by the way, near where I grew up. And I'll just say that engineering didn't take really. We'll just put it that way for all sorts of reasons. And so then I was actually a cultural anthropology major for about a year. He responded to that, you know, the engineering not really working out by going completely different direction. And I was interested, like I was saying at the beginning, music and I actually liked learning about music of other cultures, but it was really difficult to sort of project into the future. What was I going to actually do? This was interesting, but could this lead to a career or, you know, a lifetime activity or, you know, what was I going to do? So that didn't really seem like a great path forward for me. So during that time, I took a geoscience course and that one course I really fell in love with it. And if you talk to a lot of geoscientist geologists, you'll hear this story over and over again. It's a pretty common story actually that we get told early on in our life to go into engineering or some other kind of science biology or chemistry. And then we take a geoscience course and really embrace it and love it. It's an integrated science. We are doing physics, chemistry and biology on the earth related to earth problems. So it's already an integrated science where you get to do all those other sciences all the time. And I think some people really like that aspect. And so once I got into the major and I was really enjoying the content and then I could picture myself doing this in one way or another, it became fun and rewarding. And you know how that goes when you can get that really nice feedback. Once you start liking it, you become better at it, which leads to more success and sense. You like it even more, yeah. Yeah. And so it took a couple of years for me and undergrad. I'd have to say to find that it wasn't immediate. But once I did, then the ball was rolling for sure. And so following undergrad, I worked as a junior geologist helping out a single consultant in the petroleum industry, just a lone consultant he needed some help. So I did basic things, managing databases and things like that, nothing too sophisticated. But it was a great opportunity. And he was really enthusiastic about geology and another good mentor. And so then I moved from Western New York State out to Colorado. I continued in that same line of work for a couple of years actually. So it was a few years between undergrad and masters that I was out there working, which I think was really good for me. And because I got even hungrier, so to speak, about going back and diving into learning more and more. And so I started a master's degree at the Colorado School of Minds there in Golden, Colorado. And it was during that time that I really fell in love with the science site. Tons of time out in the field, out in the Rocky Mountains and the desert of West Texas doing field work and being out there with the rocks and with other students and other professors. It was just a really, really great time. And I had some opportunities at that point to go work as an applied scientist, but I decided to keep on the journey. And so then I went out to California to do the PhD at Stanford. And that was just a wonderful four and a half or five years. joined a research group that was doing research down in southern South America, down in Patagonia. And it was a more field work and then learning other skills and other aspects of sedimentary geoscience that I didn't even think of. And so it just kept expanding and getting better and better. And so and then as you mentioned in the beginning after that, I worked as a research scientist in the petroleum industry for a little over three years. I did research for them. I did internal training developed courses for the employees and even did some field work and field training. And it was great. I loved working with people on my team, but I ultimately really wanted to end up in academia. And so they ended up landing this job here at Virginia Tech. And I've been here now just over three years and loving it. It's great. So there's some degree of freedom in this job. You can't do whatever you want. There are some constraints, but overall you can choose your path. And I really love interacting with the students. That was something that you can't really get in many other places. So that's I guess the highlight reel of the path. Sure. Well, I think you've had an amazing journey. And Brian, it sounds like you've had some really interesting opportunities to kind of bounce back and forth between the sort of academic world and the industry or consulting world. So can you tell us a little bit about your transition periods? Was it difficult to transition from undergraduate into this consulting role and then from this consulting role into graduate school and going back and forth between? That's a good question. Not so much. I mean, I think that's something I like about my field is that parts of it are what someone might call basic or fundamental science, which I love. And other parts are very practical and very applied, which I think that's great. I think it's important. You know, there's a lot of problems to solve on this planet regarding energy and resources. So, you know, maybe it comes back to having some good instructors and mentors, but being able to see those linkages between the applied world and then the academic world. There certainly are differences. And personally, personally, I prefer the academic world, but I'm constantly talking with people that are in the applied world as well. And they're really not so different when you start thinking about it. Sometimes, you know, we can separate them out more of this dichotomy of here's applied science. Here's basic science, but there really is a lot of overlap there and chances to be creative and to come up with new ways to apply the science. And I think those are the people out there that become quite successful is they don't forget about the new ideas or coming up with new ideas. Certainly. Well, Brian, I think that is fascinating. Really interesting to hear about how these worlds kind of work together nicely in the field of geology, geosciences with the applied and the basic research kind of going hand in hand actually pretty well. Now, I'm curious, you know, with you mentioned, you prefer the world of academia and you've tried both. So what is maybe the one thing that you could pinpoint as like, you know, that thing in academics that you just missed when you were working in industry or maybe your favorite aspect of your career in academics? I'd say the opportunity or the ability to come up with a problem that you're really interested in and chase that problem. And, you know, when I was even a research scientist in industry, there's all sorts of big problems related to our science that potentially had application and maybe not, but we were in the research division, but there wasn't quite the mechanism to then really go chase that problem. We were steered a little bit by forces above us, so to speak. And so that's what, you know, I really like about this job. Now, it doesn't mean it always works out. Right, it can be frustrating as well. I think with that opportunity and some of that freedom, then it can also be quite daunting because then it's up to you to make it happen. So it's a double-sided thing there that, yeah, it's up to you, which is great. There's a lot of freedom there, but also, okay, it's up to you to make it happen. Right. But I like that. I think that's the exciting part you know, I might make more choices and decide to chase a problem that's not very interesting or impactful or relevant, but I do have somewhat of a choice to chase that problem. Brian, it is great to hear about your journey. And I'm sure our listeners out there, many of whom are perhaps deciding between what career path they want to take. You know, it's helpful for them to hear about some of these experiences that other people have had. So fantastic to hear about your journey. Now, can you tell us a little bit more about what you're working on today? One of these problems that you have devised that you are so excited to be pursuing? Yeah. So I have several projects going on right now and I am excited about all of them, but the one I'd like to talk about today, it's a bit different from the type of work I've done in the past during grad school and a little bit after. And so that anewness is the exciting part. And yeah, in fact, that's one of the aspects I like being a scientist is you can go in different directions and learn new things. And so this project in summer 2012, so two years ago, I spent two months out at sea, two months straight out on a research vessel designed to drill into and recover sediments from the seabed. And you've had Jennifer Bittel on your program. Yes, we're you guys on the same boat? We weren't on the same expedition, but this is the same program. Gotcha. IODP or International Ocean Discovery Program. And this program or its legacy programs have been around for about 50 years, I think. And its main goal is to drill into sediment and rock under the ocean for scientific purposes. And I knew about this program through grad school. I used some of their data during my PhD, but I hadn't been actually out on expedition. And that was when I came to Virginia Tech, this was something I sought out was to contribute to this program and actually go out as a participating scientist. And so in summer 2012, we went out into the North Atlantic Ocean offshore of Newfoundland and to drill into basically piles of mud. You make it sound very glamorous. Yeah, right. We built it piles of mud that cover a huge area, probably about the size of the state of Virginia or so and up to a mile thick. Oh, wow. So just giant piles of mud and these deposits stretch back about 100 million years. So they have a record from then up through the present of ocean conditions. And because the ocean and atmosphere are so intimately linked, this information can then be used to better understand past climate. So this is sedimentary geoscience, which is my specialty, but before this project, this program, I hadn't really spent a lot of time thinking about paleoclimate, so to speak. I was thinking more about sedimentary processes and things like that. So this is an application of looking at sediments than using them as the record of past change. It's a big expedition. It took over a decade to plan and get on the schedule and lots of people, there's 30 scientists on board of all sorts of different backgrounds and experience level. And that part was just really fun. And the main goal, again, is to look at these past climate changes and specifically, there are these times in earth history that are global warming events, global cooling events, that are relatively abrupt. And they're obviously natural earth system changes. And we've known about them for quite a number of years, but really didn't have a good handle on how quickly some of these changes happened. You know, what were the rates of warming or cooling that at geologic time scales can look really abrupt? So this expedition was really trying to get after the rates of those changes, because it's really relevant to our current situation is the changes we're seeing that are happening now that are relatively rapid. Are there analogs, so to speak, in earth history that we can examine, almost like an experiment, to see how did the earth system respond to that and how long did it take to recover, what happened to the biosphere and so on and so forth. And so we're using these deposits that are a record of this. And some people on the expedition are geochemists essentially, and they're studying ocean chemistry that's recorded in the sediments. I'm more of a physical sedimentologist, so I'm trying to reconstruct these currents, these deep sea currents that delivered all this sediment to the site and how they changed over time, do they speed up or slow down during some of these global climate change events. So you can think of these big, long-lived currents, almost like a jet stream that you have in the atmosphere, but it's in the ocean. And so these big currents and they change, they get shallower, they get deeper, they change their path, they get stronger, they get weaker in response to climate change, or also maybe they help force climate change. There's some really interesting and complicated feedbacks there that we're trying to figure out. So this is all bit new to me, this kind of sedimentary system that I had very little experience even thinking about before this project. So that's why it's fun. It's kind of new and I'm learning a lot and interacting with a whole different community of earth scientists that I hadn't before this project. Certainly, now this is a very interesting project. So can you tell us, Brian, how does the expedition select a location? You know what makes one pile of sea mud as you describe it better than another, more interesting to study than another? Yeah, that's a great question. The people out in the community essentially propose we want to go to this place and drill into these sediments or into the oceanic crust in some cases to figure out this problem or answer this question or test a hypothesis. And you need some data to prove to the reviewers to the panel to this large community that essentially evaluates this idea that yeah, this is the place to do this. And of course, you don't have everything you need because if you did, then you wouldn't need it. Right, you wouldn't have to go there. Yeah, but you do need some basic knowledge about the age of the material and aspects like that. But there's a whole process of proposing then getting past that and then a full proposal and then the safety panel because this ship isn't an oil drilling ship. So you can't drill into places where there could be a blowout. And so that's why it takes years, even a decade or more, to really plan these things down to the T. But at the end of the day, it really does come down to the idea is the scientific panel which consists of tens to hundreds of people evaluating that across disciplines. Do they deem it interesting and important scientific problem? And so, you know, sometimes there's great problems that maybe don't get scheduled and other times things that are scheduled, maybe it didn't turn out to be the most exciting thing ever. And that's just part of the process. But I think this organization, IDP, has done a great job over the years, I think, of coming up with a good process for evaluating this. Well, that sounds like an amazing project and great to hear. But it is something new. They're able to explore, really get your hands in and enjoy the time out at sea. Sounds really, really exciting. So did you enjoy that part of it or was it a bit of a drag? Yeah. Yeah, that's really difficult to answer simply. I mean, it was such a great experience, but at the same time, I'm not ready to sign up to go out again just yet. Gotcha. Maybe down the road, but yeah, it was 60 days in a row, you know, not seeing land. It's some time to recover, yeah. And it's expensive to be out there, as you can imagine. And so, it's 12 hour shifts every day without a day off. And there's a lot of work that goes on in the ship. We collect the cores and then there's all sorts of processing and measuring and characterization of the cores. So much data is actually collected. It's like you're in the field and in the lab at the same time. And, you know, it's exciting, but it was pretty exhausting at the same time. So much work gets done in those two months, but then really is just the beginning because now me and all these other scientists from the expedition have hundreds or even thousands of samples that we're all analyzing in different ways. But, you know, that's so that'll take a while. It'll take several years for all that work to be done and the papers to come out and so on and so forth. So I would do it again, but probably not for, you know, at least several years. It's tough to be away for two months at a time. And after all the work I've done doing field work, which was out in the mountains, looking at ancient deposits, it was different being trapped on a boat for sure. Gotcha. I never really got seasick and, you know, you can go out on the deck and get some fresh air, but it was interesting, but also exhausted. Not something you need to do all the time. Now, you know, some of the IODP staff that go out two or three times a year. Oh, wow. It's a special kind of person to spend half your life at sea. Certainly. I know I'm prone to both claustrophobia and motion sickness. So this is like a nightmare to me, but yeah, yeah, ping down a microscope on a boat, you know, during a tropical storm is not not a pleasant experience. Not the funnest thing. Well, it sounds like an amazing opportunity, an amazing experience. And I think such a great project to be working on. So thank you for sharing that with us today. Now, we chatted earlier in the interview about this motivational quote that you have about jumping sort of from failure to failure. And I think so far we haven't yet gone into detail about some of these experiences that you've had with struggling or facing challenges in science. So we're going to talk about this next. Now, can you take us back, Brian, to a point in your career where you had a major failure or you weren't really struggling with something, maybe for days or weeks on end? And can you tell us what happened and how you got through it? Well, again, this is just coming to mind because it's a little more recent in the last few years. And it's a failure that any scientists out there that are listening are going to be familiar with, but it's getting a grant proposal declined. The sounds familiar, yes. And that stands out to me, I suppose, as a failure in recent times. And, you know, because you spend a lot of time developing an idea and you're writing about it, really trying to argue how important is. And during that process, you know, you really come to embrace this idea and you're thinking, yeah, this is awesome. This is really good idea. And you have to think that way because if you're not interested in it, it's not going to come out as being important enough problem to fund. But then you get the official word. Pose was declined and then you read the reviews and it feels like you get punched in the gut a little bit or a lot, depending. But, you know, this is just such a common part of this endeavor. And especially nowadays, there's more and more talented researchers and fewer dollars. So you really got to stand out. But I think the key goes back to again, after you get past the initial gut punch, so to speak. And that might take a day or even more just to kind of relax a little. So could all end, yeah. Somebody's telling you your science is a good enough. Sometimes it doesn't feel great. But you get over it after a few days, hopefully. And then you go into the reviews and say, all right, what do they actually say? And, you know, after the emotional part is over, in this case, there was really good constructive criticism. Like, yeah, this, I see what you're saying, but you don't quite talk about this or so on and so forth. And you just really, again, try to learn from that. And so in this case, this particular sponsor suggested I resubmit it a revision after getting these reviews, which I did. And I took into account what the reviewers criticized and talked about and recommended. And then the second round did get funded. So that was taking that failure and trying to learn from it and going on with it. I guess, you know, a lot of times that it's not going to always happen in every case. In some cases, proposals just never going to get funded for one reason or another. Sometimes maybe it's just not good enough other times. Hopefully you think you're ahead of the time. Right. And they just don't understand it yet and all sorts of things like that. Because science, you know, we're really good at being nitpickers, right? Now, that's our job when we're reviewing papers. We've trained for this, yeah? Yeah, we're finding all these inconsistencies and tiny little things and tend not to get overly excited and we find the problems. And then I think about why do that, too, when I review things. So it's part of the nature, I guess, of doing this and that you just got to get used to people telling you, oh, it's a pretty good idea, but it's not great. You need to work harder. You need to think about this after you've spent a lot of time and effort trying to develop that idea. The students need to learn that pretty early and, you know, they spend all years working on their thesis and result in a paper and a reviewer says, yeah, that's okay. They can always think of a way to make it better. They're never, you know, applauding you. Exactly. And so I think that's a good thing in the sense of the collective, what we're trying to do as science that does make things better overall. But when you zoom in to individual circumstances and situations, you know, it gets messy and part of dealing with being a scientist is taking that criticism and hopefully turning it into something better. Absolutely. Well, Brian, this was a great example of a challenge. And I really like how you walk just through it, you know, how you get that initial rejection and you have that emotional response for yourself. And I think you're absolutely right. You need to just kind of take a day or a couple days and whatever it takes to get yourself back in that mindset to be able to constructively approach this, you know, to look at those reviews, figure out what you can learn and glean from them and kind of move on. And I think certainly you made some amazing points here about getting students introduced to this process early. So it's not so crushing when they experience their first rejection. Yeah. And just being able to bounce back and try again and great to hear that you were able to turn this into a success by taking that feedback and making even better proposal. So Brian, we don't just want to talk about the tough times in your lab in science. Can you tell us next about one of these pure success stories that you've experienced? And it can be a big success or even just one of these little victories that comes along the way. Yeah. The one that comes to mind is also a recent thing is that my first graduate student, you know, I've had this job for just over three years. So having had time to graduate a lot of students yet, because they're still here. But I have my first graduate student finished just in May. And so to me, that's an exciting success. He was a master student worked on a project related to this paleoceanography research. I just talked about related to that expedition, worked on data related to that and did a great job and he's already moved on to other things. But you know, this is really exciting to me. The research my students and I are doing really as a group effort trying to build this research program. I'm the principal investigator. You know, I design the overarching goals, but the students really do the work and they come up with their own ideas. Some great, some not so great, the same process. And so that was just really fun in May to have this first student out of my program graduate do a good job and be successful with his project. Well, congratulations, Brian, to you and your student. I think that is a wonderful success to celebrate in the laboratory that first graduate student to come all the way through the process. So did you have a particular way that you celebrated afterwards? Oh, nothing too fancy, you know, go out and get a beer and cheers and all that. And it's funny because it finishes the work he graduates, but we still need to submit the paper, right? It's never done. It's so close and it's going to be submitted and it's going to be great, but there's still a little bit of work to do. So me and the student are still talking a bit about this. And so it's not quite over, I guess, whether he likes it or not. Right. He was very thrilled to have gotten through this. And you know, it's just two years goes by really fast. And he said he learned a lot about what he was doing and learning about this process too. So hopefully that helps him in whatever he does next. So, my old Brian, I think you made a really great point here that's going to resonate with a lot of graduate student listeners out there who you have this whole flurry leading up to your dissertation. You defend and you feel this sense of relief, this sense of completion, but there's still lots of work to do because you have to get all those papers published now. Yeah, that's right. So certainly well, congratulations again. That is a fantastic success. And I love that you highlight the success of your students going through getting the degree and moving on to great things. Now, I love to chat with researchers in addition to these success stories, these failure stories about, you know, what they like to do in their free time. We chat a little about your music interests, things like that. And I know a lot of scientists are avid readers. So I love to get book recommendations from scientists. So can you tell us today, Brian, about a book that you've read and really enjoyed that you'd recommend for us? Yeah, and this actually does tie back to music directly. It's a book I'm reading right now. So I haven't actually finished it, but I'm getting there. And it's a book by David Byrne called How Music Works. And he's best known as the leader of the band, The Talking Heads. But he's been a composer, performer and producer, and so on for decades. And he wrote this book and published it maybe two or three years ago now. And so far, I don't know, maybe two thirds of the way through, but it's really a fantastic book if you're interested in music for sure. But also, within it, he talks a lot about the creative process. And that's something I think maybe people that aren't in science don't really appreciate that there really is a lot of opportunity for creativity in science. I think sometimes there's a notion that it's a very mechanical and uncreative kind of endeavor. But you really have to be creative to come up with ideas. You know, then use the rigor and the other parts of the process to test those. In this book, he talks a lot about that creative process. So it's fun to read because I see parallels there. You know, whether it's art or science or other kinds of things that we do that creative process. And he also talks a lot about collaboration, whether he was with his bandmates or with the recording engineer or with the producer. He composed music for musicals and plays as well. So a different venue. He talks a lot about that collaborative process, which is really important in science. It's really rare nowadays for a single researcher to just publish single authored papers. Almost everything is done in these groups, like this drilling expedition, or maybe smaller groups. So David Brin talks a lot about the creative process and the context of collaboration as well. So that's one I'm reading now and I assume will end as good as it's been so far. But I'd recommend that to your listeners. Fantastic. Well, great recommendation, Brian. We'll put that out there on our website under our Resources tab for our listeners to find. I really like that this book draws those parallels between music and science in terms of creativity, collaboration, things like that. I think there are a lot of similarities in terms of the process that you go through, especially like you're describing in these initial stages to come up with the ideas to sort of form these questions. And then exactly you get this sort of analytical rigorous approach that comes in next to actually answer them. So great recommendation there. And I know we chatted a little bit about your experiences with this project out at C. And I think scientists get actually quite a few opportunities to travel, to go places, to do their research or to share their research. So can you think back on all the travel that you've done for science, Brian, and tell us about your favorite place that you've been and what made it so special? Yeah, without a doubt it's got to be Patagonia, the southern part of South America. And I've been going down there for a decade now. I did my PhD work down there and now I have a couple of students doing work down there. And we're looking at these 80, 90 million year old sedimentary rocks that were deposited in ancient deep sea. And now they're exposed at the surface and we can look at them in great detail. And this is sort of more the classic geology field work that you might have in your head. And I just love going down there. I still love going down there. It's a really spectacular landscape. Some of it is stunning landscape in that photographic sense. And other is beautiful in other ways. It's desolate and stark and wind swept place with bad weather sometimes. And it's just a really interesting place to go. And unlike being at sea where you're kind of trapped on this boat, doing field work out in the mountains like this, you really can feel out there, fairly remote places that no humans probably walked on. And I just really like that experience of being out there. And the rocks are just what they are, right? They're just kind of there. And you're looking at them and our ideas change about them. The rocks actually don't change technically. But we have different concepts and ideas about what they mean. And you can go back to the same outcrops over and over again and just have discussions that change because you change your ideas. And that aspect is really interesting. That here are these rocks that have been sitting there for 90 million years. And they're just asking to be figured out. So, Emily, well, I think that is a really interesting perspective. Something that I've never really thought that way about these rocks. You know, it's something that, you know, we're right. As far as work and concern, they've been there forever. You know, nothing has really changed in terms of especially our near term perspective of them. It's just the questions that we're asking and how we're answering them, how we're trying to understand the story that they're telling. I think that is really interesting. So, it sounds like Patagonia is just a beautiful place. And you've really painted it to sound quite adventurous kind of being out there in places where maybe no human has ever walked before. So, what sort of attire do you wear for this field expedition? You know, this sounds like an Indiana Jones hat sort of thing. Well, actually there you can't wear a hat like that because of the wind. I was just going to say Patagonia is all about wind. And so, that's why I don't know if you've seen pictures of gouchos, which is the term came from Spain for the cowboys. Essentially, they wear those berets. And I think they do because it's so windy there. They can't wear a wide-brimmed hat. But yeah, I mean, the weather can be anything from 65 degrees in blue sky and sunny and beautiful to right above freezing and kind of a mix of rain and snow. Sideways rain, yeah. So, we've seen that happen in the day. So, wow, we're carrying around in our day packs. These ridiculous amount of clothes that when it's a nice day, you just feel really silly carrying around. There are times when I've had to put on every single article of clothing. And we do some camping. And in the past, we did some horse packing into areas. And so, yeah, there is an element of adventure there. But then at the same time, more recently, we're bringing in some other newer technology. We're using these differential GPS gear to be more accurate in the mapping. So, it's this interesting mix of traditional classic, get some good boots and try to get them out and with some of this new technology as well. Very interesting. Well, this sounds like an incredible experience at a just gorgeous location. Now, and I think in addition to some of these travel opportunities, scientists really enjoy the people that they get to work with. And I know there's stereotypes out there about what scientists are like. And we were trying to break them here today. I think a lot of scientists are just amazing and creative, like we mentioned. And oftentimes, very funny people. And I think working with these amazing groups, you get a lot of quirky traditions that spring up and even just really funny memories that you can look back and laugh about. So, can you share one of these traditions or memories with us today, Brian? That's a fun question. One that comes to mind. And this actually goes back to my advisor, at Stanford. During my PhD, I'm not sure who really coined it, but we ended up nicknaming him Obi-Wan. Does that Obi-Wan Kenobi? Did he know about this nickname? Oh, yeah. Okay. Because he really is a Jedi in a way, as I was describing earlier, his sort of calmness. And a couple days or weeks will go by and you'll realize that he told you something like a seed was planted in your brain. And he just has some of these powers, so to speak. So one point during his birthday, which was always a fun thing that all the students would do something with another grad student who's still a close friend and collaborator, made this Photoshopped poster, I guess I'll call it, of Star Wars characters with all of our faces and heads photoshopped onto them. It was really well thought out. And of course, he was the center and he was Obi-Wan. And pretty nerdy kind of thing to do, but really a lot of fun. And yeah, that's stuck in my memory. And I still have a copy of that poster to look at from time to time. I love that. What a great tribute to your mentor. I'm sure he loved it too. Yeah, I think so. He's pretty modest about it, but I'd like to think that he loves to be referred to as a Jedi. Certainly. Who wouldn't, right? So which Star Wars character did you have the honor of having your head on? Oh, what was I? It's my friend, Jake. I think he made me boba fat actually. That's right. That's the time where I was working in industry. So he likened me to a bounty hunter. Well, that is fantastic. What a great, really creative gift to come up with for your mentor. So I love hearing about all these funny science memories and traditions that people have. And in addition to that, and we've chatted about some of the amazing research that you're doing, but I would also love to hear a little bit about a question that's more hypothetical. One that you would love to answer someday. You know, if we took away all the normal restraints on science, if we took away things that were concerns like funding and staff and technology and feasibility, you didn't have to worry about any of those. Can you tell us today, Brian, what is one question that you are just dying to know the answer to? Yeah, so I guess this is kind of the blank check question. Right. What you would do. Yeah, that's a tough one. It's really a good thing to think about because it helps you really dial in to what you're interested in. And I guess one of the things that I'd really like to do if this was all possible, as I was talking about this processes of deep sea sedimentation. And on land, for a long time, decades, even centuries, we've been able to simply observe rivers or other systems and how they operate, make basic measurements and observations of how those systems transport into positive sediment. But in the deep sea, because it's in the deep sea, this is incredibly difficult, if not impossible, more difficult than going to space in some cases. And so if I had all the resources and funding and technology available, basically, I'd want to go down and observe these processes happening firsthand, which is pretty basic science, pretty basic observation, but in the deep sea. And this would maybe not even be possible in even this hypothetical question, because how can you see in the deep sea? So we'd have light up this huge area. I'm not sure if that's even technically possible. And then some of these events, they're almost like avalanche like events where sediment sitting on a slope and releases in this catastrophic event and all this sediment flows hundreds or even thousands of kilometers across the sea floor. So we'd have to trigger one of those events too, because these can be pretty rare on a human time scale. So we'd want to trigger that event, we'd want to be able to observe it. Spotlights on it. Yeah. And then we'd also want to take basic measurements and collect data too. So put numerous instruments all over the sea floor to measure current velocity, sediment concentration, and so on. And then finally, since I'm a geologist, and I look at ancient deposits, once this sedimentation event is over, we'd go core that deposit and analyze it like we do ancient deposits. And for me, that would really make this linkage. This is what we do on a daily basis, looking at either ancient rocks or cores from expeditions, but connecting it to the actual process and being able to observe it and take those measurements. Doing in the deep sea would be near impossible, but that's what I would do with the blank check. If I had an army of people and technology, that's what I'd like to do. Well, Brian, I think that is an excellent plan. I think that is a great project that you're proposing. And I think talking about some of these, almost what we would call impossible kinds of questions, is really interesting. It gives a lot of insight into just some of the challenges that you faced, even with the research that you're working on today, things like working on the deep sea. What are some of the challenges in lighting? You don't have that, getting instruments even down there. A lot of these little things that people may not think about is challenges that you are successfully overcoming in your daily research that you're doing. I think that is fascinating. So great to talk about these dream questions. And I think you have a fantastic one. And actually, I quite an elaborate plan on how to pull it off, which is great. Yeah, people have thought about this. It's not just me, and it's one of these things that get together with other people who research these problems, and we have these daydreaming scenarios of what we would do. So certainly, I think that is fantastic. And I think talking to collaborators, talking to other people in the field about these dream questions is really fun. And I think, in addition to chatting with these people over the years, your mentors, your peers, your collaborators, you also get a lot of fantastic advice from them as well. And I love to hear what is the best piece of advice that each scientist has ever received in their life. So can you share yours with us today, Brian? Yeah, one piece of advice I've gotten in the last couple of years that I really like. And this is from one of my senior colleagues here in my department. And she told me to resist cynicism. It's all too easy to get cynical and jaded about things, especially once you get to where you're part of a large organization that has bureaucracy, and you're dealing with raising funds. And there's all this kind of stuff starts to enter into what you're trying to do that you have to deal with, and you have to manage and so on. And so it's far too easy to just get really cynical about things. And going through all these hoops and red tape, and you know, it leads to a lot of negativity. And that can really kind of poison the well, so to speak, that if you get a lot of cynical and negative people around, that really makes it not so much fun anymore. And it's not to say that you bury your head in the sand and ignore some of these problems because there's certainly our battles worth fighting. There's all sorts of problems and inequities and so on at institutions, but I guess the point being is to try to remain positive and enthusiastic and not getting overly cynical about it. And I think that's some really good advice that received recently. You know, I'm the 10 year track which I'm on about halfway through that journey. It's challenging and daunting and there are opportunities to get cynical about things and get really frustrated. So for me, this endeavor has to be fun. It doesn't mean every single moment is fun. There's lots of hard work and failures as we've talked about, but it still has to be overall, you know, an enjoyable experience. So I think resisting getting negative is an important part of that. Definitely. And I think you're absolutely right. There's a lot of sources coming from all different directions. Really, you know, you might be getting these rejections, having these failures, getting stuck in some bureaucratic mess, you know, in the world of academia. But I think there's so much to be excited about that you acknowledge these problems, but you stay focused on the things that really ignite your passion and your curiosity. So great to hear this piece of advice. Is there any other last piece of advice, Brian, or maybe last piece of inspiration that you want to share with our listeners now coming from you personally? Well, I would just echo exactly what I just said. That advice I've been given because it really hit home with me. You know, it comes back to that quote too that you asked me about the beginning is to remain enthusiastic and to resist cynicism. And especially now that, you know, I'm in a position where I'm mentoring and guiding students, they notice that negativity and that's not going to make them want to work on what we're working on or to do this kind of work. And so really trying to cultivate a really good atmosphere and positive and enthusiastic because it is fun at the end of the day. This is really a fun thing to do and I'm thrilled that I get to do it actually as part of my job. Well, Brian, great to hear about the piece of advice that really has resonated with you and you've been able to apply certainly very importantly in working with your students as well. Now, we have had some fantastic conversations today, Brian. Can you tell our listeners now how they can follow up to learn more about your research? Yeah, sure. I think probably the easiest way because I assume your listeners are internet savvy is on Twitter and on Twitter, my handle is classic detritus, which just means broken up pieces of rock. I like it. Or sediment. And from there, I also have a link to a blog. I used to write much more. I started when I was a grad student. It's not nearly as active now, but there you can find all sorts of links to other things and get more information about what I'm working on. Wonderful. Well, listeners, feel free to find Brian out there on Twitter, check out his blog. And Brian, thank you so much for joining us today. Yeah, thanks so much for having me. It's been a lot of fun. It has been a great time for me as well. And thank you to our listeners out there. Join us again next time for another episode of People Behind the Science. Your voyage to the lives of today's exceptional scientists has just begun. You can find everything we talked about today, including our guest's favorite books, biographies, photos, and more. When you visit us at www.peoplebehindtheScience.com. I look forward to seeing you next time on People Behind the Science.