Hi everyone, I hope you're having a fantastic day and it's about to get even more wonderful. Because on today's episode of People Behind the Science, episode 452, I'm going to introduce you all to Dr. Douglas Fatuma. Now listeners, if you like this episode and you want to hear stories from more great people doing research today, you can check out our website, peoplebehindtheScience.com, or subscribe to our podcast on iTunes, Stitcher, or wherever else you love to listen. And I'm looking forward to sharing my conversation with Douglas. So listeners, get ready to meet another one of our exceptional people behind the science. Every day, discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNeely is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries, so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone and welcome to People Behind the Science. listeners, I am thrilled to introduce you all today to our wonderful guest, Dr. Douglas Fatuma. So Douglas, welcome to our show. How are you today? I'm just fine. Thank you. And I hope all is well with you. Marie? I'm doing quite well. Thank you for asking. And I'm excited to chat with you about your life and your work. But first, I do want to take a moment to introduce you to our listeners. So listeners, Douglas is a distinguished professor in the Department of Ecology and Evolution at Stony Brook University. He also holds an appointment as a research associate at the American Museum of Natural History. Douglas received his bachelor's degree in conservation from Cornell University and his master's and PhD degrees in Zoology from the University of Michigan. After receiving his PhD, Douglas joined the faculty at Stony Brook University, where he has worked for most of his career. He served on the faculty at the University of Michigan for a few years from 2002 to 2004 before returning to Stony Brook. And Douglas has written one of the most popular textbooks on evolution, and he has received numerous awards and honors over the course of his career. He is an elected member of the National Academy of Sciences, a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and also a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Douglas was also awarded the SUNY Chancellors award for excellence in teaching, a Guggenheim Fellowship, a Fulbright Senior Scholarship, the Suell Wright Award from the American Society of Naturalists, the Joseph Leedy Award from the Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University, and also an honorary doctoral degree from the National University of Mongolia. And in our interview today, Douglas is going to tell us more about both his life and his science, and we'd love to hear a little bit about your life first. So can you tell us how you like to spend your time, Douglas, when you're not very busy doing science? Well, I have two passions. The first is not unrelated to my work. I have been since Boyhood, a pretty passionate naturalist, so I just love being outdoors looking at natural history. And that means especially for about the last 25 years, being a pretty obsessive bird watcher, both here at home. So I'm part of the local birding community, and I'm going out just better weekend for a little while, as well as around the world. And this is of course a wonderful opportunity to see natural environments, all sorts of wonderful exotic species, as well as, of course, the people around the world. So it's a wonderful vehicle for that. So that's one, and my other passion is classical music and opera. I have a subscription to the Metropolitan Opera that I've had for many years, just saw Parsifal last week, growing performance, and classical music, as well as the other arts, but especially music. That is phenomenal. So do you play any music yourself, or do you enjoy just listening? I wish I can't even read music. It's never too late to start. Well, Doug, wonderful to hear about life outside of science, and I'm interested in this bird watching. So do you have a particular, maybe bucket list of birds that you want to see, or a particular bird that's evaded you? Something that I hope to see later this year in Ghana is something called the white-necked rock fell or pica-thirties. And it is a very strange looking bird, indeed, that builds its mud nests on this side of rock walls in the middle of rainforests. And when I was a kid, I saw a pair of these in the Bronx Zoo, and the image of those birds has never left my mind, and I want to see them in the wild. I love it. Well, you've painted a beautiful picture of their habitat in these exotic birds. So wonderful to hear about life outside of science, but I do want to talk about your work next. And I think oftentimes for biologists and naturalists, there can be some overlap in terms of the work you do and the things you're passionate about. But how do you describe what you do at work to someone who's interested? Right. Well, I should say that I'm on the board of retirement. That doesn't mean I'm going to stop doing scientific activities, but it does mean that pretty much my research is behind me. So basically, I'm an evolutionary biologist. I'm especially interested in the evolution of ways in which species adapt to their environment, so that also involves a lot of biological ecology. So as a professor, my career has been one first of teaching a variety of courses, mostly about evolution and what we call evolutionary ecology. Secondly, doing research, which as I say, is now pretty much over, but that has been on the ways in which insects which eat plants have evolved their ability to eat or failure to be able to evolve to eat different kinds of plants. And we can come back to that in a moment. And then thirdly, as you mentioned, I am the author of the textbook about evolution that has been, I should say, quite successful. And that's led me to sort of a variety of roles within evolutionary science. And to some extent, spokesperson for evolution, as well as engaged in a lot of editorial activities. Certainly. And I think in addition, like you said, to these plant insect interactions that you've studied, being known as a general expert on evolution is no small task. And I think this is every scientist's sort of worst nightmare because we often tend to really get tunnel vision and focus really specifically in one certain area. Was it scary the first couple of times that you had to go out there and sort of be expected to kind of know everything about evolution? Well, that means it's scary just to teach a course on the subject because evolution embraces everything about living organisms in one way or another. Today, it ranges all the way from the fossil record and paleontology all the way through genome science and everything in between. So it's a little pretentious to think that you can cover that field. So the result is I'm sort of the jackable trades and master of none. I have a superficial knowledge of a lot of things, but it is as you say, somewhat daunting position at times. And I can always say that anything I think I know about there are a lot of people out there who are far more expert than I am on that subject. Well, I think you've done some great work in this area of kind of outreach and general education, but I do want to talk a little bit about what motivates you to do all these different things that you do in your day. I mean, you're balancing a lot of different activities, wearing a lot of different hats. Do you have a favorite quote or a saying or something that goes through your mind, Doug, that really keeps you in it? There are a few, but here's one that I like. Our remedies often ourselves do lie, which we ascribe to heaven. The fated sky gives us free scope. Only death backward pull our slow designs when we ourselves are dull. So that sounds like Shakespeare and it is it's from Oswald and as well. And what is our remedies often ourselves do lie that is don't look others don't look to fate don't look to some outside forces to achieve your aims, but find the energy in yourself. And I suppose you could say that this was kind of an early expression of the power of positive thinking. So I try to maintain that positive approach. And I do that really because I love my subject. I am as thrilled by the diversity of animals and plants and living things today as I was when I was a high school student. And I'm just thrilled by the knowledge and the understanding that we've acquired of how this marvelous diversity of life has come into existence. And I love communicating that to people. It is teaching to me as a very rewarding activity, writing about it, giving lectures about it. And it just continues to throw me. Absolutely. And I think the students and the people that you're speaking do can sort of sense that passion against them excited about it as well, which is awesome. And I think through your career and the different activities you've participated in, you've really been able to kind of teach and mentor and inspire a lot of different people. But Douglas, I'm curious to hear a little bit about some of these people who might have had this sort of impact on you and who your role models and inspirational figures are or were a few one very inspirational figure whom I didn't meet until I was well into my career was Ernst Meyer. Meyer was himself a naturalist as a young man and became one of the most accomplished ornithologists in the world. And he also then became one of the people who most shaped modern evolutionary theory. Well, that's a bad word. But the way we think about how evolution works. And I became acquainted with his books early on. In fact, one of his papers about the classification of burdens was probably the first scientific article I ever read, was given to me by an older birder when I was in high school. And Meyer's integration of what he knew about birds and other organisms together with ideas of how evolution works was absolutely inspiring to me. And just the breadth of his command, the breadth of examples that he would use, really inspired me to try to learn all that. So he was one. My PhD advisor, Lawrence LeBaudkin at the University of Michigan was certainly another. He was kind of a quirky original thinker and sometimes his ideas were kind of a little bit off and sometimes they were absolutely brilliant and right on. But the other thing that I learned from him was he was the first biologist on that who was also in some sense an intellectual. That is to say, he was interested in larger social issues. He was interested in political issues. He was interested in the arts and literature. And that to me also became inspiring that you would have this breadth of vision. And I'm not sure that mine has ever matched his, but he was certainly an inspiring figure. Absolutely. And I love this kind of role model or mentor that you had in terms of this well-rounded thinker because I think so often people in science, like I said, you get pigeonholed or tunnel vision that you're really only focusing on one thing. But you lose sight of the arts, literature, a lot of these other areas in life that can add so much enrichment. Absolutely. Definitely. Well, wonderful to hear about some of the people who inspired you, Doug. And you mentioned that you were already getting academic papers on birds at the early age of a high school student. So I'm curious to hear about where your interest in science began. Does it go back even farther than this? Oh, yeah. Well, not in science, but in animals, yes. And certainly by the time I was in fourth or fifth grade, I was already enchanted by the diversity of animals. And that's because I grew up in the Bronx. People don't think, oh, growing up in the Bronx in New York City, we have, can you possibly become an athlete? The answer is the Bronx Zoo, which at that time was the largest zoo in the country, meaning having the greatest diversity of birds and reptiles, amphibians, and mammals of any zoo in the country. And I, already by fifth grade, I was taking the subway up to the Bronx Zoo, becoming fascinated by all this diversity. And really, Thelon loved both with the enormous diversity of birds and reptiles in particular. And got to know some of the zookeepers there who sort of fostered my interests. And probably by six or seventh grade, I was going out into the New York City parks because actually New York City has some absolutely wonderful parks where you can find all sorts of insects and frogs and salamanders and of course birds. So I started doing that and at one point to another, started meeting some older bird watchers after I'd gotten my first pair of medoculars from my father. And I'll never forget one of them showing me a great horned owl, which is a magnificent bird right there in the Bronx Botanical Garden, right in New York City. Oh wow. That sort of cemented it. So there's not that was that all through high school. I knew I wanted to do something with animals, whatever that might be. And I knew that that meant going to college. And everyone in my high school went to college. I was very fortunate I'm going to a very good high school in New York City. So I ended up at Cornell, which was probably the best place for someone of my interests, where I had courses about birds and fish and insects and plants and everything as well as of course the other aspects of biology, physiology, biochemistry, genetics, ecology. So that rewiss shaped my understanding of what biological science was and not simply delighting in the diversity of life, it shaped my understanding of biological science. And I realized that the fields of ecology and evolutionary biology were those that seemed to most pertain to understanding this diversity of animal life and plant life that so enchanted me. So I went off for masters in PhD work at the University of Michigan, which had many faculty members who were experts in various animal groups and there ended up studying under Lawrence Lodgan, an ecologist as I mentioned. So that's where I got a PhD. I ended up at Stony Brook. When I was finishing my PhD I interviewed at a few places and then one other option, but shortly before then, Lodgan was tapped to move from the University of Michigan to Long Island where there was this new campus being developed. To the promised in words of Governor Rockefeller at that time, it was going to be the Birkhoi of the East. This was a new university campus at Stony Brook, no one had ever heard of before. But Larry was induced to come here and initiate a department of ecology and evolution, which was one of the first two such departments in this country. Before then there had been zoology and botany departments, but it was a period in which biology was being reorganized more or more sort of molecular biological versus organismal biological lines. So he founded this department and his idea of how to found a new department was to hire a couple of famous people and a bunch of promising young people. So the promising young people who knew included several of us from the University of Michigan who were finishing our degrees at that time. So three of us came here, the first members of this department and of the three two moved elsewhere eventually and only I am left to tell the tale. So what has it been like and watching the department grow from the very beginning to now where it is today so many years later? Well obviously lots of ups and downs. The University as a whole is immensely greater and more complicated than I have to say, more bureaucratic than it was then. And the department really grew rather rapidly to be recognized as a really major intellectual center of ecology and evolutionary biology. And we have for most of our history then sustained this stature as really one of the very best departments in my field. I have to say we're going through great struggles right now because budget cuts and so forth in the University, but nonetheless we remain I think a very strong department in these areas. So I've been blessed by having really really good colleagues and really really good graduate students not just in my own lab, but in the department as a whole. And we've been very collegial. It's a department in which every week we have a visiting speaker and we all go listen to that speaker whether the subject is in our particular research area or elsewhere. So that's been very important for my growth as a scientist. Certainly. Well that sounds absolutely wonderful. And one thing that really struck me as you were talking about your interest outside of science as well as your career path is this passion you've had for birds. So it really makes me wonder what then drew you to this plant insect interaction area. Okay. Well number one I took an entomology course of course in the insect taxonomy. When I was an undergraduate as a senior with William L Brown Jr. who was the world's expert on the taxonomy and diversity of ants. And he was another very charismatic and very influential person in my life. So the result of that was that I also fell in love with insects. So I've taught an entomology course here a number of times and I've probably enjoyed teaching that and were there anything else. So that wasn't a difficult jump. But the answer was that in the early 1970s one of the big questions in evolutionary biology it had been revealed that most species of humans and lies and everything else have a lot of genetic variation. That is to say you and I are genetically different and in fact any two people who aren't identical twins are genetically different and you can use various techniques to see that yeah we differ in a lot of Virgines. And the question was what accounts for the existence of this genetic variation? Why aren't all members of the species population the same? So I had the idea that maybe different genotypes would be adapted to different aspects of the environment. And I thought that well suppose you compared an insect that eats only one kind of plant with an insect that eats many kinds of plants maybe what you would find is that the one that eats many kinds of plants would consist of a whole different kind of genetic subtypes each of which was best adapted to one of those many plants. So that was my first big research project that really drew me into using insects that feed on plants as a vehicle for understanding a broader problem in evolutionary biology and evolutionary genetics. And then of course I found that the enormous enormous diversity of insects that eat plants are whole world fully of interesting questions to ask and interesting species to study. Definitely so is there a particular insect that is maybe your favorite or one you find most fascinating? Well there have been several but one of them I'll mention so we did this study in which we used the methodology of the day was to grind up insects or just a tissue sample from an animal and examine its proteins. And if you found that two members of the species had a different version of a particular protein that was an indication that they differed with respect to the gene which is responsible for producing that protein. So that was a way of examining genetic differences among individuals of the species. So we studied a number of different species of moths to see if the species that were capable of eating many kinds of plants would show more genetic differences as revealed by these proteins than a species of moth that eats just one kind of plant. And I should say the moth itself doesn't eat the plant it's rather will larva the caterpillar that's the stage that eats the plant. And in the course of this we found every species moth that we looked at sure they showed some genetic differences among individuals and no two individuals were alike the same as no two humans are like unless they're identical twins. And then we found this one species it's called the fall canker worm moth in which we found a whole bunch of different caterpillars that we collected just from oak trees that they all had pretty much the same genetic profile. They don't look as if they were identical twins which was very weird. That's right. And then we found well they actually a number of these different gene combinations. So they're a number of different not pairs of identical twins but sets of identical individuals. So for example on maple trees we found well there's another genetic combination which we find many many caterpillars with this genetic combination. So that told us that there was something very curious about this species and what it said was well they must be reproducing asexually in other words a female would have offspring who are all identical to one another they'd form kind of a clung. And this is not unprecedented quite a number of other species of animals are known to be like this. I think that was known for only one other species of moth in the world at that time. So this was a pretty stunning discovery. The weird thing about it that was that if you go out in the fall when the moths are out what you see is females with their abdomen's releasing pheromones that is chemicals which are designed to attract males and you do indeed find male moths coming to mate with them. So it was very weird because it looks like well sex is going on but nonetheless it looks like you have these caterpillars being produced asexually without the mixing of the genes from a male and a female. So it was very very strange. Sure well this mysterious fall cankerworm moth sounds very intriguing. So thank you for sharing the story behind this exciting insect. And we've talked about some of the different experiences you've had over the course of your career Douglas. But I'm curious to hear if there's a particular project or a particular thing that you studied or worked on that was just the most memorable or one of the projects you've been the most excited to be a part of that you want to share with us today. So I just talked about how there's genetic variation among members of the population and for evolution to work there has to be some genetic variation. In other words evolution simply doesn't operate if all individuals are exactly the same. You need to have genetic mutations that alter some feature of an organism and some of those mutations very very rare way to turn out to produce the version of the organism that is better able to survive or reproduce because of some altered characteristic that perhaps fits into its environment right. So that's the principle of evolution by natural selection. But natural selection can work only if there are genetic differences in some characteristic among the individuals in the population. So it turns out that very often mutations have occurred in the past and they kind of accumulate within a species that's what I was studying with these caterpillars these mutations accumulate so that there's already a lot of genetic variation within a population so that when an environment changes often the species doesn't have to wait for new mutations to happen that just might happen to make it better for this new environment. Rather it'll turn out that some of these mutations that are accumulated just fortuitously happened to be just exactly what the doctor ordered for this new environment. So for this is the basis for example for the evolution of resistance to insecticides. So any number of species of insects that are pests including for example malaria bearing mosquitoes have evolved to be resistant to DDT and every other insecticide that's been thrown at them. And that's because mutations are already in the population if you've got millions and millions of mosquitoes some of them have mutations that just happen to make them a little bit more resistant to DDT or whatever the insecticide is. This turns out to be really common in other words a lot of species have adapted very rapidly to changes in their environment even to changes the humans have made in the environment. That's not to say that any species can adapt to any alteration of the environment that we impose that's definitely in the case. In fact a lot of species are becoming extinct because of what we're doing as a species to change the world. So here's this general notion among evolutionary biologists that most species are pretty flexible genetically and can pretty rapidly adapt to changes in the environment. Well there are other aspects of the diversity of life though that really are very puzzling them. For example there are many groups of insects in which all the related species in a group form one big branch of the great tree of life and all of them go back to a common ancestor which could be 50 million years ago, 60 million years ago and all of them feed on pretty much the same kind of plant. So you may be familiar for example you see white butterflies flying around pretty much anywhere in eastern United States it's bringing the summer. Those butterflies lay eggs on plants in the mustard family those are cabbage white butterflies at least that's the most common one. So they're larvae their caterpillars eat mustard plants and that is true for hundreds of species butterflies in that group all of which come from one common ancestor about 80 million years ago and almost all those species have larvae that feed only on plants in the mustard family. So that is really weird because we think there should be adaptable to other kinds of plants considering the great revolutionary flexibility of so many species. So I postulated well maybe species of insects just don't have the genetic variation that would be required to take a big jump and become adapted to a totally different group of plants and I won't say that this is a heretical position but it's definitely not the most popular one because everyone's so wedded to this idea that species are really adaptable and to make a long story short we used a group of beetle species all of which are related to one another and they all feed on plants in the day's eat family and we basically did a whole bunch of tests in which we looked to see whether these species had the genetic potentiality for feeding on a different kind of plant than the one that they normally feed on and what we found was that you have one species that eats golden rods which are in that same family and another species that eats ragweeds and well it turns out that those beetles don't seem to have the genetic potentiality of switching from ragweed to golden rod or vice versa. So they really are constraints then that seem to limit the genetic potentiality is the possible avenues of evolutionary change that a species where its descendants might be capable of and this is becoming a really big theme in evolutionary biology it's like we understand a lot about the process by which species do adapt to different environments but what we don't understand very well is the cases of failure what are the situations under which a species can't adapt to a new aspect of the environment and of course that's really important because one consequence of failing to adapt is extinction and that of course has been true of the vast vast majority of species that have ever lived so one of the things we really don't understand very well is extinction why does extinction happen instead of adaptation so both the ability to evolve and the inability to evolve adaptively they're two sides of the same coin and they're both really interesting. Absolutely I think these ideas of host specificity and the genetic flexibility are really fascinating in this particular experiment that you mentioned sort of had a happy ending you got an exciting discovery out of it but I know that's not always the case I think the careers of scientists are littered with these challenges and failures and things that don't turn out quite right or like you expect them so Douglas do you have a story of challenge or failure or one of these moments of scientific confusion? Oh I probably got more than I remember because you don't like to remember the things that you were well let me go back to that fall canker worm month that I was talking about so remember that we found evidence that it was really weird that obviously there was sex going on because we have male mugs meeting with females but then we also had this genetic indication that females must be producing lots of babies that are all genetically identical to one another so we started collecting females and getting egg masses from them so we'd be able to see whether all the offspring of a female indeed have the same genotype and it was very puzzling because very often the females would lay eggs and then they wouldn't hatch some of the females their eggs are hatching but a lot of them they weren't hatching and this is because we were just going out and collecting female mugs at night in November when they come out in the late fall so many of us decided this really frustrated there are opportunity to do some critical experiments they only come out once a year so we had to wait until the next year to be able to do the experiments so we started fooling away so well what are these males doing and we ended up doing experiment in which we caged some females just by themselves and in others we gave them a male and lo and behold it turned out that if you give a female a male her eggs will hatch interesting but nevertheless all her offspring are genetically identical and it turns out well they have the same genotype as their mother so the females mating with the male but he ends up not being a father in other words the offspring don't receive any of his genes so this turned out to be from that point of view a happy ending because it was frustrating for a while but we solved the issue we figured out finally what was going on we don't know exactly what's going on there are a few other examples of this that have been described in various insects and other animals in which it appears as if having the sperm penetrate the egg is important for getting the egg to start developing but nevertheless the males chromosomes his genes are not then actually incorporated into what will become the embryo it's a very bizarre genetic system so here you've got the situation in which you have these asexual females that are almost like sexual parasites they're using these males but the males don't contribute now imagine you have one female moth who has 50 offspring and half of them are in normal sexuals that have them are male and half female offspring and there must be some ones out there that have her like that because we do have male moths right so imagine you have a sexual female who produces on average 25 daughters and 25 sons and compare her to another moth who also has 50 eggs but she's asexual she just uses the male and throws away his genes and then proceeds to have 50 babies and all of her babies are daughters well thank them mathematical consequences of that because the next generation the sexual female has 25 daughters times 50 offspring whatever that number turns out to be that's the number of her grandchildren but the asexual female has 50 daughters times 50 offspring so that's twice as many grandchildren and do that for a few more generations what you're going to find is almost the entire population is going to be made up of asexuals because every generation they produce twice as many offspring that are going to make again twice as many offspring right so in no time you've got a population which is 99% asexual and at that point the population should go extinct because there aren't any males to activate yeah so there's something very weird going on something is maintaining a reasonably high frequency or high percentage of sexual females in the population and we try to figure out what is it what is this sexually reproducing component in the population of moths head going for it that enables them to persist and we could never figure that out we thought well maybe either offspring are adapted to a different kind of plant that the asexuals aren't using or maybe the males really prefer to mate with sexual females and only occasionally are attracted by the asexual females and we couldn't find any evidence for those and we finally just sort of gave up and we said we just don't know let's move on to another question and I hate to admit defeat but we were defeated oh wow so there's a project out there that's waiting for someone who's more creative or has newer tools yeah better tools yeah well listeners this mystery awaits you I must say if you're out there looking early May if you're in eastern North America you'll find fall canker worm caterpillars sometimes green sometimes black on lots of different kinds of trees oaks and maples and elms and all kinds of trees that we've been just waiting for someone to study it some more I love it well Douglas thank you so much for sharing one of these unsolved mysteries from your own research portfolio but we don't just want to talk about the mysterious and challenging projects I'd love to talk about some of your successes and I know you have quite a few to choose from here but do you have a favorite success story that you want to share with us today I would say what I was telling you about the beetles and I'll expand on that because this is some of the research that I'm really happiest with so remember this was a following on the idea that maybe there are genetic constraints so that it's really hard or maybe who knows almost impossible for an insect to adapt to a really different kind of plant so here you had these beetles all these related species about 15 different species all feeding on different plants that are in the sunflower family which is very very big diverse family plants and I thought if the history of evolutionary change in their feeding habits if that's been guided by genetic constraints so that only certain paths of possible evolutionary change are open and other conceivable paths in evolutionary change are closed or off limits well if that's the case then maybe what we would see is that the genetic potentiality of the species could be re-weighted in one way or another to the entire evolutionary history by which those species have evolved from a common ancestor what do I mean by that what we might find is that if we look at all the relationships among these different species of beetles they all come from what common ancestor back on it probably on the order of 49 years ago we have reason to think it's 49 years ago because we did DNA studies which then enabled us to draw kind of biological genetic tree of which species are most closely related to which others because so this is an evolutionary tree of Ophraella beetles they don't have an English name well that names lovely so that's fine yeah so we have an evolutionary tree so I thought well maybe it's possible that a species of beetle could branch off and adapt to a different kind of plant from what its ancestor fed on maybe only if that plant is closely related to the plant that its ancestor fed on in other words maybe they can adapt to plants that are closely re-weighted and therefore not too different from one another compared to being able to adapt to a plant which is more distantly related and might be more different in its chemical characteristics or other characteristics maybe that would just would be a leap too far so we looked at the phylogename we thought yes that that is the case it does appear on usually that if you look at two species that are each other's closest relatives they also feed on two different kinds of plants that are very closely related within the sunflower family so in other words by and large evolution is going by relatively small steps not big flying leaps so if that's the case then when we do our genetic studies and we look to see if a species has the genetic potential for possibly adapting to a different kind of plant than its normal plant what we honestly then is if it has any genetic potential at all for adapting to a different kind of plant it's most likely to have the genetic potential for adapting to a plant that is closely related to its normal host plant so if you're feeding on ragweed there's another kind of plant called marsh elder which is more closely related to ragweed than to other members of that big plant family so we said if we take a ragweed feeding table maybe it will have some genetic variants within the population that have the potential for feeding on marsh elder even if it doesn't have any such genetic potential for feeding on golden rods which are much more distantly related plants that not be related to ragweed and that's just what we found so it turned out that there were cases in which it looked like species do have some genetic potential for adapting to a different kind of plant but usually that would be a plant that is closely related to what they're used to feeding on and that matches the whole evolutionary history that we discovered by looking at the relationships among these beetles and how related species beetles usually be done related plants and I really like that because it's one of the first studies that I think people have done in which they're trying to match what you see at the level of the evolutionary processes that are happening just within individual species sometimes called micro evolutionary change trying to re-weight evolutionary processes within species to sort of the grand story of what has been played out in evolution over the course of millions of years what's sometimes called macro evolution so we find a bridge parallel between micro evolution which we can study actually sometimes going on in front of our eyes can we find a bridge between that and evolution as it's played out over many millions of years so this experiment is sort of one little step in that direction and it's something I feel really particularly satisfied with absolutely well congratulations on this successful experiment and like you said this is a really exciting line of research and tells a nice story of the evolution and kind of ties a couple pieces together that I think people usually don't tie together when they're thinking about it absolutely and hearing I'm working in the areas that are often thought to be like these are really abstruse who really cares about beetles that are packed old and rods I think it's cool and much less their genetic variation where this family tree of beetles who cares about that right what good is that and the answer is actually well it could be pretty good it could be pretty important one of these beetles species feeds on ragweed I mentioned that early well ragweed is an American plant is a Native American plant and you know that ragweed is serious cause of hay fever a really serious ragweed has become a serious weed throughout much of Europe and over into Asia and the question is is there any way of controlling it and there's no way here's the something it's growing along road sides and shallow fields and whatever and there's no way to be able to control it everywhere by using an herbicide right so the question is might there be a way in which you could use a natural enemy of the plant to suppress it to keep it down so in fact European scientists who have been concerned with the possibility of what's called biological control of this pest plant European scientists have actually been looking at one of my overella beetles to ask the question could this be a candidate for an insect that could be imported to Europe and serve as a natural control of this rewiss series plant pest so lo and behold it turns out that my favorite beetles which I assure you I didn't choose them because they might possibly be useful for biological control I took for a bunch of other very arcane reasons but it turns out they contact me they brought me over to Paris a couple of years ago to talk with them and one of the points that I raised which they were aware of of course was well even if we bring over this plant the speedal to control ragweed is there any potential that it could evolve to attack other kinds of plants that are not weeds or might even be important crop plants and in particular sunflower which is a commercially important plant sunflower is in the same family as ragweed so the question is is there a potentiality for this ragweed specialist to undergo a genetic change and evolutionary change and adapt to sunflower so this is where my kind of work becomes very relevant it seems totally arcane and obscure and it's being done in the service of understanding these grand ideas about evolution but it really can be seriously useful and in fact several of my PhD students and a couple of other students from Stony Brook here over the years who have done PhD work with me were my colleagues on the evolutionary ecology of insect plant interactions several of them have gone on to very rewarding careers in applying these ideas to real life situations in agriculture controlling agricultural pest insects one of them who's got us to hear here many years ago and he is a member of the National Academy of Sciences he's very distinguished he's had an international career developing these ideas about modeling evolutionary changes in so far as they could end up being serious problem for trying to control insect pests of crops and I have another student who's at Iowa State University and he is working on basically evolution of corn pests which is if you're from Iowa you know there there are insects that are serious pests of corn right whether or not you can control them partly depends on the ability of those insects to evolve absolutely well this is an exciting success and congratulations on these projects and I'm really glad that you brought up these applications to some of the downstream things that this type of research that you're doing can be used for because I think so often scientists especially those in basic research are faced with this kind of so what question from the public and I think you don't necessarily have to know that up front for that research to be valuable in the future absolutely I think it is so important for people to understand that every aspect of our life depends in one way or another on technology it depends on the applications of science of physical science of chemistry of biology so much of our food depends on food science which depends on biology and almost all of those sciences those applications depend on the fundamental understanding of physics of chemistry of biology of genetics of evolution of the ecology of physiology of all these basic sciences in which is the fundamental how does it work in nature people just ask how does it work and understanding how nature works whether it's how organisms work or how molecules work how the universe works that fundamental understanding which scientists pursue largely out of their own curiosity just because they want to know they want to understand the world around us that understanding is the indispensable foundation for being able to develop the technology that we all depend on the biological and the physical and the chemical technology that every aspect of our life depends on absolutely and you mentioned that this project came along with an opportunity to travel to Paris and I love talking about some of these travel opportunities that scientists get to share their work or work with collaborators so do you have a favorite place Douglas that science has taken you so many that's a hard choice let me mention two sure one which is probably closest to my heart is Costa Rica since I was a kid going to the bronxoo seeing all these exotic tropical birds and reptiles and mammals I wanted to go to the tropics it's like I knew this is where there's this incredible diversity of exotic animals two cons and jaguars and crocodiles and boa constrictors and fair delance and vipers and all kinds of things that I wanted to see so the summer after my first year in graduate school I had the opportunity to go to Costa Rica to take one of the very first courses that was offered there by an organization that had recently been formed called the organization for tropical studies which since has become a major force in educating hundreds and hundreds if not thousands of students about tropical organisms tropical ecology as well as branching out into things like tropical diseases and some social aspects and so on they now have several research stations in Costa Rica and eventually I ended up teaching in that tropical ecology course many times and since then I've gone back there a few times just on my own with friends to look at birds and Costa Rica is this marvelous country is a credible biological diversity the government there has been for a long time strongly committed to ecological conservation and land conservation so that ecotourism is I think there are second most important sources national income there are these beautiful national parks and rainforests and dry deciduous forest and so on and I found one level Costa Rica that first time and every time that I've been back there since it is very close to my heart but I want to mention another country and this is just a few weeks ago this is the third time I've been in Turkey and I was invited to be part of a two-day weekend symposium or conference on evolution that was held in Ankara the capital of Turkey as you may know among western countries the United States is closest to the bottom in terms of the percentage of people who accept evolution at the bottom is Turkey really which there has been a lot of anti-evolution propaganda for a long time and basically it's a matter of the perception that there's a conflict between New-Ajusk-Belief and evolution and recently the Turkish government essentially has forbidden the teaching of evolution in high schools it is still being taught at least in a couple of the large universities but my impression is that in small colleges and universities they've abandoned the teaching of evolution because they are afraid of penalties so it's a highly repressive situation I was invited to this two-day conference which was entirely organized by undergraduate students they've put this on a number of times before so they know what they're doing it was a totally professionally organized conference these students knew exactly how to mount it you know and in every way they had been able to raise funds to be able to fly speakers in not just from the US but from Canada and several European countries and they had us speaking about various aspects of evolution this conference had 1100 people registered oh wow and most of them being students not just from Ankara but from across Turkey coming to Ankara to listen to evolution these were not necessarily biology students these were people who just wanted to know about evolution some of them were teachers some of them were not students some of them were from others walks of life I want to mention this because the passion that these students and other people had for learning about evolution I can't tell you how emotionally affected I was by just their thirst for knowledge their passion to learn about what they understood to be really important principle of science principle of biology and one which moreover was forbidden and understanding that repression of scientific knowledge is just antithetical to modern life really is because of the importance of every aspect of science free inquiry and free discussion scientific ideas is absolutely essential for every aspect of our life and that's what these students recognized so to have an audience of the 1100 people just sitting there on the edge of their seat listening to one talk after another was really inspiring absolutely inspiring and reassuring I think that even in this environment that really doesn't support it that interests still persist that passion is still there absolutely that was so inspiring well these two trips sound like they couldn't be more different but both wonderful on their own way and I've been putting any of other places they're all wonderful to yeah we'll make our own show Douglas we'll talk about all the places you've been well I think throughout our conversation today in addition to these great places we've highlighted some of the great people that you've been able to work with and I love talking about scientists as humans and all the wonderful things that we do in science that maybe people aren't aware of because I think there are so many stereotypes out there about what scientists are like and how science is done but I think much of what actually happens is contrary to these stereotypes and a lot of these quirky lab traditions or funny memories are even just fond memories that you share with your colleagues really show this human side of science and show the world that it's not this isolated scientist working by themselves up in a laboratory so Douglas do you have one of these stories that you can share with us today that really shows this human side of science probably the most rewarding aspect of my career has been working with students and in particular with PhD students I've never told PhD student what to do they have their ideas when I help them work them out and sometimes we'll talk out an idea together and the result of this is only the course of time in the best of situations you become friends and colleagues the student is no longer a student but a colleague and nothing fosters that more than going out and doing extended field work together some of the most rewarding aspects of my career have been I told you about these beetles okay so about 15 species beetles that I was working on and in order to get the DNA for the five-engineetic tree that I was talking about I basically wanted to collect every species in this group of beetles and that meant a whole lot of traveling around especially in western North America and I don't want to travel around for a month or two on my own obviously I want to have company and no better company than a PhD student especially one who's sort of starting and has not thoroughly embedded in their own research yet so I did that for actually three summers and of course there are all kinds of incidents that happen one of them we're driving through really this is my student guppy out and we're driving through Utah and I saw this lake bed and I thought well maybe one of our plants is growing down there we should check out to see if we have that plant that has a certain beetle that I'm after so we drove down this dirt track with some grass and weeds and stuff and little track and we drive down there and no the plant's not growing that was a waste of time we drove back hi wait continued this is western Utah and this really remote area where you're heading westward toward Nevada and we stopped and driving along this offense and on the fence pole there is a raven sitting and on the next fence pole there was a golden eagle oh wow and I've never ever seen a golden eagle down next to the ground I've seen quite a few of them but they've usually been flying were perched way up on a mountain side one of these birds doing here and we saw what they were doing there that was a dead animal on the road they were obviously both eating and the animal was a badger and I have never seen a badger before alive or dead it's kind of weird looking kind of skunky type member of the weasel family well let's pull over to the road I want to look at this badger it might be the only one I ever get to see as we pulled over and I then noticed that there were a bunch of beetles attracted to the carcass so I told down to you what's turned off the car we'll be here for a while I want to collect some these beetles from my teaching collection so we did that and that was all very rewarding turning over dead badger and collecting beetles so we get back in the car and the truck won't start and neither of us knows anything about autumn mechanics it's late afternoon there's no traffic on this road no one to stop and help us and we ended up then just putting up our tent and had camping for the night I mean no idea what was going to happen in the morning we had a very limited supply of water I was also very worried that the truck could get too hot and we had live insects that we were carrying and we need to keep them cool so I've been buying ice to put in the cooler with these containers full of live insects so fine way guy comes along and pick up truck and this being the rural west and he realizes these people might need help he says let me get under and see if I can figure out what's going on okay I says do you have a quarter that's it give me the quarter and get in the driver's seat and when I tell you to start it up try starting it up sure yeah okay and the car starts right up really yeah what did he do well they was some electrical connection or something between the starter and something else or whatever I know about beetles not cars whatever it was it got us on our way but I've never been more thankful for the knowledge of people who really know how the world works and now you never travel without a quarter right these non-academic things boy that's the kind of knowledge you need right right and I'm sure this is a trip your PhD student at the time we'll never forget as well yeah well there's another PhD student who will never forget and probably next summer driving around with me and I have a habit of getting up in the morning and do a couple of hours of birding while it was still too early and vegetation's too wet to collect beetles and then really get into collecting beetles and driving to the next site and seeing if we could find the plant and do you have that beetle that we need and I'm tendency to forget to eat oh no so damned is with me dancing great big athletic looking musky weird guy or whatever and driving along and it's four o'clock or five o'clock in the afternoon and I said can't do we have any peanut butter and bread still and he said I thought you'd never ask it has been 18 hours since we had anything and I thought you would never I wanted to see how long you could go before you thought of eating it had been baked since dinner the preview tonight it was like almost five o'clock in the afternoon anyway that's what happens when you get a little obsessed I guess you're into the work I like it well Doug we mentioned that in addition to all those wonderful research that you've done you have also written a book and I love it talking about books on our program and I know you've not only written the textbook but also a popular book for science so do you have any book recommendations or things that you're reading right now or would like to add to our listeners own reading lists well too many to name one that I would like to recommend very highway this is a book I could have written I should have written I didn't write and I would not have written as well as it is written and that is a book called why evolution is true and it's by my friend and who just recently retired from the University of Chicago Jerry Coyne C-O-Y-N-E why evolution is true and it is a short book you can get through it in a couple of hours and it is a brilliant and beautifully written description of all the various lines of evidence that overwhelmingly support the truth of evolution has happened and that all living things that we know have are descended from one form of life it's a brilliant we written book and I'd recommend excellent still within science but very far from what I know anything about I'm just recently read a book by Robert Sapolsky called Behave and I think it's called Human Nature at its best and worst or something like that and Sapolsky is a behavioral biologist at Stanford I don't know him I've never read and he was worked before but this is again a wonderful written book that talks about human behavior starting at the level of individual nerve cells and then he makes you understand more or less how the brain works and then that builds up into the things that influence our behavior and he says well the things that influence our behavior have happened with a whole bunch of different times in history first of all this evolution which is produced the brain and its properties and he talks about that and then he says secondly there is culture so we learn and we learn largely what we are taught and what we absorb from our experiences in our culture so we have both the evolved genetic component to behavior and the cultural learned behavior and then he starts talking about the role of hormones when we're faced with a situation which we both think and at the same time having emotional reactions and hormone driven reactions and comes down to then the immediate things that happen in the brain and the neurotransmitters and the connections that are being made in the brain that result in our behavior and then he carries this forward into the social realm and talks about both aspects of why we can be cooperative and altruistic and loving or on the other hand why we can be hateful and aggressive and sometimes murderous and I thought it was a brilliant book that covers behavior just across this incredible spectrum that's been my most recent enjoyable read I also read things outside the realm of science and about a year ago I finished what was at least the six year project to read in translation truths remembrance of things past the alternative then we're accurate title is in search of lost time it's very long and I have to say parts of it can be a little tedious but in its best passages there is nothing like his ability to describe emotions and to describe settings and to paint pictures of people and how they're behaving and especially how they are feeling is absolutely unparalleled reread passages again and again because of their beauty I hope that doesn't sound too pretentious no no I'd love it that's been a major part of my reading life yeah that's a six year commitment right there well he wasn't full time so it's hand trips that's gonna be the time to really sit down and read oh that's wonderful well Douglas we will add these recommendations to our list online for our listeners out there and one thing that I'd like to ask you to give our listeners today is a piece of advice and this can be one that you received along your career path that was really helpful for you or just one that you think would be really helpful for them I thought one that's gonna be relevant and one that's what life relevant best advice ever which of course I didn't take until long after it was given to me by any number of people best advice ever was stop smoking that's good advice so it's no for a number of years and I just want to say that that was the best the most important advice and I finally took it and I probably would not be alive talking to you if I haven't but in terms of career and life and profession or whatever again this is an advice that I got from older graduate students when I was a grad student and I think from my advisor and again I didn't quite follow it at first and then I realized that this is absolutely the best advice you can get and that is to engage yourself with something that you want to do follow your own curiosity follow what inspires you and follow what you love what you just find most intriguing I didn't do that for my PhD thesis research I instead did a project that I thought was important in terms of its theoretical implications for the field and the result was that I spent hours and hours and hours sitting in the lab counting for soft food supplies and I think the project was intellectually very worthwhile but the actual execution of it was basically kind of boring I mean here I was I was a naturalist I was inspired and still I'm inspired by animals and plants and the beauty of the natural world and here I was doing something that was pretty distant from that frankly I didn't enjoy it and I really only got to enjoy research and to really devote myself to when I got into these projects I'm working with the whole variety of insects and take me out into different habitats and learning different things learning different groups of insects and their peculiarities and that is something which just if you like the more enissithetic or emotional side to complement the intellectual pleasure that it gave me so my advice really is follow what excites you as I think I've said before I'm just thrilled now by the beauty and diversity of the natural world as I was when I was in high school and I still left coming out there and seeing all these birds and learning local plants and especially when I'm out birding I'm also looking at birds or insects or whatever through the lenses of what I know as an evolutionary biologist and I'm looking at something and I start thinking about how do I interpret when I'm looking at how do I interpret that bird's behavior or this insect's shape where it's morphology or its coloration or the habitat it's living in how do I think about that from my perspective as an evolutionary biologist so for me there's an aesthetic aspect and an intellectual aspect that are seamless and I think that that aesthetic aspect has enriched me and helped to motivate me as a scientist and my scientific knowledge I think really informs and helps me appreciate what I'm looking at and helps me appreciate how marvelous it is so whether your passion is writing computer software or doing mathematical models of evolution or climate change or whether it's studying neuroscience or art or music or neurobiology or whatever it might be that excites you you should follow that follow your heart and there will be a way in which your particular passion can be developed into a successful and useful career I love it well Douglas thanks so much for sharing your insights and we've talked about some of these projects that you've been so passionate about over the years during the course of our discussion but I'm curious if we gave you all of the resources you could dream of anything you could possibly need is there one big outstanding question maybe outside of our kankerworm that we talked about earlier that you are just dying to know the answer to they are a number but I think probably within the field of evolution I would say one that I still find really intriguing is there have been cases in which organisms have managed to adapt to what seems like a very different way of life a very different kind of environment in which it's a little hard to imagine what the transitional stages might have been how did you get from here to there and a classic example would be aquatic vertebrate ancestors becoming land-loving organisms how did that happen how do you make that transition in that case we do have some understanding we do have some really important fossils that show us some of the steps by which that happened but in other cases well like with my insects monarch butterflies their larvae feed on milkweeds which are really toxic you put your average insect on a milkweed plant and enforce it to eat it and it'll just drop over dead what with the stages how did a non milkweed feeding insect make the transition to feeding on this highway poison this plant that's just one example how did woodpeckers evolved here you have this organism which engages in this really energy consuming activity that takes an enormous amount of work to dig into live wood an extracted grub that seems like a really hard transition to do so there are a lot of these kinds of transitions in the history of life in which it might well be that there were just all sorts of little steps along the way that we don't know about but sometimes it's like both the behavior and the anatomy has to change together one doesn't make sense without the other the first insects that started laying eggs on milkweed their behavior had to have changed you have to have the evolutionary program if you're a monarch butterfly to find a milkweed plant to weigh your eggs on the first insect that did that laid eggs on a plant that their babies weren't adapted to they would have dropped dead because the plant's poisonous so how do these things work together it's in the realm of complex adaptations where we have a lot of information but there are still cases where I'd like to know how it happened and this is not a matter of you never know that and therefore it's unknowable and therefore science can't answer this question in other words this sort of anti-scientific chanelism that you hear from creationists but rather here are questions in which we have some understanding but not enough well Douglas you have given us a lot to ponder today so thank you for that is there any last message that you want to leave our listeners with at the end of our interview today evolution is true that's one seriously I think my most important message is this and it goes back to what I said earlier every aspect of our life depends on technology on what has been developed that is founded on biology physics chemistry geo sciences other sciences which then engineers make use of that knowledge and the result is they produce things that we absolutely depend on what that means is that that science by and large is pretty trustworthy it works if it didn't work we wouldn't be surviving right now we wouldn't have the transportation we wouldn't be talking to one another over sky right now right everything we do depends on the fact that the science works so science really is the best way to knowledge the best and the most trustworthy vehicle we have for knowing how the world works you should not pick and choose what you want to believe from what scientists say that is not to say that we know all the answers it's not to say that every scientific pronouncement is absolutely true because almost inevitably we find that we have an incomplete understanding every science continues to advance because there is still things that have almost everything that I have ever studied that every scientist is studying their aspects in which we don't know enough we're still questing but what we do know includes a lot of very firm foundations we really do know that inheritance is based on DNA for example so you can't just go around picking and choosing what scientists say that you like and what scientists say that you don't like and deciding you're going to accept the one and not the other if you do that you are making a really serious mistake right now in the United States we're continuing hearing about false facts and is this whole growing movement toward this notion that facts don't matter that we don't really know anything you can't trust anyone what do scientists know and this anti-scientific and frankly anti-truth movement that's going on some of it at the highest levels of government I think this is so dangerous I can't begin to say and this is true of course not just with respect to authoritative information coming from science but from other realms as well so there has to be some understanding that some sources of information are trustworthy others are not and to learn how to discriminate between them and among them by and large science is trustworthy and it is very important to accept and to nurture and to foster the process of science absolutely well said Douglas and such an important message to share with our listeners the world in our country today so thank you for that and thank you so much for all of your insights and all of the stories you've shared with us on the program today it's been such a pleasure to chat with you it's been a great pleasure and I really appreciate your questions and this has been very enjoyable and thank you very much absolutely and if our listeners want to learn more about you and what you do how can they get in touch probably the best would be my email address that's dfutuna dfutubyma at gmail.com perfect well listeners definitely get in touch if you have any questions for Douglas and Douglas it's been wonderful to have you on the show and listeners wonderful to have you here as well we'll see you next time on another episode people behind the science
