 Hey listeners and welcome to episode 617 of People Behind the Science. I'm your host Dr. Marie McNeely and this week's episode we are introducing you to Dr. Jim Hutspith by sharing our interview originally broadcast on June 26th of 2015. listeners if you haven't met Jim yet this is an interview you definitely don't want to miss. Jim's research examines the neural mechanisms of hearing and he is working on developing new treatments for hearing loss. He is a pioneer in the field and he was the first to propose that our sense of hearing relies on eye and channels that are open by mechanical forces. This hypothesis has been fundamental in furthering our understanding of the mechanisms of hearing. So listeners we hope you enjoy learning more about Jim's life and research in this episode of People Behind the Science. Every day discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNeely is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone and welcome to another episode of People Behind the Science. I am thrilled to be here today with Dr. Jim Hadsbith. So Jim welcome to our show today. How are you? You just print back to you. Wonderful. We'll great to hear and I'm excited to introduce you to our listeners. So listeners just a little bit about Jim before we get started. Jim is the FM Kirby professor at the Rockefeller University and he leads the laboratory of sensory neuroscience there. In addition, Jim is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigator. He received his bachelor's degree in biochemistry as well as his MDM PhD from Harvard University. And afterward, Jim completed a postdoctoral fellowship at the Carolyn Skate Institute in Sweden. Jim has since served on the faculty at the California Institute of Technology, the University of California San Francisco, and the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center before joining the faculty at Rockefeller where he is today. Jim has received many awards and honors including the Charles A.D. N. Award for pioneering achievements in health and the W. Alden Spencer Award from the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons. Additionally, he is a recipient of the Ralph W. Gerard prize from the Society for Neuroscience, the K.S. Cole Award in Membering Biophysics from the Biophysical Society, the award for merit from the Association for Research and Oedalair Inology, as well as the guide prize from the University of Grunogen. Now, Jim is also a member of the National Academy of Sciences and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. And listeners, Jim is here with us today to give us a behind the scenes look and tell us about his journey through life and science. So Jim, today we are looking forward to getting to know more about you, your story, and your science. So can you start by telling us what you like to do when you're not doing science? Well, first of all, I'm usually doing science. So the problem does not often arise. But by virtual living in New York City, I have a huge number of options here. I'm very much of a visual person. So I take advantage of the Metropolitan Museum, the Noyer Gallery, the Museum of Modern Art, and various other venues that are around town. Just living in New York is itself something of an experience. I think everybody knows who's visited. So my wife and I often go to a theater or simply enjoy the city of Good Vestron in the life. Well, that sounds phenomenal. I know I've only been to New York once in my life and it was absolutely an experience. It's hard to take it all in when I was only there for a week, so. One of the comments about it that surprised me. It's very different living here than visiting here. I was always terrified when visiting because it's so big, so busy. It's almost overwhelming, yeah. Exactly. But when one is living here, you basically are living in a small town because we took our car out behind the barn and shot it. We didn't need it anymore. And we do everything on foot. And my wife, who has recently taken up measuring the distance in the Spanish, she walked seven or eight miles a day. Oh, wow. Yeah, it's routine. And I walk to and from work every day and visit other things on the way. So as a consequence, one is living in a little town. You walk to place, you know the forest, you know the butcher, the baker, everybody else nearby. And it makes it a much more humanizing experience than one appreciates when you're thrown down, say, at a hotel in Times Square. Right. That's exactly where I said hotel in Times Square. So, well, wonderful to hear a little bit about your city and your experiences there. And next, I want to hear about your science. So Jim, I want you to tell us how you describe what you do to someone who's not in science. Sure. So first and foremost, I work on hearing. And I think the important aspect of that is why I work on hearing. And there are really two different answers, depending on who one is talking to. For most people, the obvious answer is that 10% of our population have hearing problems. So that's 30 million people in the United States. And it's estimated to be at least 300 million people worldwide. Yeah, it's an enormous problem. And we of course all know people who have hearing problems, some of the listeners will. I certainly am developing some. There are a lot of causes for them. There are more than 300 genes that affect hearing adversely exposure to various loud sounds, which is common in the workplace and military settings with over loud music and so on. That can damage the year. There are a bunch of legitimate drugs drugs that are needed for severe infections or for say, ovarian cancer. Both can affect the cells of the inner air and devastated. And we tend to lose our hearing with age, a phenomenon called Presby Accuses, the hearing of old men. So as a consequence of all those things, our society suffers a great deal from this. And the numbers are hard to pin down, but it's been estimated that this costs us $80 billion a year in terms of lost work opportunities, special education, medical diagnosis, operations, so on. It's a big deal. That is huge. Yeah. So that's one of the major motivations. I actually went to medical school and then the course of that got interested in the fact that there was such a large impact. And actually so little we can do about it. The cells in our ears will talk about later, where out I get damaged with age. And they don't regenerate. So once they're lost, they're lost for good. So we have the same problems that we have with brain cells or with heart cells that they're not ordinarily regenerated. And therefore we tend to lose our capacity to our life. The other motivation I have and the other thing I tell people is really just a matter of curiosity about the remarkable things that your does and just to mention three of them quickly. One is that we can hear such high frequencies. It's routine first to hear 20 color. So that's 20,000 cycles a second. And if you think of something like the eye, you know that if you look at a motion picture or at television, you're seeing images repeated 20 or 30 times a second, but you don't see the discontinuity. And yet somehow the ear operates a thousand times that fast. The second point is that the ear is sensitive to vibrations right down to the level of the water molecules sloshing around inside. So we can actually hear everything down to the noise that's produced by thermal motion in the ear. And finally our ear can handle sounds all the way from zero decibels, which is about the threshold to about a hundred and twenty decibels, which would be something like a jet plane taking off on the runway. That's a million fold range in the amplitude of the sound or a trillion fold into the twelfth range in the power of the sound. So it's an enormously broad range and I'm curious about how this comes about and many of the people I've discussed this with are also curious how can this be done? Definitely. Well, I love how you described a lot of these factors that motivate you that really got you into this field. The curiosity just in general to answer some of these questions, but also the desire to help people with hearing problems and the fascination with the auditory system. I think you mentioned a lot of these little tidbits, these facts that I had no idea. And I'm a neuroscientist and have sort of studied this peripherally. So very interesting and I'm excited to chat more about your research as we go through the interview. But first I want to hear about some of the people who perhaps motivated you or inspired you to pursue this field or helped you along your journey. So can you share with us some of your role models? Those go way back and I think the early role models are very, very important to divert just a second. My father's an attorney and when I was a kid, I worked some weekends and certainly thumbers in his law office. And it was horrible. I hated my papers and the dressing off the loaf and so on. I knew from the get-go that I didn't want to be in that kind of work. I did the summer office job as well and struggled. Yeah. Okay. So I did this for several summers and then finally ask if you know can I do something different? I'm willing to work, I work hard, but I'd always been a scientist. Certainly by the time I was five, I was already collecting rocks, fossils, insects. The time I went to college, I had more than 200 pets, all kinds of wild animals that I had accumulated in our backyard. That's amazing. So I knew I wanted to do science and so my first major role model was a gentleman named Peter Callaway who was an electro-inthephylographer at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston. And my father happened to know him so he apprenticed me to him when I was 13 years old. That first summer that I worked at Baylor. And that was wonderful. I mean, I immediately fell into electrophysiology measuring electrical signals from the brain and I loved it and I spent years there doing histology, making electrodes, helping with various kinds of recordings and so on. He was also a remarkable role model because he was not a fun guy. He was a very serious individual and absolutely devoted to doing top notch clinical work. He was the world's expert, I think, on juvenile, on children, electro-inthephylograms, but also get work for NASA and others. But it was all of just impeccable quality. He said a very, very high standard and so I'm sure that did me some good as a rebellious and rather difficult child. Still, it felt straight me out of it. That was certainly one. And then I was very fortunate in graduate school to have had four individuals who were important role models. Three of them associated with each other. I went to graduate school at Harvard Medical School. And just at the time I was there, Steven Kufler had come from Johns Hopkins to Harvard. And he was an individual who was really the first person to put together a neuroscience or a neurobiology department. It was a new thing at that time. The field was just emerging. So he had attracted several people, including two postdoctoral fellows of his who became professors, namely David Hubell and Farsten Beesle, who went on to end the Nobel Prize. And that was an exceptional environment to be in. Kufler was a consummate experimentalist who was just curious about everything. And he was also wonderfully naive. He would ask, the most remarkable stupid questions in seminars and the like, which for a young graduate student was very refreshing because of course I was largely terrified of everybody around me in graduate. Right. You're afraid to raise your hand and ask questions? Yeah, exactly. One feels that one will sound foolish. But Steve, who was perhaps the brightest one of all, was also the most foolish in the questions he would ask. And he would ask very naive questions. But occasionally a naive question that was so insightful that you would see the air go out of the speaker. I mean, he could deflate accidentally a very pretentious presentation because he would see something very much at the base of the presentation that was fundamentally wrong that the speaker and others in the audience simply hadn't appreciated. So he really went at things with this childlike naivety, which was made him really a very successful, really great scientist. Jubilant Weasel, as I said, went on to an Nobel Prize for their work on the visual system. They were both, again, very strongly experimental types. They didn't spend much time on administration, on talking, on teaching or doing anything else, but they stayed in the laboratory and they worked very hard. So they were excellent role models in that sense. They didn't give much advice to me as a student. And I initiated 13 different thesis problems and eventually published something on I believe eight of them. Oh, wow. I was all over the map. I mean, it was really right. I think a lot of our listeners can relate to that. Three range graduate career. Yeah, it was embellished by the Vietnam War, which made the entire experience much more pecan because it was the sense that if anything went wrong, one would be shipped overseas. Gotcha. So this kept me working harder. In any case, the two of them were an extraordinary part role model. And the fourth individual was Jean Paul Rovel, who was an electron microscopist who worked in a Jason laboratory downstairs in the anatomy department. And unlike before going, he did take an interest in me and spent a good deal of time teaching me electron microscopy, which I still do, and I'll be doing as soon as I hang up. And just giving me a good perspective on how to think like a cell. That was what he said. It was what he called. I like that phrase. Think like a cell. It really worked. I was able to sort of adopt that. And it's been a useful way to continue one's career. You can begin to understand psychoanalyses and figure out what they're up to by just applying that simple rule. So those four were the most important. Well, Jim, fantastic to hear about some of these role models. And really interesting to hear about your experiences really at the birth of the field of neuroscience and getting in at the ground floor and being able to work with some really phenomenal scientists along the way. Now, we've heard a little about these role models. And I'm curious to back up a little bit and hear about your beginnings in science. So you mentioned that as a kid, you were a big fan of collecting rocks and fossils and you had quite a number of pets. What was the first inkling or the first memory that you had that you were becoming interested in these things are interested in science in general? It's hard to point to a first memory. I had the fortune of living in Houston, Texas when it was still a small town and hadn't been paved. And we also backed on to a large park that's still there. It's called Memorial Park and it's the biggest natural park in Houston. So my brother and I would wander over there after school almost every day. And we were quite naive about what we were doing. We would simply run across various creatures. And then we would try to get books. This was of course pre-web in the like to find out what these creatures were and how to take care of them. So we began bringing somethings home. After a while we had raccoons, dogs, ducks, crow, mini reptiles, poisonous snakes, non-poisoned snakes. Is it incredible? Did your parents support this habit or did they not know about it? They more or less supported it. We have spit-pies back yard. The main thing we had with turtles, there were box turtles in Houston. It happens to be a species that's somewhat unusual. So we brought home a few of those and then we brought home a few more and a few more and then they began breeding. So we became net exporters of box turtles. It turned out that we could go to grocery stores and after meeting the people there we got permission to romance through the garbage bin. And in this country as you know there's a lot of pretty good looking food that goes out in the garbage. So we were bringing broken watermelons and bruised peaches and whatever. The turtles were ecstatic. And after a while there was a cyclone fence or bound the area. After a while turtles showed up outside the fence trying to get in. They could see a good thing inside. So we eventually repatriated all these turtles and the new barn ones to the adjacent park. So I hope they and their descendants are still thriving there now. So anyway this goes way back. The other story that I'm told, which I don't recall, was that my parents said that when I was a kid, when I was about five, they noticed that I knew where all the wild animals around the house or around the yard were. So if they ask about the toad, I could say, well the toad will be over here. It's two o'clock in the afternoon and it two o'clock the toad goes over to this place. And at such and such a time, the flying squirrels which they had around there would be over here and the other animals would be over there. So I had just naturally noticed where all these things were, which I thought was perfectly normal. Right. It's very impressive that animal behavior. Yeah. Exactly. So I sort of blended it into that. So my brother, who's a few years younger, he's just retiring as a professor in ecology at the University of Vermont. So he stayed on that natural path two hours career and it benefited him very well. Wonderful. Well, great to hear about some of these stories from your past that really got you started on the path towards science towards examining the world around you a little more closely. And I think this curiosity is something that a lot of scientists point to you in their early years is maybe one of the hints that they were going down this path toward a career in science. But I want to hear more about this path. So can you tell us what took you from this curious kid all the way to where you are today? I know you've had a lot of steps in the midst of that, but can you share some of these key pivotal points in your career that you think really propelled you forward? Sure. Let me first though back up just a second to address the point you just made, which is that I think a lot of us maybe most scientists or born scientists, they come with a particular set of traits, not all beneficial traits, but particularly the curiosity. I mean, just a real need or will desire to understand how things work. And so I like many other kids of that sort took apart everything that I could lay my hands on as a kid. What's your parents to grin? I was something like eight. I forget exactly when when they first remarked that it actually fixed something instead of just breaking it worse. I'd finally turned the clock and was beginning to produce something useful from it. But this university like many others has an annual science outreach presentation, which we just had this last Saturday, ours is called Science Saturday. And we had a thousand kids on campus and back kids, I mean down to kindergarten, who came just because they and their parents wanted to see science. So we did demonstrations with magnets, neuro fibers, electric fishes, all kinds of things in our group, a total of 50 something demonstrations by the whole university. And I think that's really an important thing. I mean, kids at that stage don't have much of a sense of what science really is. And I remember as a kid going to Rice University, where my father taught in part and seeing a snapping turtle's heart, beating in a jar. And these hearts would beat in fact for several days after excision, just in a nutrient medium. And that was amazed by this. I was really hooked by the phenomenon. And I think these kids who visited this week were at the same experience. Definitely. I think reinforcing got very early curiosity is really important. So in my case, I did some of that myself and with my brother, just because we shared this interest in natural history, that took me all the way through college, just with the obsession with various animals and with taking care of and breeding them and so on. In college, I was fairly terrified. I was actually a very shy person. So I was thought to be learning disabled when I was in second grade, because I wouldn't talk. And it took actually promoting me to the third grade and sort of stimulating me to get me to talk a little bit, but all the way through college, I was basically working very hard and doing very little than academics. So I sort of got out of touch with natural history and the like during that period. But towards the end of that, I began to have opportunities to do research and did summer research programs at Harvard Medical School and elsewhere. So that kept the flame alive. And I was then very, very excited to be able to go to graduate school and to get into such a good place as I did. As you said, what turned out to be a very exciting time in the field? Absolutely. Well, I think you brought up so many great points here, Jim. I love this idea of the up close hands-on experiences for children. And I think that's so important today to really encourage that curiosity, cultivate that scientific way of thinking in kids, even if they don't choose to go down to path and science. I think just getting people to think like scientists is going to be so helpful for future generations. So I love to hear that you're getting involved in that effort. It's very important to reinforce it. And it also is something in which I think our society is just overcoming sort of a sexual stereotype, right? The idea is girls used to be told, well, this is Jackie, you don't want to do it. Our mathematics is too hard. A la Barbie. And that's changed now. I mean, we have four more girls and young women who maintain their interests in science than don't feel that it's nerdish and the like. And now in college, of course, the more females than males and now in graduate school, we're seeing the same thing. So I think this sort of grassroots change in the attitudes towards hands-on science and keeping alive that interest is really had a big effect there as well. Absolutely. Well, wonderful to hear a little bit about your past, Jim. And I want to hear next about your present. So can you share with us one of these projects that you're working on right now that you are the most excited to be a part of? There are two broad areas we're working on. But the unexpected thing about hearing, unexpected by me and by everybody else is that it turns out the ear isn't just a passive recipient of sound. Instead, the ear has then it's something called the active process. It has a built-in amplifier or if you will, a built-in hearing aid. And this is unique among our senses in the sense that the ear has positive feedback. It takes sound signals in and it actually augments them by adding energy to them so that what finally reaches the sector cells is a stronger signal than that which began. So it gradually emerged over several decades that this is the case. And we've been working for, I'd say, the last 15 years on trying to figure out the mechanism of this. How is it that sounds that go in our ear get amplified and have other processing done to them? The same active process helps tune our hearing so that we're more acutely aware of differences in frequency. That's very important in our ability to understand different voices, to recognize various natural sounds and so on. And the other thing that this active process does is to implement what's called compressive non-linearity. What that means is it squeezes a huge range of intensities of sound. The trillion-fold range in power that I mentioned before. It squeezes that down just about a hundred-fold range in the output, say in the mirrorfiber which comes in. So all three of those things, the amplification, the tuning, and the non-linearity, really are part in parcel of what is so special about our hearing and why it's so effective. So we're trying to figure out how that works. Very interesting. So what type of approaches do you use to attack these problems? Are you looking more cellular, molecular, genetics, sorts of things? Or what type of approaches do you use on a daily basis? This work is almost all what I would call biophysics. And the reason for this is it's a unique process. We know something about the proteins and the genes involved in it, but it's fundamentally a physical process. You have a situation that's like an amplifier in which a sound goes in. And then this apparatus mechanically amplifies the sound so that the vibrations in the ear are many times bigger, say a hundred times bigger than they would otherwise be. So to say more about that, I have to divert a second just to say something about how so-called transduction works in the ear. How sound gets turned into an electrical signal. Basically, the cells that you would are called hair cells, they're hairy in the sense that each of them has a tiny cluster of filaments protruding from its top called the hair bundle. And when found comes in, it actually vibrates that hair bundle just like a tuning fork. And the hairs have fine filamentous connections between them that are attached to ion channels. So when these little hairs move, the channels open and close and let's electrical current flow into the cell and set up an electrical signal. Now that whole apparatus, it turns out, also has a power source. It has cellular energy in the form of ATP. And that ATP is used by a form of myosin, just like the myosin that we have that makes our muscles contract. So that myosin actually helps wiggle this little hair bundle back and forth. So it's a little bit as if you have something like a tuning fork with a power source built into it. A very weak vibration causes the tuning fork to vibrate a bit. And then this power source amplifies that input before it's processed by the rest of the year. I should say that this amplifier is also what goes bad when we become hard of hearing. Many you know, most people don't become deaf overnight. They gradually lose their hearing until only about 1% of it is left. And in effect, they have had the amplifier burn out. So they still have the rudimentary hearing that they've lost the high quality hearing that is implemented by the presence of this amplification. Certainly. Well, I think it is fascinating to hear more about the sophisticated machinery that's incorporated in these really physical processes involved in our sensory experience on a daily basis. So wonderful to hear more detail about the work that you're doing now. And I think so far, Jim, we've talked about all the high points, a lot of the great things that have happened in your career, in your journey through science. But I think every scientist has dark days as well. So we like to bring those to our listeners attention. So they know what to expect and have a more realistic picture of perhaps of what the life of a scientist is. Since I think oftentimes the successes are what's highlighted in the media and what they see. So can you tell us about one of these challenges that you've faced or even a failure that you've had along the way and how you got through it? Sure. So I can talk first about minor problems and secondly about major ones. But I think one thing that really is important for people to understand about science in general and it really isn't taught is that science is mostly failure. You go to the lab every day and you try and experiment that you into it might be interesting. And of course it doesn't work and you go back the next day and it doesn't work again and it doesn't work again. You have to get used to the failure. You have to get used to the failure and it's not a negligible thing because there's some people who are very bright and do brilliantly on tests and so on who don't have that high threshold pain and they don't do well as scientists because they can't tolerate this. And the other thing that happens of course is when an experiment finally does work you write a paper and publish it and then you start doing something else that promptly fails. So you've been through this yourself. You spend a very small time. It's a short lived happiness. That's right. You may have one bottle of champagne and take a day off and you're back to failing again. So I would say first everybody should understand this because some people when they first confront it get really daunted. They think the problem is with them that they're doing something wrong. The fact that they failed indicates they're not good scientists. But on the other hand it's quite the opposite. If you're a good scientist you fail a lot because you're trying to do things that haven't been done and that people don't know how to do. If you don't fail pretty regularly then you're doing something wrong. They're not trying hard enough. Right. And this is true. These role models I've mentioned before these people all had a lot of ups and downs because they were doing truly novel science. So that's the mundane failure. I guess in my own life the low point in my career was an administrator fund. I was for a while chairman of the department in neuroscience. I went to a university that remained nameless but it's in the southwestern United States. And when I was there I was lured by the opportunity to attract a lot of scientists who I thought were very good with professorships and other embellishments that might provoke them in the coming. But when I got there in fact all of these things turned out to be a looser. They simply did not provide the resources that I had asked for or that had been promised in writing. So this is very devastating. You devote your career to teaching and to trying to build up good programs and then discover that this has all been undermined by inappropriate behavior on other people's parts. So it was a very great blow that really stopped me for several years. In fact I was moved by a rather unpleasant administrator to an office in the basement of the building next to the morgue where the bodies for gross anatomy were kept. So just. Oh yikes. Yeah, this seems like an invitation to leave which I took. So I was very fortunate to have the opportunity to move up here to Rockefeller and I'm very appreciative of people who rescued me. And also of Howard Hughes Medical Institute which I joined during that same rather low point. So that has been a great boost to my career since then. So I don't recommend that experience at all. Certainly. So how did you navigate it? I think oftentimes scientists find themselves in these sticky almost political situations within departments that they were not prepared for going into it. So how did you work around that and get through it? Well, I was just depressed. What can I say? You're right. It is a political situation. And scientists aren't particularly well equipped for that. Scientists are I think and should be as much as possible naive. Right? The whole just of science is to have an open mind and try to approach basic issues of what's going on in nature with as little prejudice and as little prior opinion as possible. So we're not well equipped. I think constitutively to be manipulated by let's say jerks as I was. So there was which I could do except focus on the science and hope to get out of there. Gotcha. Well, thank you so much for sharing one of these situations where you were in a tough spot in your career and we're talking about some of the just daily mundane things that happen in the career of a scientist. I think you're absolutely right. These failures happen regularly. These challenges these struggles happen regularly. They're part of the career and you have to be prepared to face them and you have to have some sort of burning passion desire to continue in the field of science to have that curiosity to keep moving you forward to get through it. I think sometimes that's exactly right. Yeah, the curiosity is what makes it all go. So you can put up with a lot of this if you have the sense that there is a hope of understanding things and if you were strongly motivated enough to make it happen. Right. The other analogy with this is with art, right? I mean, the fundamental experience of an artist is one of failure. There's something out there that you want to get on the canvas or that you want to put in an instrument. You can't find that thing or just grow about it. And again, successful art has never quite gets there. An unsuccessful artist paints the same thing over and over. Definitely. Well, I love that analogy and I think we don't just want to talk about your tough times, Jim. Although I think it's so helpful to share these experiences. I also like to share the successes, the high points, some of the best moments in scientists career. So can you tell us, Jim, about one of your successes? And it can be one of these big successes or even just a little victory along the way that really excited you. I guess the particular thing that excited me the most was at the beginning of this story about the act of process and the era. We were trying to figure out how to assimilate a bunch of observations that other people had made that all hinted that there was something special going on there. But this was dozens and dozens or even hundreds of observations spread around by as many papers by many, many authors. And so it didn't cohere. At some point in collaboration in part with another professor here, Marcel O'Manyasco, we realized that all of this stuff cohere and it cohere in a particular way. There's a thing called a hop bifurcation. It's simply a mathematical description of a particular relationship in nature. And let me tell you what a bifurcation is. A bifurcation is simply a qualitative of large change in the behavior of a system. As one tunes a single parameter, you turn a particular knob and all of a sudden something changes radically. And an obvious example, which is a hop bifurcation, is if you're in an auditorium and somebody begins to turn up the PA system, it gets louder and louder and louder. But then there's a bifurcation. A sudden change in it begins to screech to roar. The thing has gone unstable because of the positive feedback. It turns out that the ear operates just that same way. The active process sensitizes the ear so that if you're in a very quiet environment, the system gets more and more and more sensitive. If you go into a sound chamber, something gets totally quiet, human ears will actually begin to misound. 70% of us have at least one ear that will put sound out because the system has gone so unstable that it's gone over this bifurcation and it's begun to actually misound rather than to absorb. Interesting. So the realization that all of this stuff fit together and that there was a simple mathematical way to look at it was really shocking and rather wonderful to me anyway. Well, this sounds like an incredible experience. Looking at this pile of puzzle pieces on the table, almost, and then suddenly being able to see the picture saying how they all fit together. And I think these are the moments scientists live for. So how did you celebrate once you had this success, Jim? We voted down and started failing again. That's all you got right. No, in fact, it isn't something that happens in a day because we are still fighting with people in the field trying to convince that this is the case. I think the evidence continues to pile up. But it's not something that you can point to and say, okay, this is definitive. It's now absolutely proven. It's always the case in science, right? That you invalidate a theory or you can not falsify it. But there never comes a day where you can say, this is absolutely clear now. It's absolutely known. So we've had a number of celebrations along the way as we put the pieces of the puzzle together, but there's no single day in which all of a sudden everything was totally clear. Definitely. I think as our ability to discern more and more detail on the processes in our bodies in the natural world becomes better. I think we sort of keep rewriting our quote-unquote facts in science. So a great point there. I mean, it's something that rather amazes me when you think about it that all of the great scientific discoveries of the past we take for granted and somehow we can learn them all. You would think our brains would eventually get full or that it would reach a point at which you catacomalate everything that Newton learned and everything that Kepler learned and everything that Watson and Quick learned and everything else. And yet we're very good as a species that somehow condensing out the essence of those discoveries so that you know a little bit a few key equations say three from Newton and a few from Kepler and so on. And that's all you really need to know. So this goes on all the time. We keep distilling down. We've learned to find or infine or detail until only the very key points are left. Absolutely. Well, Tim, wonderful to hear more about your research and some of the work you've done over the course of your career. And I think every scientist is so busy with the work that they do that they don't often have a ton of free time as you alluded to when we first started this interview. You don't have a ton of time when you're not actually doing science. But I think one of the things that scientists do to occupy this little bit of time that they have is they end up reading. And whether it's scientific literature or books about science or perhaps escape a little bit into the fiction world can you share with us, Jim, something that you've read recently and really enjoyed? Oh, let's see. I read regularly and a lot. I read about a book a week. So I have to stop them thing. A book a week is very impressive. My wife and I have both been reading the Hillary Mantell Wolf Hall and bringing up the bodies because those are also the subject of a play now in New York City. And there's a PBS or BBC presentation on TV. So we've been reviewing those two because there I don't know if you've seen those or not. I haven't. The television in particular is acted by Mark Rylance who's superb. So we wanted to sort of revisit the source from which that was taken. Before that, I have read a number of novels. I guess the circle, not too long back, which is an interesting take on modern technological companies and where they're taking us. The sense of an ending, which is a sort of personal tale from Britain and did various nonfiction books actually book my stole that on nonlinear systems and chaos, which deals with the issues of health, biophirications and things like that. So I tend to read anything that comes my way. Well, excellent book recommendations. I'll put those out on our website for our listeners to find in case they are searching for their next book. And now that we know what's on your bookshelf, Jim, I want to know about the stamps in your passport. I think scientists get so many opportunities to travel as part of the career. I want to hear about your favorite place that you've been to. I guess the favorite was an opportunity a year and a half ago to visit Japan to give a series of lectures in Nigata. Nigata is a smaller town on the west coast of Japan. So it's on the sea of Japan if you use the Japanese term. The Koreans don't like that. Nigata is the sake capital of the world. It throws wonderful rice, which is used in the next sake. So that's the major embellishment. And it has wonderful seafood as a result of the sea of Japan, which has many exotic species. That you don't find anywhere else. But the real pleasure there is not only the wonderful city, but the opportunity to interact with medical students and graduate students there to give a whole series of lectures. I think I did 11 and my wife did five over a period of nearly two weeks. So it was much more than the usual fly and fly out sort of behavior. Right. And it was nice because we actually began to know the people who we were speaking because we saw them again and again. And the students in particular got over their shyness and the language barrier that we faced and became very comfortable with asking questions and the like. So that was the great pleasure. Japan is a wonderful place to visit. I think wherever one goes. Well, it sounds like an excellent experience. I know Japan is on my list of places to go. I'm curious though. You mentioned there are a lot of exotic seafood species. What is the perhaps most exotic thing that you ate while you were there? So you can't get it here. It's called Notoguro, which is a wonderful deep water fish. It just has a unique taste. But I would say the most prevalent thing, which is more exotic, is a lot of codfish testicles and ovaries. Interesting. Overs for breakfast, testicles for lunch and dinner every day. Were they good? Oh, yeah, it's wonderful. All right. Well, listeners, if you ever make it out that way, you'll have to definitely try the codfish testicles and ovaries. So put that on the menu. And Jim, wonderful to hear about your travel experiences. And I love highlighting these opportunities that scientists get to travel for science. And I think there are so many great opportunities out there. It's one of the things that really draws people to the career. And we don't just want to talk about your travel experiences. You mentioned when you were there in Japan, one of the great things about the trip was being able to work with the people. And I think the people you encounter in your path as a scientist are phenomenal. And I know there are stereotypes out there about what scientists are like. But I've come across so many counter examples to these stereotypes that I really like to highlight this human side of science. So can you share with us today maybe one of your own memories of the human or the lighter side of science or one of these fun traditions that you've experienced in your career? I think one thing that again, people don't think much about building into a scientific career, which turns out to be a major embellishment. It's just as you said, the human aspect of it. When one becomes moderately expert in any given area, you suddenly find that you have colleagues all around the world. Whatever the field happens to be, you are now part of a culture of educated men and women who are knowledgeable about that subject and interested in talking about it, interested in learning what you have to say about it. This doesn't matter what the particular subject is, and it doesn't matter what country you go to. So all of a sudden you find you have dozens or hundreds of friends whom you never would have anticipated. And it's very different from many other careers. If you're in business and you're selling a product or whatever, the people else while around the world are out to get you. We are in a competitive relationship. Those are competitors. Yeah. And there's of course competition and science, but there's much more of an altruistic interest in interacting, particularly because I guess it's the sense of the rising tide lifting all boats that if I go to Japan and talk to a person there who's normally a competitor, he or she is going to give me ideas that may help my research and vice versa. So both parties will benefit from an equitable exchange of comments and ideas. So it's different from the career in business and it's a big plus. So I don't have any particular incidents to single out. I would just say that I've had a wonderful time with colleagues from abroad also coming here. New York City is very attractive to Europeans because it's the capital world. It is the place to go for a lot of them. Yeah. I mean, for many Europeans and for many Japanese and so on, the only American cities that remind them of Europe or Japan or home or New York, maybe San Francisco and Boston. It's much easier to attract people to those three cities. So in our group at any given time, right now we have two Russians. We recently had the Ukrainian, somebody from Colombia. We have one from Argentina. We have two Germans. We have had several colleagues from France. It's constantly changing and that's also very stimulating. It's also wonderful that all these people work together. We have, at any given time, almost surely some people from countries that are still in war with each other. It never shows here. People have done them. They're family and they're interested in the science and everybody gets along very well. This also has accumulated effect. As one gets older in the field, you know more and more such people and more and more postdocs and students have come to the lab from around the world. So at this point, almost anywhere I go, there are people who I want to see and who I hope want to see be. Well, Jim, I think you brought up so many great points about really the international and collaborative aspects of the scientific enterprise. And I think you're absolutely right as you progress through your career, your network just kind of keeps on growing and growing and expanding across the globe, making friends, colleagues, collaborators all along the way as you go. And great to hear about your experiences in your own laboratory, being able to cultivate in this international environment, have people coming in from a lot of different places and working together. I think that's so helpful for bringing in new ideas as well. So wonderful to hear about that. And now, Jim, we've talked a little bit about your research and some of the work that you've done over the course of your career. But my next question is, what is your unanswered question? If we gave you everything, Jim, if things like funding and staff and technology and feasibility, most of these restrictions and science, we're not a problem. What would you be answering today? So that really goes back to the other major project that we're working on now. And this project is not so far along. But like many others in this field, I would like to understand better what we can do about fixing hearing problems. The hair cells, the sensory receptors of the ear, as I mentioned, are not replaced by mitosis or cell division. So when they're lost, they're lost. And we all tend gradually to lose, particularly the higher frequency cells throughout life. And as we get older, ours were exposed to loud noises or certain diseases or drugs, we become progressively less able to hear it. Eventually, hard of hearing are completely dead. So there's been great advance in the field within the last few decades, which is the development of the so-called cochlear prosthesis, the implant into the cochlea, which is an electric device that stimulates the nerve fibers even after the sensory receptor cells have died. And they're now something like 300,000 of these worldwide in use. Oh, wow. I didn't realize there was that many. It's going enormously. And they're extremely effective. But they have drawbacks. The main drawback is they cost something on the order of $50,000 with surgery and so on. And they are not applicable everywhere in the world. I mean, if you have $50,000 and are living in New York, that's fine. But in the third world, for example, these are well out of reach. So it's desirable to find sort of therapy for hearing loss that's much more general. And the holy grail is finding a way of regenerating the dead cell, the hair cells. It turns out that other animals that are non-mammalian can do this readily. So in fish, in amphibians, and in reptiles, including birds. If you kill off the hair cells with drugs or a loud sound, they grow back over a period of a few days to a few weeks. And the ear becomes more or less normal again. So somehow mammals have lost that capacity. And our hope is to restore. So our group uses two experimental systems. We do some work in zebrafish, which, as you know, where dime store size fish, it can be raised in very large numbers like fruit flies. So they're sort of the fruit fly with a backbone. They're the worker put model system for doing genetics and some kinds of developmental biology. And we have another person in a group working with mice asking some of our questions. And at both cases, what we're trying to do is to interrogate the cells that give rise to hair cells, either in the adult fish or in the juvenile mouse and ask what messages are those cells sending? What genes are turned on in those cells? What genes are necessary for the cells to divide? Make two new cells, which are hair cells or one of which is a hair cell. The hope is, of course, then that we could find some way of recapitulating that in an adult human that we would be able to go back and turn on the developmental program and get at least one set of cells to divide to make one more round of hair cells and replace the missing. Wonderful question. And great to hear about the progress that your lab is making, closing in on this tantalizing possibility of being able to restore our own hair cells and thus restore hearing. I think this is phenomenal work. So great to hear about one of these big questions that's still in your mind that you guys are working towards. And Jim, I know along your career as a scientist, you not only get to work on these phenomenal research questions, but you also get a lot of great advice from the people you encounter along the way. So Jim, I would love to close our interview with one last piece of advice or maybe one piece of inspiration that you could share with our listeners. I'm not long an inspiration. I think the key thing is to keep on keeping on. As you said before, curiosity is what makes it all go. And I think the curiosity is precious. Once or twice along the way, I've nearly had that squeeze out of me. I've simply been too tired, too depressed, with all of the mechanics of going through research and sort of lost sight of what makes it all go. And backing away from it and restoring that curiosity, I think, is key. So what I would say is keep curious. Fantastic advice. Keep curious listeners. And if you are in a downturn in your motivation, your inspiration, just keep that curiosity going. Fantastic advice. Now Jim, can you tell our listeners how they can reach out and get in touch with you or learn more about your work? The easiest way is to go to the website of Rockefeller University. That's easily accessed. And there there are ages for each of the investigators here. So you can simply look me up there. That has a series of vignettes of different research projects we've been working on lately. And it also has some graphic material that describes the various things going on in the year. So I would recommend that. Fantastic. Well, listeners, definitely check out the website. See what else Jim's lab is up to. And Jim, thank you so much for joining us today in sharing a piece of your story. It's been a pleasure speaking with you. Thank you. It has been a delight for me as well. And thank you listeners for joining us. We'll see you next time on another episode of People Behind the Science. Your voyage to the lives of today's exceptional scientists has just begun. You can find everything we talked about today, including our guests favorite books, biographies, photos, and more. When you visit us at www.peoplebehindtheScience.com. I look forward to seeing you next time on People Behind the Science.