Hey everyone, this is Dr. Marie McNally, welcoming you to episode 158 of People Behind the Science. Our wonderful guest today is Dr. Mark Martin. I appreciate you joining me today and we have an excellent show on the way. Now a quick note here, if you are looking for a great book to read, you can check out what our guests are recommending in these interviews. We're keeping a list on our website at www.peoplebehindtheScience.com slash resources. Also just a reminder, you can find us on Twitter at PVT Science or you can send a tweet to me at PhD Marie. We're also out there on Facebook and you can send us a message via email at contact at people behindtheScience.com. Alright everyone, it is time for our show and I know Mark has some phenomenal insights to share with us today. So get ready to meet another one of our exceptional people behind the science. Every day discoveries are made that will change our understanding of the world around us. Dr. Marie McNally is here to bring you the brilliant minds who are making these discoveries so they can share their incredible stories and take you on an amazing journey. Welcome to People Behind the Science. Hello everyone and welcome to another episode of People Behind the Science. I am excited to be here today with Dr. Mark Martin. So welcome to the show Mark, how you doing today? Oh I'm doing fine, how about you? I am fantastic, I'm excited to be here and I'm excited to tell our listeners all about you. This is Mark, a professor of biology at the University of Puget Sound. He received his PhD in biological sciences from Stanford University and then completed post-doctoral training at the University of California San Diego. Afterward, Mark worked in the biotech industry for several years. He then spent some time as a science fiction writer before accepting a teaching position at Occidental College in LA where he worked for about 10 years before he joined the faculty where he is now at the University of Puget Sound. Today Mark is here with us to tell us all about his journey through life and science. So Mark, today we want to get to know you, both as a scientist but also as a person. So can you take a few minutes here to tell us what you like to do with your time when you're not doing science? Well, science is very much a part of my life. I mean the fiction that I used to write with science fiction, although don't tell anyone I also used to write ghost stories too. It's our little secret now. I like Halloween and Edgar Allan Poe and all that good stuff. And we get HP Lovecraft. But to get to your point, I am the father of a 13 year old and a 10 year old, they will shortly be 14 and 11 respectively. And so most of my time is spent with a bull whip and a chair as they negotiate the boiling rapids of testosterone and adolescence. They are sweet, sweet boys and it's a very difficult time in their lives and I have to spend a lot of time helping them. There's not a problem that any parent hasn't gone through here and I know my father listened to me so I try and listen to them and it's quite the drama. Let me tell you. Gotcha. Well, it sounds like you are living in some precarious times there in some of the situations. I know I remember my teenagers were a bit tumultuous and I feel bad for my parents still. Yeah. Did you apologize? I did. I have profusely so we're good now, I think. I remember going to my father and I was recently reflecting on this and the issue and my sons let me emphasize are wonderful, wonderful people. I'm very fortunate and I never thought I'd be the peacemaker in the family but I am. Nonetheless, I remember my oldest son sitting down and talking me about something issue in his life and I was reminded of doing the same thing with my own father when I was about his age and my dad took a look at me as a firefighter and he said I have to clean up his language a little bit because again, he was a firefighter. You got a lot of free time and I was really upset that he wasn't experiencing my existential Anui and pain at the age of 14 but what he really meant was something far more important as something I teach all of my students. We only have a limited amount of time on this planet and how you want to spend your time is important and if something very dramatic is important to you fine but it's important to get that perspective and place your efforts where they do the most good for you. Absolutely. Well I think that is a fantastic message to get from your father at this troubling time in your life. It always means more later I think when you have time to reflect on it, right? So it's great to hear about how you spend your time when you're outside of the lab but Mark can you tell us now about the work that you do inside the lab? Can you tell us how you describe what you do to someone who's not in science? Absolutely. I teach it a primarily undergraduate institution. Most of my time is spent teaching. I teach freshman the introduction to cell and molecular biology that we call the unity of life and then I also teach my beloved microbiology to juniors and seniors. At the same time I do have a small undergraduate laboratory. There are no graduate students, no postdocs, no technicians. It's pretty much me and undergraduates and it's a very exciting for me. It is the most important teaching that I do is actually in the laboratory where we work on predatory bacteria that is to say bacteria that attack and consume other bacteria. In addition I've always had a long-term interest in symbiosis and so I'm very interested in microbes that exist in concert with other living things and studying their diversity and the effects that they have. I have two collaborations in my department that study that. So we have a lot of different projects in the lab and this is great for the students because they have an opportunity for true ownership of a project. Well I think these research projects are fantastic and great to hear that you're able to take part in getting some of these undergraduates exposed to and excited about research. I think that's great. So have any of these predatory microbes made their way into your science fiction writing? No. There's a woman who teaches at Kenyon College, Jones Lajuski. I can never say her name to suit her so I just call her Joan. And she's actually a very well-known science fiction writer. I'm just a poser. I only had a couple of novels years ago. But Joan's quite well-known and she has written several books that involve microbes running our behavior, the brain plague being one of them. So wonderful, wonderful stuff. But I try to keep away from the microbiology and fiction because I'm a little too close to it. Gotcha, gotcha. Well that is fantastic. So we mentioned this discussion that you had with your father and how he kind of gave you a motivational quote or piece of advice. Now is there any other, I guess, motivational quote or saying that you loved keeping your mind and think about on a daily basis to get you through it all? Absolutely. I love quotations. My poor long-suffering students get them all the time from me. And the one that I was thinking of that was most appropriate is from Carl Jung and Jung wrote that you are what you do, not what you say you'll do. I like that. And in the writing business, it's something that I don't know if it's original with Larry Niven, a fine science fiction novelist. But I heard him say it once, which is everybody talks first draft. And that always made me laugh. Well, I think those are great motivational quotes. I think really important in science because we have these ever-growing to-do lists. And you say, oh yeah, I'll do that. I'll do that. I'll schedule that you're planning out, at some point you just have to cut it and do it, right? It's drinking from the fire hose and it's easy to let it get to you. And if I can make a quick plug for a book that made a big difference in my life. Sure. There's lots of different names, but it's the meditations of Marcus Aurelius, the last good emperor. My brother actually got me a silver denarius from his reign that I carry in my wallet. It's a book he wrote to himself and it's full of a great deal of wisdom that transmits today. And I recommend people read that. Additionally, especially if you're involved in academics, the late Randy Pauch's, the last lecture is so much worth your time. Absolutely. I've definitely read the last lecture. I cried. Yeah. Sure. For me too, you know, I'm a sensitive new age guy. I have no trouble crying. But I have to tell you that he said something that I always tell my freshman. And I have a new crop of advisees this fall. And I tell them we treat all of life as if it's graded on a letter basis. But truth is, it's mostly pass fail. This is true. You either make it or you don't. I think in a lot of cases, it doesn't matter if you make it with an A or B. You made it. Right. Now, of course, this is Randy Pauch saying that and he did some really remarkable stuff. So there you go. Those are great book recommendations. We'll put them out there on our website, on our resources tab for our listeners to check out. And certainly great sources of motivation and inspiration. Now, can you take us back and tell us a little bit about your scientific journey and your life and maybe some of these people that really stick out in your mind as people who served as role models are really inspired you. Well, I have a disorder. You'll have to kind of keep control of what I call it as low-garia. I tend to talk too much. So I'll try and keep it nice and directed for you. I'm kind of a first generation going to college in my family. My brother went to college before me and became a lawyer, which is what people in his generation did. My parents find people, my late mother, wonderful woman, my father and today's his birthday, by the way. Well, happy birthday. Indeed. He's a firefighter and I call him the working man philosopher. He hates it when I say that, but it's true. And they didn't know anything about any of this science business, but I got the science bug quite early growing up in Southern California. I was identified as having some abilities in that area and they gave us lots of enrichment, something I don't see with my own kids in school. There aren't as many opportunities, which is a shame. And so I was involved in science affairs a lot and to make a very long story short in the eighth grade, I did an interesting project involving planarians or flatworms. Now, I didn't have any friend who was a university professor or any relative. I came up with this based on something that I'd read. There was a fellow at the University of Michigan who had claimed that he had trained planarians, flatworms to run a maze, chop them up, feed them to untrained worms, and then the worms knew that. Now, being a visual kid, I love this idea. And nobody was around to say, Mark, that's a dumb idea. So I did pursue it. I couldn't do the maze thing. It was too difficult for an eighth grader, but I could create a conditioned response where they would associate the darkness. Please forgive me. They are flatworms with a mild electrical shock. You turn off the lights and they contract an anticipation. I was able to show they remembered that, but here's the important point. When you cut flatworms in two, the head half regenerates a tail, the tail half regenerates a head. And I found out that both halves remembered. Interesting. Now, what I didn't know because I wasn't in the eighth grade reading scientific American and I wasn't going to lectures and I wasn't watching a lot of PBS in the eighth grade is this idea, the holographic model of memory, that it's stored throughout the nervous system was really quite exciting at the time. And so I won an award for this project, but that's not the important point. I got letters from scientists encouraging me. Oh wow. And that's how Roger Sparia Nobel Prize winner wrote to me, took him no time to do this, but it made such an impact in my life. You know, one of the things that I tell people is in our society nowadays, we have no trouble sounding off when someone does something poorly, but we seem to have a reticence to say, hey, that was a great job. And it doesn't take very long and it makes a big difference. So this made me think maybe I could become a scientist. So then I went to undergrad at UCLA and I discovered that I did not, in fact, know how to study. And on top of that, I had a certain degree of what I call testosterone poisoning, which is common to most gentlemen of my gender. Of course, of course. And I was too proud to ask for help. So it took me some time to get myself in gear. And I didn't have any mentors or people looked up to, but bit by bit, I got to know some of the professors even at that large institution. Robert Goldberg, who's a professor of biology, he's still there, was just a force of nature in the classroom. And I think that as far as understanding science and how to teach it, he had a huge influence on me. And he challenged me and really encouraged me to give it a go for graduate school. And when it came time to apply, I didn't think I was all that great. And I remember sitting with my brother, who was then an attorney, and my brother said, well, are you applying? And he starts naming all these fancy places. And you know, I was born in Compton and raised in North Long Beach in California. I don't mix with fancy people. And I said, oh, I think I could probably get into UCLA or maybe UC Irvine. And he said, why not these other places? And I said, well, I'm not good enough. And he looked at me and there used to be a television show called Frazier. The one brother was Niles, who was very pretty. And that's kind of how my brother was. And he said to me in this voice, Mark, if you are so stupid and suck so badly, how would you know what's good? And so I said, well, it's pretty expensive. And he pulled out a checkbook and said, with $200 and then those days that was a lot of money. Gosh, it makes me sound old. And I applied to 10 or 12 different schools and I got into every last one of them. And I was able to get into Stanford, which impressed the heck out of my family. I couldn't believe it. My father, by the way, refused to believe that I had a fellowship. He thought that because we couldn't afford tuition to replace that. But he kept thinking that this was some kind of scam that I had a fellowship. Just didn't make sense, completely different world. So I owe a lot of people my undergrad years there. And then when I went to graduate school, there were many people, my PhD advisor Sharon Long who was quite patient with me. I must say kind of averting my eyes. The members of my PhD committee, even more averting my eyes, Robert Simone and Alan Campbell, wonderful people. And they got me more or less through the whole PhD program. But it was in the process of getting done that I met somebody who has really been an idol of mine, scientifically. And that would be Ken Nielsen, who is currently at USC, University of Southern California. Ken Nielsen was one of the people who first uncovered the mechanism of something I dearly love by Aluminus since from bacteria. But also really a fine human being. And when times were good, he was encouraging. And when times weren't so good, he was encouraging. When I was between jobs, he would offer me a chance to work for him. He didn't have to do any of that. But he believed in me. And so I think about those things. And I turn that right around. And I ask, how can I be that kind of mentor to other people? Now maybe I don't have the facilities or resources that some of these folks do. But I do have the time and I do have the interest in my students. And it's paid off. I've sent, I believe it's 15 of my former undergraduate researchers to PhD programs. So I think I've done an okay job as a talent scout for science. Absolutely. That's what I like to think folks on me early on. Well, that is wonderful to hear about your journey. And a lot of these people who really shaped your journey along the way. I think that's fantastic. So can you tell us about the next steps? I think you've had a really interesting career. And it's fantastic to speak to people who have tried a number of different things before ending up in a research career in one of these more traditional faculty roles. Now can you tell us perhaps about your experience in the biotech industry? Absolutely. I did not want to leave San Diego at the time. It was during my first marriage. And I did not want to pull up stakes and go anywhere else. And I was casting around for some kind of job at the conclusion of a postdoc. And because I couldn't move across the country, that limited my choices. And there was a job at a company then owned by Merck called Kelco. And they worked on polysaccharides made by bacteria. And in fact, you've probably consumed some of these polysaccharides. I don't mean to gross you out. I'm okay with that. Zanthan gum is present in salad dressings as a suspending agent. And it's made by Zanthan monoscompesterous. And I worked on that for a number of years trying to maximize production. Gelan gum, which is used in snack well cakes. I have to tell you it was really interesting to work in a biotech lab where you did food science to some degree because I was always taught never eating the lab. Right. And then they would come by with cookies. I wouldn't turn those down even in the lab. I would take the lab cookies. And a clipboard saying, did you like that on a scale of one to five? Yeah. You were the lab rats, right? Yes. Yes, exactly. So I did that for a number of years. And one of the things that was hard for me about it is that I really didn't like doing administration. I liked working at the bench and I liked working with people doing research. And more or less, my position was as an administrator. And may I say, that's not something that just really appeals to me. I remember a gentleman asking me if I golfed and I told him that the hard part for golfing with me was getting past the windmills. Those windmills are tricky. They are. Not think that was funny. I'm glad you do. But you did. Got to. I like putt putt. I get in there the mini golf. Yeah, I'm there. Advice presidents do a lot of that though. So anyway, they had a series of downsizing things. And I was in the process of trying to figure out what I could do next. I didn't want to stay in biotech. I was no longer married. I had a lot of options. And I didn't know quite what to do. And there was a couple of opportunities I applied for that didn't pan out. And then I was laid off in downsizing, which happens. And I was really quite worried about it. But a very good friend of mine is a gentleman named Gregory Benford. And Greg is a astrophysicist and a science fiction author. And one of my very best friends. And he decided that we could work together on writing fiction. So I had the master's course as it were from him. And we were able to get a contract for a couple of books. And we wrote a couple of books. This is many years ago now. I hate to tell you, but it was helpful to me because I did not have an income. And because of Greg's impact in the project, we actually got a decent contract. So I was able to keep things together for a bit. And I wouldn't say that I'm a tremendously great writer. I think that's something you have to spend a lot of time at to be a fiction error. You have to really eat and drink and breathe it. It has to be you all the time. And I have many, many interests. And what happened is that I was thinking, all right, I need to start working on other writing projects. If that's the way I'm going to go. And then a friend of mine, Daniel Klianski, who's at the University of Michigan, wrote to me and said, you know, Mark, there's a one year position at Occidental College in Los Angeles. I think you'd be a great teacher. And I always felt that I could be a good teacher. And so I went there and was able to spend about 10 years teaching and doing research with undergraduates at Oxy. And then I had a chance to come up here to the University of Puget Sound in Tacoma, which by the way is a fabulous place to raise children. And I should say at Occidental College, I met the woman who's now my wife. And we had our children there before we came here. And I am now a 10-year associate professor. So I have been teaching for all my goodness. Is it be 20 years just about? 20 years now. And I really enjoy it so much more than other things. I don't like grading. I don't think anyone does. So students out there who don't like being graded that works both ways. And I really like doing the research I do with students in the lab. I cannot do the kind of work that some of the people I know do at RO1 PhD granting institutions. But I really love the work that we do in the lab and find out interesting things. It really fits my personality. Well, Mark, it sounds like you have just had an incredible journey. And so wonderful to hear about how you had these opportunities to try a variety of different things, you know, from doing research in your PhD and we're doing research with undergrad as well as taking some time to write some science fiction, which I think is fantastic. And also spending some time working in industry. I feel like you've had a chance to try a little bit of everything. So now you know for sure what you're doing is what you are most excited about, which is fantastic. I have to say a lot of students who come and talk with me are convinced that for example, if they don't get a B or better an organic chemistry, they can't go to medical school. Or if they get less than an A in genetics, they can't go to graduate school, whatever. They're all about settling, all about limiting themselves. You just have to not give up. You know, you've got to never, never, never give up. And if there's something you really believe in, you've got to go for it. Well, I think that is fantastic advice. And I know, you know, when you are going through this process in your undergraduate days, everything seems like a catastrophe. You know, like if you get that B plus in genetics, if you get your GRE scores and they're not what you were hoping for, it's very discouraging. So it's great to hear from you a successful scientist and teacher that it is possible. It's not the end of the world. And you have to just keep going after it if you're passionate about it. Now can you take a moment to tell us a little bit about some of the research or some of the projects that you're working on now that you are so excited about? Oh, absolutely. There's again lots and lots of stuff. Our problem now is getting things into shape to be published. So as far as my predatory bacteria, I do work on an organism called the Dellovibrio, curved leach is what that means in Bad Latin. Okay. And it's a fascinating organism. And I have friends that I've gotten to know over the years that have enormous budgets and armies of postdocs. And I can't compete with them. But that's not the point for me. My job is to teach people how to be scientists. And so one of my students about a year and a half ago came to me and said, you know, we don't know what it is. Dellovibrio recognizes about prey bacteria. Does it have a receptor? It's not acting like, for example, bacteria, phages. And no one did know. And he said to me, doc, because that's my nickname to the student, because Doc Martin is funny for two different reasons to them. The shoes and then there's this like very ascorbic British doctor. There's a television show about him. Gotcha. Anyway, the interesting part is he asked, is the shape of the prey organism important? And so we started looking at mutants in prey bacteria that affect cell shape. And we have some evidence that it really does using the tools that we have available. And I've gotten into some collaborations with people to help look at that. So I'm really excited about that work. And I have a student who's just thrashed that project to death all summer long. She's great. And I know this is the kind of thing that graduate schools look for in students. So I'm hoping to write that stuff up for publication in the fall. I'm really quite excited about that. In addition, there's another organism that I had a difficult time making mutants of to find out how it attacks prey. It does a fascinating process called tracking. The organism is called encephal bad Latin for sword bearer again. And it flows along prey organisms, but only one type. It's not a generalist. And it was very hard to do the typical gene jockey approaches that I'm used to doing with bacteria. But via Twitter, I was able to meet a colleague, Dave Baltress, who was able to help me figure out how to make those mutants. And so I'm a real believer in social media being really important to the progress in science. Not simply about making pithy statements since being snarky, but also about learning about what's new in science and forging new collaborations. It's quite transformative. Absolutely. And those are my predatory microbes. Two quick projects that I do in a collaboration with my own department. I have a colleague, Stacy Weiss, who's interested in a particular species of lizard that lives in southern Arizona. And we found that the microbes associated with the males and females have differences, unexpected differences. And we're wondering how that factors into the life history of those lizards, which is quite exciting for us. And then finally, and this is something that I think is quite remarkable, here in Puget Sound, the lumber industry was shipping up wood for a very long time, and they would bury the wood. In fact, there are places along a five minute drive from here where there's 10 feet of sawdust underneath the beach. Interesting. And it gets fermented into hydrogen sulfide. And that's the joke, the aroma of Tacoma, right? I had no idea. That's awesome. Yeah. People would say it smells bad. I said it is the smell of scientific possibility. That's right. Anyway, the interesting part is there are a wide number of bacteria that actually feast upon that hydrogen sulfide as a source of energy. And in fact, they are very similar to the bacteria found at hydrothermal vents miles down in the ocean. So what I tell people is we have kind of a laboratory here for studying these sulfur rich environments that normally are produced by geological processes at the bottom of the ocean. We even find crabs covered by the filaments. If you look in a scientific literature around some of these hydrothermal vents, there's a type of a squat lobster, which they call a Yeti crab, because it's covered with these filaments of bacteria. And they are using the hydrogen sulfide generated geologically. We can see the same sorts of things with crabs here. And I've been calling those Sasquatch crabs just to be difficult. Right. I like that. I'm really interested in those communities and how similar they are to what you see around hydrothermal vents. And we're finding out they're quite similar. And that work is done with Joel Elliott in my own department. So I'm very fortunate not simply being a microbiologist, but having folks in my own department who appreciate microbiology. Absolutely. Well, Mark, it sounds like you have some incredible research projects going on. And I am particularly fascinated by these predatory microbes. I mean, I think so many people think about bacteria and microbes as more pathogenic than predatory. So I think it's a really interesting way to think about them that really hasn't crossed my mind before. It's fascinating. Well, to me, and I really hate the expression germafob. And the reason I don't like it is because when pasture popularized the term germ, he meant a small piece of life. It was in the context of him developing his germ theory that finally put a stop to the ideas of spontaneous generation. But if I ask a hundred people, because I've done this, the first word that comes to their mind when I say germ or bacteria, it's always negative. This is true. And what I tell people is that microbes, the ones that cause disease are like the juvenile delinquents of the microbial world. They're very small in number, but they get all the press that bleeds at leads, you know? Right. And so that's the kind of situation that I tell them. And nowadays with the microbiome, people have tried to portray bacteria as being almost saints if they were devils before and now they're saints. Fact is, they're neither. We're just a surface to these organisms, to be honest with you. Interesting. Well, I think we could talk for hours about how cool microbes are. That's how I got a nickname. And this is the story I mentioned to you before very, very briefly. We were in my department having a discussion about a future faculty higher, what area that should be in. And because of budget issues the way they are, that's real similar to me suggesting that if I look like George Clooney, how should I dress? These are things you don't have to worry about. And two plant biologists were saying we needed another plant biologist because plants were at the center of the biosphere. And I didn't say anything. I didn't look up. I didn't roll my eyes. I cast no shade. And what happened is one of my colleagues turns and said, well, Mark here thinks bacteria are more important than anything else. And I said, no, I think plants do plenty of important things, but the important things were things they, yeah, kind of stole from prokaryotes. That's true. And she'll often said, Mark here a microbial supremacist. And I said, yes, I am. Embrace it. Just embrace it. But listen, T shirts, the whole nine yards. That is an amazing story. So what was the outcome? Who did they hire? Well, that was of course something. We're going to be hiring a geneticist in some area in the next year. I actually don't care what area is not. You're doing great work with students. Gotcha. But I'm not going to sit there and push for another microbiologist because as I say, I have many colleagues in my department who really respect what I do. Absolutely. Well, that sounds fantastic. I love the little story behind a nickname. That's awesome. So I think Mark so far, we have talked about all of the fantastic aspects of your career and all the wonderful opportunities that you've had along the way. We haven't yet talked about some of these challenges that I know every scientist faces. And it can sort of come in many different forms. But oftentimes you meet these periods in your life where it just seems like everything is going wrong. Maybe for days or even weeks on end. So can you take us back, Mark, to a point in your career where you were struggling with something or maybe you had a major failure? Tell us what happened and how you got through that tough time. Absolutely. I know of no scientist that's had a perfect route through things. Right. And I mean, for me, when I was laid off and I didn't have a book contract and I wanted to try and break back into science and there were all these people who basically told me I couldn't do it. That I would have to become a sales rep and there's nothing wrong with being a sales rep. But I wanted to teach and do research. And I kept getting told I couldn't do this and I wasn't good enough when I couldn't get interviews. And this would happen day after day after day. And you knock on doors. And this is exactly what every student goes through when they're looking for jobs. It's nothing unique to me. But you start to doubt yourself. And I think to some degree, I'm psychologically omniscient. I don't want to say anything good about myself because it might be taken away. So it's really hard for me to ring my own bell or toot my own horn whenever the metaphor is. So I had to just keep trying and just be stubborn and not give up. And it was really difficult for me to be able to do that. And I had to really rely on my friends and supporters. Not the ones who just say, hey, it'll be fine, buddy, but the ones who really know you and really care about you. You can't be alone. You have to have a support group around you, people who believe in you. Not a fake belief, but a genuine belief. That's what happened when I was looking for work coming in. The end of my time with Occidental College was much the same where you know, it was very hard to get other job offers. And you just had to keep trying. And sometimes you would be on the phone with people and they'll say, really not very nice things. And you have to take it and stride. Something that I often tell people who aren't scientists that they need to remember is most scientists, not all, but most are the folks that no one wanted on their fourth grade kickball team. I was there. Yes. You know, of God, we have to take Martin, you know, that kind of thing. And so as a result, many scientists, when they get in a position of power, don't really know how to interact well with people. I find that learning a little bit about dealing with people has been helpful to me in being a mentor to students. And I really think it's important in being a good friend to your acquaintances as well. You really have to not give up. And it's hard when all you hear is negativity. That's true for say my pre-med students who think they want to go to medical school and they'll come up with all these very negative scenarios. And I'll say, you know, do you believe in yourself? Because you have to have that. Are you that person just like my brother said to me, if you're that bad, how would you know? Right. There's truth to that. Certainly. Well, I think that is a fantastic experience to describe to our listeners who might be going through some tough times, trying to find jobs, trying to figure out what they want to do next. And I think it's so difficult. Like you said, you are getting a lot of this negative feedback. You are starting to doubt yourself. You're getting discouraged. And it's so important to surround yourself with those people who are going to support you, who believe in you, who can really help you find your strengths to be able to present them to others and really make yourself feel valuable to the places that you're applying. I think that's really, really important. So we don't just want to talk about these tough times, though Mark, can you tell us next a success story? One that has meant a lot to you. Oh, my. I mean, there's a couple of that kind of stick up in my mind. I mean, when I first looked at the data about cell shape and predation, that was very exciting. And I went and called the student up and said, you have to come to the lab and go over this with me. But I do remember when I was doing a job talk. And I don't know if you were this way, but I don't think of myself as being terribly facile. And I think that there's a part of me, mostly asleep at the back of my head. I call him smart, Mark. And he'll wake up from time to time and say very clever things that I am in no way responsible. You're just going to look at yourself and shock. I think after those moments, like, I'm awesome. So I had a job interview at a place and I had to give a public talk and the room was filled with about 50 people and they really liked me when I was visiting. The students really liked me and that's always gratifying. And what happened is when I was introduced, they did the wave. And everyone starts laughing and clapping. And I'm standing there in front of about 50 people. And all of a sudden, the following came out of my mouth where I said just like this, you know, for many years, I dreamed of a time when scientists would be viewed like sports figures. And I, today is my day. That is brilliant. And that really helps you feel good. You want to store those things away. Even when I get as just happened last week, a really heartfelt and thoughtful thank you note from a student, you really want to save those. Again, part of you probably doesn't want to because you don't want to feel like you're patting yourself on the back and spraining your shoulder, you know, right? At the same time, you need those things for when times are rough. So you really want to kind of remember those good times because that's what goes on. The problem with science in general is science is not about accomplishment. It's about trying again and again and again. It's what a colleague of mine used to call the re and research. So you have to never give up about you have to keep pushing and keep trying. Absolutely. Well, I love hearing about a lot of these little successes along the way. I think definitely getting those heartfelt thank you notes, feeling like you've made a difference to a student or to a colleague really just gives you the motivation to keep going when you're facing these challenges, sort of the re and research redoing things, redoing things and keep trying things new when things are failing. So fantastic to hear about some of these experiences that you've had that really helped push you forward. So I know one of the other amazing things about careers in science that a lot of people point to excitedly when you ask them, what are some of their favorite things about their career? Are the opportunities for travel? So mark a lot of researchers get to go to conferences or maybe have travel to work with collaborators or even for their training. Can you think back on all these places that you've traveled for science and tell us about your favorite? Well, I mean, my favorite, it was not involved directly with my research, but microbiology is always in my head being a microbial supremacist. Yes, yes. But when I finally had a chance to go overseas, which was not common in the class in which I was raised and a couple of years ago, I went to New Zealand and I got to go to a lot of the hot water areas, the thermal baths. The sulfur springs over there? They're fabulous. And one look at that, I'm getting real close to look at the patterns of microbes and algae that are growing on the rocks. And my long-suffering mathematician, wife, Jennifer Quinn finally like taps me on the shoulder, says, you know, you could look up. And I know it's the important stuff right here on this fine scale, you know, and that was wonderful. I think that having an opportunity to reconnect with people, you haven't seen it a long time at conferences. Fantastic. I've really enjoyed that. There are people I see every year at conferences that I don't see otherwise. And we often get a chance to talk about what's exciting in our work. And that's something that's just like bread and butter to a scientist. And often in the humdrum day to day, for me, it's grading and teaching and mentoring students for people in R01, it's writing grants and advising for postdocs. It's all great. It's all wonderful, but it's the same thing. It's good to hear what other people are doing. And that's really keeps us going. Certainly. And I think going to different places, like you said, reconnecting with people. And I think just seeing new sides, I love that you were sort of transfixed with these hot water springs in New Zealand. We're able to travel to a lot of different areas, or did you kind of stay in one place while you were there. We were just there for 10 days. But I mean, the funny part that my wife says is that, well, all of my life, I wanted to see the glowworm caves, right? Yep. They're phenomenal. I've been there. Yeah. And she has pictures of me looking as if I have brain damage staring upward, right? Such a flattering photograph. And she says, it's a wonderful thing to see on my face, this wonder in all the rest. And when we got off the boat, I said to her, just like this, gosh, I wonder what their microbiota is like. And then she hit me. You know, in the moment, you totally ruined the moment. All the microbes, you know, well, that is amazing. And I can definitely relate to this sense of wonder that you feel when you're in those caves, looking up, it is gorgeous. It's wonderful. Absolutely. So listeners, if you haven't made it to New Zealand yet, we both recommend it highly. I'd like to go spend a year there is what I'd like. But you know, who's going to pay for that other than me? Well, you just got to find a research project down there, a collaboration that you can swing, right? There you go. Just like that. Certainly. Well, that is a fantastic experience that you have described. And I think there are a lot of amazing opportunities in science to travel, to see different places, to meet amazing people. And I think a lot of the scientists that we get a chance to work with, contrary to some of the stereotypes that are out there about scientists, they're just creative and oftentimes very funny people. And I think when you look back at some of these lab groups that you've worked in, there's a lot of quirky traditions that go along with them, or just really funny memories that you can look back on. So can you share one of these traditions, or one of these funny memories with us today, Mark? Oh, you know, everyone says that scientists aren't superstitious. And every time they say that they're lying like a Persian rug, absolutely scientists are superstitious. Definitely. Tell you the number of people I know that every time they do a PCR reaction, we don't have video, so I can't show you, they will make the sign of the double helix as they close the top of the PCR machine. And they'll say in the name of the mother, the daughter, and the recombinant strand, that kind of thing. Students say it's more art than science. So I came up with three basic rules, Martin's laws of research, as I call them, and rule one is there's one ego per lab, and it's not yours. And it's really important for folks to remember, because boy, I got in trouble about that, because testosterone poisoning again. Number two is nature appears to resist investigation. And I take it personally. I have it on plaque in my lab right now. And then the third one, of course, is this business of having to repeat it. If you can't repeat it, it's not real. It's that re-in research. And I will remember a very fine student of mine years ago who had a biochemical assay work quite well. And she goes, hey, it's great. Look at this. And I said, wonderful. Do it three more times. And she says, why it worked once. And that's what you have to get over as a scientist. You've got to do it and do it and do it. Right. But I will tell you the number of scientists they're superstitious. And they won't admit it to you, but it's really true. Oh, absolutely. I've talked to a number of scientists that have sort of good luck charms that they put. Or once things are arranged a certain way, if something works, you can't move anything, right? Every one of my students, they make a good luck fairy. There's something on the Benchfly website, where you can design your own and decorate your own good luck fairy to put up in the lab. And also, most of the students who work for me happen to be women, more women than men at most undergraduate institutions. Lego made these little Lego female scientists, and I make them personalize them. And those are kind of their avatars. That's cool. I like that. They really like doing it too. I have to tell you. Well, Mark, I love hearing about these quirky traditions and superstitions that I think a lot of scientists have. So I must ask, do you have your own good luck fairy? I do. I do. I cannot personalize one of the Lego figures to me because, of course, these are female scientists. But I've been thinking about using Homer Simpson as my avatar, because you can get a little Lego Homer Simpson. That's what I'm thinking I'm going to go for there. But I do indeed have my own good luck, very good to hear. Well, those are incredible traditions. And I think wonderful to make the lab environment fun for your students. And I think a lot of these good luck charms that I'll think even a little bit of the superstition kind of makes the failures sting less. You're like, oh, well, obviously it's because we didn't do something. You know, one of these superstitions, or I didn't have my good luck charm there that day. So that's why it went wrong. You know, the ancient gods are petty and cruel and plague PCR with suffering. That kind of thing. Of course, of course. So fantastic to hear about these traditions in your own laboratory. And we talked about some of the amazing work that you're doing there. But we haven't yet had a chance to chat about some of these unanswered questions in your life. So can you tell me if things like funding and staff and technology and feasibility all not an issue? What is one research question, Mark, that you are just dying to know the answer to. And you know, I knew instantly what I wanted to tell you about. And it's this, do you know what tardigrades are? I do not. Tardigrades are called water bears. They are little creatures about a millimeter long. And if you go look on the internet, there's a lot of interest in them because they enter into not a hibernation, but kind of a resting state. Interesting. They are immune to almost anything you throw at them. They can survive in high vacuum. They can take, you know, mega rads of radiation, chemical treatment, and then you add water and they wake up. Wow. A good friend of mine, Margaret McFall-Nye has really pushed a particular paper forward about the role that bacteria play in animals and plants. That is to say every animal every plant around us that we know of, including, you know, animals like ourselves have a microbiota associated with us that they co-evolved with. There are partners in evolution over time. And so my question is a really simple one with tardigrades. And this is true of any organism that goes through a resting stage like brine shrimp for that matter or rotifers. Any organism that goes into a resting stage, do they take their microbiota with them? Or do they re-enoculate? And if that's the case, how do they co-evolve if it's denovo new each time? We're not supposed to do this as scientist or we assume what's going to happen. My guess is they pack a lunch and they take their microbes with them. Interesting. There is a slime mold that does something similar, dictastelium, a wild dictastelium that will actually incorporate bacteria into its spores so that when they germinate from the spores, the bacteria are already growing to serve as a food supply. So if I had funding, I would want to look at these organisms that undergo, it's called cryptobiosis, where they go into these resting stages. And I would love to look at that. And of course, because I'm saying that someone's going to go do it. So I'm not going to stay draught you. I'm just going to say I'd really like to be able to work on that. Absolutely. You're seeking collaboration with whoever has the funds to accomplish this. I think that's fantastic. We're going to try to do a kickstarter on this. I've been told that there's like, eh, about kickstarter around here, but I think that's something folks would be interested in. The people at giantmicrobes.com, and yes, there is such an organization. They actually make these plush microbes and such. They even made a plush tartarade that's cute beyond words. Oh my goodness. But it's cute. Trust me. So do you have quite the collection of these plush microbes? I, in fact, if you had video, you'd see I have a large dish full of them right here in my office. Oh fantastic. Good to keep close at hand. They're nice little almost stress balls, I think. It is. And I really like kind of messing with students on this subject because of this parboolophobia. I don't like term germophobia, this fear of the small and all the rest that we have going on. I remember talking to a student who just got her dental degree now, but when she was taking microbiology from me and she is in the front row, and I think she was not super engaged. She's a smart student did well, but I do talk a lot. Anyway, I happened to try and draw her in by saying, you know, right now there's a cloud of Sarah associated microbes in the air. You're emitting. And I'm emitting a cloud of microbes. And she got this look of absolute horror on her face. You know, bolt up right. And then she's later she brought me a piece of artwork. Now it's based on that peanuts character pig pen. But rather than dirt surrounding it, it's microbes. And that's how we really live. Interesting. I like that. I also have an artist friend who does some of the t-shirts and buttons that I use for my class. And one of my favorite images she made is pointing out that when we're holding hands, so are they, meaning the microbes. That is just romantic. See, I think so, but that's me. Right. I think that is incredible. It's interesting to hear about all these sort of quirky little traditions. And I love that you're describing you have t-shirts and buttons and stuff. And you're making art out of your science. I think that's wonderful. I know a lot of students in both my freshman class and my junior and senior and I wrote about this on my blog. They've done fantastic artwork. They've done rap videos because everyone learns differently if they can find an approach to explore ideas. It knocks my socks off every year when I have them do it. And people might roll their eyes and say, well, you know, extra credit, the rest that's boring. But I promise you, they end up doing more work on those kinds of projects and learning more than anything with me yammering at them in class. It's really fabulous. Certainly. Well, I think that is wonderful as someone who made my own kind of little songs to remember things and undergrad. I can totally sympathize. I understand this. Absolutely. I keep waiting for them to take its raining men and turning it into its raining microbes. I keep waiting for that. But no one's going to do that video, but that's what I'm waiting for. So students of the future. Yes. Make sure you're ready to start preparing now. Get something together. That's the credit. That is amazing. Well, Mark, I think we have had some fantastic discussions today. Can you share with our listeners now one last piece of advice or maybe one last piece of inspiration today? Absolutely. I used to want to be a physicist. I found out that I have an allergy to higher mathematics. My wife rules her eyes at me, but I'm correct on this. I think some people have a natural knack for higher mathematics and I am not one of them. So even though I love physics, I love theoretical physics, I love astrophysics. I cannot do the higher math. I'm okay with arithmetic, but higher math not so much. And when I was an undergraduate, I had a chance to meet the very famous physicist Richard Feynman. And I wrote about this on my blog because it was very, very big deal in my life. I went to one of his talks and had a chance to talk with him afterwards. And I'm telling him how upset I am that I can't grasp the higher math and he's really paying attention to me. And he's not putting me down. And I'm telling you, he did exactly this. He says to me, and he really did talk like a cab driver. So I'm going to do this voice because this is how he sounded. He says, kid, you'll know it when you find it. You've got to look at it. You've got to really think about it and look at it and you'll know it. He says, besides, most physicists, and he looked from side to side and grinned, patses. I didn't know what that meant. I gathered it wasn't a good thing. And so my point is that he talks a lot in another book that was written about how you know you're on the right path in science. And it's all about what makes your heart beat faster. You know it. You just have to be open. Don't tell yourself this is the thing for me. You will know it. It's what castenata, that old mystic fraud used to say, a path with heart. You need to find your path with heart. And you will know it when you see it. Absolutely. Very, very well said. And I love that you describe that you'll know you're on the right path. If you get that response of excitement, you sort of feel your pulse racing, you know, your breath going all fast. You want to know more. I think that is a great, great description. And certainly so great to hear that you had this opportunity to meet Feynman, speak to him, get the advice from such an inspirational person. Now can you tell our lit snors a little bit more about how they can reach out and learn more about you and this amazing research and work that you're doing? Oh, I'm happy to chat with people. People can write to me at my email address. And it's my first initial, my middle name and my last name. So it's M O N Martin at Gmail. That will work. I also have a blog where I write about teaching and research and that kind of thing. And that's at not surprisingly microbes rule blog spot dot com. And I'm at the University of Puget Sound. Perfect. Well, listeners, feel free to reach out to Mark if you want to learn more. And Mark, thank you so much for joining us today and sharing your story. It was such a pleasure to talk with you. Thank you. Certainly. I have enjoyed our conversation as well. And listeners, thank you again for joining me today. We'll see you again next time on another episode of People Behind the Science. Your voyage to the lives of today's exceptional scientists has just begun. You can find everything we talked about today, including our guest's favorite books, biographies, photos and more. When you visit us at www.peoplebehindtheScience.com. I look forward to seeing you next time on People Behind the Science.
