Oh heeey, it’s that friend who started their term paper the night before it was due, Alie Ward, with alast-minute, too ambitious, extra credit episode of Ologies. What am I doing?? Why did I decide on aSunday to make an episode with five different ologists to air one day later? Am I okay? Not really.But also, yes. We’re going to be okay. Probably. That’s why we made this episode. We just damnneeded it.But first I need to say thank you to patrons at Patreon.com/Ologies. That costs $1 a month to jointhat club. Also, thanks, if you have ever left a review for the show. I have read it with my teary,oftentimes bleary eyes and I pick a glistening, just-birthed one each week as proof. Such as this onefrom Aileen, who said:Dear Alie Dad, thanks for accompanying me on my road trip from Seattle to California andback, and for making me guffaw until I cry, and also reflect on what makes me feel hornyabout life!!! Ur kid, AileenAileen, happy to horn you up about snails, and condors, and mud, as your oddly paternal internetfriend. That’s what I’m here for.Okay, quarantinology. [nonsensical garbling of surprise] It’s a word. Not shockingly, it has gainedpopularity in the last, like, 16 months. Today is June 14th, 2021. I live in California. On June 15th, ina few hours, the mask mandates are lifted. So what does this mean? What can we expect? What’sgoing on? How safe are we? Is the pandemic over? That’s not what the news says. Can I play croquetwith my college roommates on a lawn? Can I hug my uncle? Will I ever eat pudding from the samespoon as a stranger again? I hope not. But I’m here to help. I’m going to do that by letting peoplesmarter than me talk to you with their mouths.In this episode, we’re going to talk to married history buffs, researchers, and authors GeoffManaugh and Nicola Twilley, who you also know as the host of the incredible podcast Gastropod.These two are releasing a new book. It’s called Until Proven Safe: The History and Future ofQuarantine, which, sidenote, Mary Roach calls “Flawlessly executed.” Life goals to have Mary Roachsay that about you. Ah!Anyway, their book, Until Proven Safe, is available for pre-order. It’ll be delivered in July. It’s allabout why human beings quarantine. Fascinating. There’s a link in the show notes. So, I sat down totalk to them. They dish on the history of quarantines, why they are and sometimes are not fullyeffective, the cultural shifts that happen in the wake of a pandemic, and more. And also, I just had anincredible chat with them. I had to pare down a lot of this and I will release the full version topatrons because it deserves to be heard.After the break, we’ll check in with your favorite Vaccine Infodemiologist, Jessica Malaty Rivera,plus Manhattan-based physician Mike Natter, who worked on the front lines amid New York City’ssurging 2020 caseload. And then finally we’re going to check in with Thanatologist, grief counselor,and founder of the School of American Thanatology, Cole Imperi, who will address why you feel sofucking weird, and how to process it, and move forward, and honor the incredibly jacked year thateveryone just had.So, I’m an absolute maniac for shelving my in-process wasps episode and texting experts from myorthodontist’s chair this afternoon and asking them to send some thoughts via voice memo, and1then trying to put this all together over a 7pm espresso. But I could not be more passionate andcommitted to getting you all the ologists that you need when you need them. So get ready to hearabout covid versus plague quarantines, medieval cities, forbidden scarves, sneaky sailors, mooncooties, the efficacy of vaccines, variants, herd immunity, vax girl summers, the headspace ofhealthcare workers right now, and no matter where you are or what you’ve been through, how toreflect, and process, and honor the last year. So let’s all take a deep breath, [breathes in deeply] bethankful for that breath, as we examine the history, and the present, and the future ofQuarantinology.----------Geoff Manaugh: I am Geoff Manaugh and my pronouns are he/him.Nicola Twilley: We actually both have quite difficult names to pronounce, so that’s good. I’m NicolaTwilley, although I go by Nicky, and I am she/her.Alie Ward: Can you tell me a little bit about what you were doing when you decided, “Let’s write abook about quarantines”?Geoff: Yeah, I can say that the origins of the project itself actually came quite a while back. In 2009we were down in Australia together. I had a teaching gig in Sydney doing an architectureworkshop for about six weeks. And at one point, we had a local friend who took us out on apicnic and we noticed that there was this really interesting complex of buildings out nearwhere we had gone, which was a pretty remote peninsula on the other side of the bay fromSydney itself.And you know, these buildings, they were on stilts. They had really nice wraparoundporches, and it was called Q Station. And what it actually was, was an old quarantinestation that had been turned into a kind of spa hotel. And the cool aspect of that, I thought,was that the very things that made quarantine at one point… sites like that so good forquarantine, which is that they’re far away from the city, they give everybody fresh air, theydon’t risk people just wandering into town. They’re separated by a bay, they’re also out ona peninsula so they’re even separated from the land that they’re connected to. Those samethings that made it good for quarantine made it good for a spa hotel, a way to get awayfrom the world and to get away from Sydney.So I think, ironically, the initial interest in the topic was actually, in retrospect, a littleembarrassing in the sense that we were like, “What was quarantine? Why did we stopquarantining people? Why are facilities like this no longer being used for medical reasonsand now they can be turned into hotels?” Or they can be torn down entirely, or they’re justleft in ruins… Because you know, when you look around at quarantine, you tend to see thatit really does look like a leftover business from the past.And we realized almost immediately, as soon as we started looking into quarantine, that inreality, you know, it is obviously still taking place at scales all around us. It’s taking placewith animals traveling overseas. It’s happening in agriculture. And that was really what, Ithink, gave us the idea to pursue it as a research project. And then the idea of writing abook together, I’d say, came later.Nicky: Yeah, I think we both realized there was just something in there for both of us. I write a lotabout food and agriculture. I have a podcast about that. So the fact that quarantine is soimportant in terms of food and agriculture appealed to me. And then I write a lot aboutscience, and then we realized, “Oh, quarantine is used in…” NASA are experts on quarantine2because it’s constantly being used in terms of space exploration. And then we… The morewe dug, the more there was there. And it rapidly expanded into a book.Alie: How far back did you go when you thought, “Hm, quarantine. Let’s look into the history.”?Nicky: I think that’s where we started, and you know, as a concept… I think one of the things aboutquarantine that’s so interesting is it seems really intuitive. You have this person or thingthat you think potentially might be infected with a disease. You don’t know yet, but you’reworried, and you have reason to be worried, so you decide to, kind of, put them somewheresafe until you can be sure that they’re either healthy or they’re sick. That just seems like,“Oh, that’s such an obvious thing to do. Why wouldn’t that have happened for all of humanhistory?” But of course not. It actually had to be invented.If you think the disease is an act of God, for example, then you’re not going to think thatputting someone in a separate room is going to do anything because you don’t have aconcept of infection. So, it did have to be invented. And as soon as we, sort of, thought thatthrough, we wanted to know where it began.Alie: Yeah, where did it begin?Geoff: Historically, it began in the Adriatic Sea, which is interesting because the Adriatic is really,kind of, the first sea that you would encounter as you’re leaving the Near East, what is nowthe Middle East, and approaching Europe. So, as merchants were bringing goods back fromTurkey, from what was once known as the Levant, and bringing those into the Europeaneconomy, it was the Adriatic where people realized that they were encounteringmysterious diseases that they hadn’t had before and that those diseases appeared to bebreaking out at the same time as the ships were arriving.So, as Nicky was describing, there was kind of some deductive reasoning, which was that,“Okay, let’s take the next ship that arrives from the same destination,” or whatever youwant to call it, that would come to a city like Dubrovnik or a city like Venice, and “Let’s justhold it, let’s delay it, let’s put a buffer around it and see if the disease still arrives.” And itwas that kind of deductive reasoning that I think led to the spatial logic and even thetemporal logic of quarantine. So, there’s some debate amongst historians about whether ornot Dubrovnik or Venice is really first in line as far as the invention of quarantine.Aside: What is a Dubrovnik? Well, I had to ask the internet, and Werkepedia was like, “It’shistorically known as Ragusa, you shit-for-brains.” And I’m like, “Listen, Google. How was Isupposed to know that this historical Croatian seaport with a history dating back to the17th century is known for its global position in the maritime trade and for its medievalarchitecture and beautiful stone buildings with russet terracotta roof tiles perched on cliffsabove the azure Adriatic waters? How was I supposed to know that?” But now I know whata Dubrovnik is as well as a Ragusa.Geoff: But I think that from what we’ve seen, and the historians we’ve discussed with, and theactual archival evidence, it really does look like Dubrovnik was the first place where aquarantine order was officially given in the 14th century. And it was about delaying thearrival of ships, and fumigating goods, and keeping the sailors and the merchantsthemselves out of Dubrovnik so that they couldn’t infect the people who lived there.Nicky: And it’s really… The timing is because this is when the Black Death arrived in Europe forthe first time. Before that, Europe, historians think, had been for centuries relatively free ofnew infectious diseases. And then the Black Death gets started. A lot of mystery still aboutwhere that started and how it spread, but historians think it started in China and spread3toward Europe that way. And by the 1340s it had arrived in, you know, some of thesetrading ports that were doing business with the East.Dubrovnik, at the time, was a huge trading port. It was one of the first places you’d stop onthe way into Europe with your ship full of valuable goods. And the people who lived inDubrovnik at the time, they wanted to have their cake and eat it. They didn’t want to stoptrade because that’s how they made their money, but they didn’t want to die of the plague.So, quarantine was this attempt to say, “We just park you here initially on an islandoffshore, and later in purpose-built facilities, and we wait and see, and then if you’re notsick, cool. We can still do trade and make money. And if you are sick, we kept out theplague.”Alie: How long was their quarantine? How long did you have to wait and see if the Black Deathwould consume a ship full of people before you could say, like, “Okay, we’re cool. Bring onthe grains.”?Nicky: 30 days at first, in Dubrovnik, but they quickly switched it to 40, and that was not for thekind of reasons we decide a quarantine length today. Nowadays, the quarantine length isexactly as long as we need to know… you know, according to how long the disease takes tobe diagnosed or show symptoms. Back then, you know, there was much less of that. Therewasn’t a germ theory of disease or anything, so 40 was chosen because of its religioussignificance.Alie: Really?Nicky: Yeah, it was sort of… I mean, you know, 40 days and nights of rain. The 40 days of Lentbefore Christ’s ascension, and so on. It’s a period that was seen as a period of purificationor transformation. In Hebrew thought, it’s the length of a generation. So it had thissymbolic sense that you would know for sure at the end of that period.Alie: Ah-ha! And then, what about pre-ship migrations? Are period huts a type of quarantine?Nicky: That’s a really good question. Throughout the research of this, people were like “Whatabout leper colonies?” You might be the first person, Alie, to ask us about period huts. So,good job, you. Typhoid Mary, people say, “Was that quarantine?” No. If you know theperson is diseased, or just having their period, then you know. There is no uncertainty.You’re not waiting to find out. What that is, is isolation.And this is what makes quarantine so interesting and so easily abused as well, is that youhave to not know. There just has to be doubt, and suspicion, and uncertainty, and fear.Alie: Got it. Okay.Geoff: And I think that quarantine is so metaphorically powerful precisely because, you know, theidea is that there might be something inside you that is dangerous to others but we don’tknow yet, you don’t even know yet, and so you need the space and time that quarantinegives in order to see if this thing will come out. It becomes mythological. It even sounds likethe plot of a horror movie.Think about John Carpenter’s The Thing where there’s people hanging out at an Antarcticbase waiting to see if there’s something hidden in them. And I think that quarantine reallyhas that exciting aspect to it that lends that poetic, religious, or mythological note thatNicky was talking about, and also made it so exciting to explore as a topic.4Aside: So, Geoff and Nicky make the excellent point that isolation connotes a confirmedcase, but quarantine is really more of a “Shrug. Let’s hope this wasn’t necessary. Thanks fordoing it anyway.”As someone who tends to think that more is more when it comes to effort, it can be hard tounderstand just how important doing less has been for the greater good of humanity andhas been for centuries.Alie: Any idea, going through old notes, or letters, or manuscripts, what were people doing whilethey were quarantined in the past before there was, like, Angry Birds and Twitter?Geoff: Yeah, that’s funny. Such a good question. You would see sailors who would come on a verylong journey through the Mediterranean, or for that matter all the way around the world,across the Atlantic or even the Pacific, but now they’re not able to get off the ship. They’rebeing held in quarantine. They can actually see the land. They can see the city that they’vesailed to. But they just have to sit on deck for 40 days just waiting to see if somethinghappens to one of the crew members or if one of them has this disease. So, boredom is avery, very prominent note that you see throughout history.Eventually, this led to some things where, you know, richer… the captains of the shipsthemselves, who could afford it, or who were simply treated better, were able to stay inlarger quarantine facilities, maybe even get off the ship and come into land and stay in oneof these lazarettos or like that quarantine station that I mentioned in Sydney. And if youcould afford it or if you were simply treated better – maybe because of race, maybe becauseof gender – you’re given more resources to get you through the period of quarantine. So,that was definitely something that we’ve looked at because that’s yet another way in whichquarantine can become unequally distributed, so to speak.Just very briefly, another thing we found too was quarantine erotica. People actuallygetting…Alie: [bursts in giggles] I’m so sorry! I never thought those two words would be mushed togetherin just a sloppy, sexy Moon Pie. Like, WHAT?! [laughs]Geoff: But you know, you’re trapped in this building with strangers. You’re forbidden maybe to benear them or to touch them. And all of that is just leading up to a kind of erotic frisson thatturns into stories. And you know, you see that in the golden age of quarantine literature, inthe 1800s, I guess you could say. Even during Covid-19, there was the rise of online eroticafor people who were fantasizing about being trapped in an airport hotel with other peopleon the same flights, and the next thing you know they’re bumping into each other in moreways than one.Alie: [cackles mischievously] But wait, go back. There was a golden age of quarantine erotica? Noone told me about this!Nicky: Oh yeah. I know. And I studied English literature for my undergrad and we did not focus onthis and I feel shortchanged, frankly. But yeah, in the 1800s there was this, kind of, mass…They were these pulpy, syrupy short stories and novellas. One of them is called Love in theLazarette. It was sort of, you know, this tinge of the exotic because you were travelingoverseas and you didn’t know who was who, were they sick, were they not? And you’rebored, you have all this time on your hands. You’re mingling with others.Aside: Of course I looked this up. And I had my eyes open quite wide to titles like Love inLockdown and Quaranteen: Step-Sibling Love In The Time Of The Coronavirus: A Story Of5Taboo Romance, as well as the novel Covid-69: An Erotic Coronavirus Quarantine Story. Andthough I haven’t read the last one, let’s hope that Covid-69 isn’t a futuristic romp set in the2069 covid resurgence. Let’s hope it’s just about good-old pandemic knob-slobbin’.Alie: And did you have to study any baby booms that happened after quarantines, or do we finda dip because people are isolated and too scared and depressed to get it on?Nicky: Excellent question. What they’re predicting after Covid-19 is a dip. We did not study thishistorically. I mean, historically, you have to remember as well, during the Black Death, athird to half of the people in your town might’ve died, so it was altogether a next-leveldisease. And I think you might frantically try to reproduce after that, but not maybe during.Aside: Okay, so maybe you’re not emerging from a cocoon of immunity with a freshdevelopment deal or a new human being. You still did a good. I think.Alie: And how much do they find that quarantine does save lives? Obviously, if I had to guess,scientifically, I would guess a shitload. But did you have to look at any historical data frompast or more recent quarantines?Nicky: This is a really good question. And actually, when the guy at the CDC who is the head of theDivision of Global Migration and Quarantine started out in the job, he actually wonderedexactly the same thing. Like, “Do we actually know that quarantine works? Like for sure?Scientifically?” So he studied the 1918 flu specifically.It’s hard to study older quarantines because the records just don’t exist to get you that levelof quantitative accuracy that you’d be looking for. But for the 1918 flu, he was able to seethat, actually, yes, quarantine… even when it’s leaky – and it is always a little bit leaky – thecities that did best were the ones that quarantined earliest and longest. And you could justsee that again and again in the evidence. So yes, the answer is yes. They seem unfair. Theyoften are unfair. They’re almost always leaky. And yet, they save lives.Alie: I wonder… When do you think they’ll get data on this recent pandemic? Are those numbersthey’re going to be crunching for decades, do you think?Nicky: You’re starting to see it already. You’re starting to see, almost daily, papers coming out thatsay, actually, “Travel bans help save lives,” or “Places the enforced lockdowns earlier savedlives,” or “School closings saved lives.” They’re even doing the analysis and showing thatactually it wasn’t as economically damaging as everyone warned, and in fact, in the longrun, will have saved more money by saving lives than cost. So, already the evidence iscoming out, I think. You know, it’s a place-by-place thing because quarantine was apatchwork, always, but you can find that data already.Aside: Just a quick aside. There was a recent article in The Guardian titled “The world’seconomic recovery from Covid-19 looks likely to be uneven.” That was the title. There yougo. And the author, Nouriel Roubini, essentially goes on to detail that:In the US, a decline in new infections, high vaccination rates, increased consumer andbusiness confidence, and the far-reaching effects of fiscal and monetary expansion willdrive a robust recovery this year.6But it also continues to say that:The outlook is more fragile for many emerging and developing economies, where highpopulation density, weaker healthcare systems, and lower vaccination rates willcontinue to allow the virus to spread.Also noting that incomes from tourism dried up in some countries. But one thing is certain,people are taking notes.Geoff: I think as well, as we saw with the flu of 1918, I mean, the data is going to be mined fordecades to come. I think people will still be writing papers and crunching the numbers onCovid-19… there’ll be grad students writing theses about this in 2050 trying to figure outwhat did and did not work.But you know, it is really difficult, I think, to quantify exactly… you know, if we’re talkingabout lives saved in the sense that getting numbers on things that didn’t happen is a bittough. And I think that level, what I think is so, frankly, kind of cool about quarantine –although I hesitate to hear myself calling quarantine cool, but in any case – is just that it’sso simple. It’s, “Just stay in this one space. Don’t interact with other people or other thingsfor a certain amount of time, and after that point, if you’ve been proven safe, you can comeout again and we can go from there.” So, it’s a pretty remarkable and remarkably effectivetool for what it’s asking you to do, which is simply to be spatially separate.Aside: So quarantine is like a game of freeze tag. Maybe it seemed fun at first until holdingstill started to really ache, and then those aches just became a new normal as we watched afrenzy continue around us. But what about all the folks who lost jobs or took on newessential jobs that put them at the most risk? Nicky and Geoff share some globalperspective from their research.Nicky: Marty Citron and others thinking about this are like, “Okay, if you’re going to make thatsacrifice,” which is a sacrifice, “and you’re making it for the public good, then the publickind of owes you a duty of care and you should, for example, not have to worry aboutlosing your job, or losing your income, or feeding your family. And if you make thatsacrifice you should be ensured treatment and access to vaccines when we have them, andso on.”And it’s, like, this idea that there’s a sort of bill of rights for the quarantined that I think isreally being… That’s one of the things that has, sort of, made some of the lockdowns ofCovid-19 seem so unequal, because those rights weren’t being thought through. Peoplewere being told to give something up for the public good.I think one of the things we ended up concluding is that if you don’t have a public, you can’thave public health, and that quarantine really relies on that sense of being part of acommunity. In Venice, where the first quarantine hospitals were built, those quarantinehospitals were one of the five institutions in the city where notaries had to ask, “Would youlike to leave money to this in your will?” It was one of the public goods. It was one of thethings that was seen as being, you know, an institution that everyone was responsible forand that was protecting everyone.And I think if you are living in a place and time where we don’t have that sense thateveryone is responsible and everyone is also being protected by these institutions, then it’snever going to work.7Alie: What about historically? When you were writing this book, obviously you did not expect amajor global pandemic to happen when you started writing the book. But I’m really curiousto hear about some of the records that you had to pore through and if there were anyrecords that really stuck in your mind, or really surprised you, or emotionally stuck withyou?Nicky: Oh yeah. I mean, going through our materials and then watching covid unfold was like… Itfelt like déjà vu every day. For example, in Dubrovnik, they’re the first to have passedquarantine regulations. Well, they also passed a regulation saying that only people who,basically, weren’t essential workers could leave the cities. So essential workers,laundresses, and gravediggers, and so on. People who were in these risky jobs wererequired to stay in the city and the nobility could flee.So, you saw those kinds of details of gravediggers being hanged for breaking quarantineregulations and nobles running off to the countryside to stay in a villa and tell stories.That’s been there since the beginning. So, those kinds of stories… Yeah. And then seeingthat play out during covid, it was like, “Oh gosh. Have we learned nothing?”Aside: And after more than a year of essential workers being literally the lowest-paidsector in the nation with some pretty high risks, one University of California San Franciscostudy found that of Californians aged 18-65, the highest occupational death rates wereamong cooks. So, as things open up again and you start to see “Help Wanted” signs inrestaurant windows and fast-food hubs, it might take on a different meaning to you.Geoff: I think also, there were just so many haunting details that came from some of the researchthat we did. One of the things we learned about was in Split, which is a city in Croatia,where an individual who was working at the lazaretto, I think he was a guard at thelazaretto, noticed that in the cargo bay where they had been storing cargo taken fromships, he saw a really beautiful scarf one day and decided he would take it home from thelazaretto, the quarantine station, and give it to his wife as a present.[clip of Oh No song from TikTok: “Oh no…”]But the scarf had the fleas that transmit the bacterium that causes bubonic plague.[“Oh no…”]So not only did he give his wife the plague, but it led to an outbreak that swept through thecity of Split.[“Oh no, no, no, no, no.”]Another example that sounds like a John Carpenter film… I apologize for mentioning JohnCarpenter more than once in a single interview, but in any case… There was a great storyfrom Boston where the pilot of a ship was being held in quarantine on an island offshorefrom Boston, and when the water froze over, he just walked into town. And I mean, luckilydidn’t bring the plague with him. But it’s those kinds of little, tiny details that feel like thebeginning of a film, or the beginning of “This is how the outbreak starts” that really stuck,at least with me, in the sense of just how dramatic and strange they are.When Nicky and I started going into everything from high-level isolation facilities inLondon where they work with Ebola patients, to even underground in New Mexico, to afacility where they’re storing nuclear waste and it has to be buried for at least 10,000 years,you begin to see that actually The Andromeda Strain has a weird, kind of, fictional realismthat was interesting to note.8Even the movie, Quarantine, which is a horror movie that came out in, I think, 2008, I thinkis also interesting because the name of the film is just Quarantine, as if the word itself… Youinstantly know this is a horror movie. Just saying that word, “quarantine,” is going to makepeople scared.Aside: So if living through the last year and a half and witnessing the continued infectionand mortality rates feels exhausting, that’s because we’ve been living in a real-life horrorfilm. We lived through it, so cut yourself a little slack for not cleaning every closet ordeveloping those weird vertical abs that only Ken dolls have and also writing King Lear andother masterpieces.But what else is real but feels like a movie?Nicky: The fact that I think I’ve said to the most number of people is that when the Apolloastronauts first came back to the Earth, the CDC had said that they would not let them backin if they did not go into quarantine because, you know, no one knew there wasn’t someweird germ on the Moon that was going to kill us all.[clip of Isaac Mizrahi and Shawn Killinger from QVC debacle:]Isaac: Google the Moon, okay?Shawn: I guarantee someone’s googling right now because I knew it was not a planet.Isaac: The Moon is such a planet. I can’t even stand it!Shawn: The Moon is not a planet!Isaac: What else is it if it’s not a planet??Shawn: It’s not! I believe it’s a star, or… it’s something.Isaac: It’s a moon!So, the CDC literally put the Lunar Receiving Lab in Texas under federal quarantine forpotential extraterrestrial infection. It’s the only time, I think, there’s been a quarantine forextraterrestrial infection on Earth. I mean, they really took it seriously. There was a plan. Ifthe astronauts had developed some curious, inexplicable disease, there was actually a planto just bury the entire Lunar Receiving Lab and all the people in it under, you know,concrete and dirt, just to save the Earth. So, they were taking this very seriously.And I think nowadays we kind of, “Oh, the Moon’s just a rock,” and imagining that danger issort of, “Oh ha-ha, weren’t they silly?” But you know, if we’re going to bring stuff back fromMars, it’s going to be the same type of precautions that we need to take. So, it’s a reallyinteresting fact to be thinking about right now and I think it, kind of, blows people’s minds.Alie: The idea of space critters coming in. You don’t know! Who knows what’s going to be onthere? Maybe the whole Earth will turn to cheese. Maybe there’s a weird fromagebacterium. Who knows!Can I ask you some listener questions from patrons?Geoff: Please do.Nicky: Please!Alie: Ooh! Okay. All right, here’s the deal. We’re getting into a phase where a lot of restrictions, atleast in North America and the United States, are lifting. But that’s not global. So, a lot oflisteners wanted to know: How do we know if it’s time to lift isolation and quarantines in acertain region?9Nicky: Okay, so I think as with all things quarantine, there’s always a level of uncertainty, andthat’s one of the uncomfortable things about it. But in the book, we do spend a lot of timetalking to the people who figure out… you know, the disease modelers, the epidemiologistswho try to forecast spread and come up with, you know, the appropriate response basedon what they think is going to happen. So, what they would say is, scientifically, whatyou’re looking at is that ‘R number’, the reproduction number. Are more people passingthis along? If that R number is above 1, you’re looking at its spread. The higher it is, theworse the spread, etc. So, you can make decisions based on that.So, they say with relative confidence that once that R number is under control and there’s acertain level of immunity, either through vaccination or exposure in the population, thenyeah, it is safe. We do look at the limitations of modeling in our book. You know, we’re notat the point where we can predict the future accurately. All we can make are guesses thatare more or less educated. So, I think also people should operate according to their owncomfort level.Alie: That makes sense.Geoff: I think that’s one of the things, you know, that’s so interesting with covid, that it really hitsthe sweet spot of a disease that requires quarantine, because you can be infectious even ifyou don’t have symptoms. So, you have to maintain separation from other people becauseyou can be spreading something that you yourself don’t even know you have.Nicky: The other thing I’d say is, this uncertainty about, “Am I safe? Am I not?” it’s at the heart ofquarantine and also it’s just what people cannot stand and makes them anxious,understandably. And they want science to provide certainty, and I think if there’s one thingthat is really interesting about this is that, actually, science needs to do a little bit of a betterjob of communicating that it’s just our best working theory at this point in time.Alie: Megan Younce asked: Will everything ever feel back to normal? And Lisa Taylor said: Andwhen? I need validation.Any idea how long, based on things that happened in the past, people can… Let’s say withthe flu of 1918, when do people start to shrug off that kind of anxiety?Nicky: That’s another really great question. There are a couple of things I’d say. One is, in somesense, people will move on really quickly. And this is actually one of the problems withquarantine, because we never take the time to take the lessons that we learned andimplement them for next time because we’re so busy celebrating being done with it.So, part of the thesis of our book is, “Hi, we have this amazing moment right now to makesure that, really, almost for the first time in history, we learn from quarantine and we getready to do it differently next time because there will be a next time.” There’s just a lot ofbacteria and viruses out there and they reproduce and mutate quicker than we do.So that, I would say… I would say we’re going to bounce back really quickly and that mightactually be a bad thing if we don’t take the time to learn lessons. And the other thing I’d sayis, even though we’re going to bounce back really quickly, a lot of things will have changedand they will form the new normal. This is something we found… You know, the firstpassports, which are a thing that we just take for granted now – you can’t travel withoutone overseas, you can’t cross an international water without one – that came about as away to move around during the Black Death and skip quarantine by showing a healthpassport.10So, these kind of bureaucratic ways of controlling movement, monitoring health, surveillingthe population, they kind of get baked in as the new normal and people take them forgranted. So, in some ways it will never be the same and then in some ways it shouldn’t be.Geoff: I think that what has actually been really interesting, and quite ominous in fact, over thelast two months, is that at one point everybody thought India was doing really well andthat covid had, kind of, bypassed India and that, you know, everything from thearchitecture of Indian cities, with everything open to the air, was not allowing covid tobuild up inside homes and have people breathing it, and picking it up, and giving it toothers. But then, now, as you know, as we record this podcast, India is going through areally huge spike in covid cases. It’s one of the worst countries in the world right now.And you know, the news can change really quickly because a country that appears to bestarting off, maybe, very badly and is very hard-hit can actually get back on its feet andfigure out what it did wrong. And vice versa; a country that appears to be, not immune, butsidestepping or avoiding all of the really negative stuff can really kind of get blindsided by asecond wave, or by variants, or by several variants, or simply by bad politics. And so, that’sbeen pretty eye-opening. As far as individual countries, I do think there’s kind of a scientificplaybook for how to deal with epidemics or respiratory illnesses.Nicky: One of my old bosses is a professor of history, and she was like, “Well, I can say thisbecause I’m a historian, but we are living in historic times.” And I really do think we allwent through, sort of, a major moment in history together and we should all cut each othersome slack for whatever we’re feeling.Alie: Yes. Good call. Thank you so much for doing this, for being on. It’s been really great toprocess the last year with a few experts, to be honest.Nicky: Thank you. It’s such a treat for us.Geoff: Thanks for having us.Aside: Let’s continue to process, shall we? We shall. But first, just a quick breather and wewill hear about a few sponsors of the show who make it possible to donate to a fewdifferent charities for this episode. First up is 500WomenScientists.org, which is anonprofit dedicated to making science open, inclusive, and accessible. They’re awesome.We’re also sending a donation to Covid.GiveIndia.org, which aims to stop the virus’s spreadand supports vulnerable families affected by Covid 19. They support healthcareinfrastructure and they boost oxygen supply and ventilators to patients in India.We’ll be sending another donation as well to the School of American Thanatology, whichseeks to provide inclusive and accessible education opportunities in and adjacent to thefields of thanatology, death work, and thanabotany, while also fostering research andwriting opportunities for the community. The School of American Thanatology’s autumnseason starts Monday, September 7th. There’s a link to them in the show notes. Thosedonations were made possible by sponsors.[Ad Break]On to a few more expert opinions, including an epidemiologist, a medical doctor, andsomeone who is here to calm your nerves and unscramble your brain; help you moveforward. First up, we have your favorite Vaccine Infodemiologist.Jessica Malaty Rivera: My name is Jessica Malaty Rivera.11Aside: … who I texted last night at 7pm and said, “HELLO IT’S ME. I LOVE YOU. CAN WERECORD A MINI-SODE TOMORROW MAYBE?” And she made time for me this morning. I’mso grateful. She’s a microbiologist who got her Master’s in Emerging Infectious Diseasesfrom Georgetown University School of Medicine. She’s also an infectious diseaseepidemiologist with the COVID-19 Dispersed Volunteer Research Network, an expertcontributor for all kinds of news outlets. And you may also know her work from TheAtlantic’s COVID Tracking Project.Alie: I’ll start recording, just so that we have everything. You’re back. You’re joining us again.Busy year, of course, for you.Jessica: Yeah.Alie: How are you doing? We’re in June now. A lot’s changed. When we talked last time wethought it might be fall before anyone had vaccines that was a normal Joe.Jessica: Yeah. I’ve actually loved how wrong I was about that prediction. [laughs] I err on the side ofcautious optimism with a little sprinkle of pessimism, so I was just delighted to see howahead of the curve we were when it came to that timing and the fact that most at least havehad access to the vaccine in the United States. It’s really remarkable.Alie: Yeah. I got mine in April. When were you able to get yours?Jessica: I got my first dose on March 16th, 2021. And the reason why I remember that was becauseit was also the one-year anniversary of the first person to get a dose in a trial in 2020. And Ijust, you know, of course cried my eyes out over that.Alie: Did you do it on purpose or just got lucky that way? [laughs]Jessica: It just happened that way! It just happened that way.Alie: Now, I feel like the US is ahead of the curve, obviously, like you said, with vaccines. What’sgoing on with the rest of the world and what does that mean for the way that we’ve seencurves rise, and fall, and come back?Jessica: I think that’s a really important question, and I think it’s important for all of us toremember that we are still very much in a pandemic, and pandemics are exactly that.They’re pandemics. They are global. And this disease is, kind of, burning through countriesand disproportionately affecting communities at varying levels, and we can’t call anyvictories yet until everybody has equitable access to a vaccine.And I don’t know if you saw today’s news. I was really thrilled to see that Novavax’s datacame out really good and COVAX has committed to securing 1.1 billion doses, which alsofrees up the US to donate even more doses. So, we’re getting there. But some of theseestimates, Alie, are like 2023 for some countries to get fully vaccinated, and that’s just notacceptable.Alie: Yeah, oh my god. Is it a supply issue? Is it a pipeline problem? Is it distribution?Jessica: All of the above. It’s the fact that, you know, developing these vaccines, like actuallyproducing them, is very labor-intensive and requires high skill and a skilled staff to do that,a skilled workforce. Not all the places in the world actually have that on an infrastructurallevel. It’s the cold chain process too; making sure that there’s enough refrigeration and sub-freezing temperatures for shipment and storage. It’s cost.12It should not be costing people to get this vaccine, but that’s because we in the UnitedStates had that majorly financed by Operation Warp Speed. We need things like COVAX tomake sure that it is equitable and free for other people in other countries too.Aside: COVAX, sidenote, is directed by Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, the Coalition forEpidemic Preparedness Innovations, and the World Health Organization. Its mission is toprovide equitable access to Covid-19 vaccines because this is very much a globalhumanitarian issue and we’re trying really hard to outrun this thing. So, toot-toot! Allaboard to vaccine town. Get in!Now, before things get worse… I promise, this episode, it gets brighter and sunnier in aminute. I promise.Alie: What about variants in the meantime as this ravages different countries?Jessica: Yeah, variants are what keep me up at night, to be honest. I mean, I think that it’s notsomething we need to be freaking out over. Variants are a very natural byproduct ofviruses that mutate over time. I think we talked about this last time, but viruses need a hostbody to replicate, and as they replicate, they mutate, making little mistakes. And after anaccumulation of mistakes, you have what we call a variant.It’s not surprising that we have multiple. It would not be surprising if we have more. Butthe best way to outsmart the variants is to prevent more bodies, more hosts, from beinginfected to allow more replication to happen. We do that by keeping risk low and we dothat by getting vaccinated.Now, that said, we have really encouraging data to show that the vaccines that arecurrently available are really effective at reducing illness if you’re infected with thevariants. It’s not… We don’t have all the data yet; we know that at least for the mRNAvaccines, Pfizer and Moderna, the most concerning variant right now, the Delta one, thosetwo vaccines seem to be really effective. We don’t have data yet on Johnson & Johnson forthe Delta variant. But we’re trying as fast as we can to get that data. But honestly, the bestthing you can do is continue to keep your risk low and get vaccinated if you haven’talready.Alie: Any new vaccine data coming out that would be, perhaps, soothing to vaccine-hesitantfolks?Jessica: I mean, there’s been recent data that’s been very encouraging on maternal health. Recentlythey had data to show that there was no negative impact on the placenta from the vaccine,which I know a lot of people are still very concerned over very false claims about itsnegative impact on fertility. There have been, you know, hundreds of thousands of reportsinto V-safe, which is the CDC’s data collection survey thing. You can sign up for it after youget vaccinated. They basically take some small data from you on how you’re feeling, anysymptoms, any adverse events. And so far there haven’t been any safety signals on that endwhen it comes to pregnancy. Just really, really encouraging.Now, when it comes to mRNA technology, I think if anything, it’s just proving howfascinating it is and the fact that these manufacturers are working already on using thistechnology for research on HIV vaccines, and research for RSV, and research for otherillnesses. And the RSV one is actually really interesting to me, as a parent. I’ve got twoyoung kids and I’ve actually had a kid who was hospitalized for a number of days from anRSV infection. So, it can’t come soon enough, right? We have decades and decades of13research that have prepared us for mRNA to be the new showstopper in vaccine technologyand I am here for it.Aside: That’s right. mRNA vaccine technology is the Beyoncé album that she’d beenworking on for years that dropped at midnight on a Wednesday with no notice and willchange our world for generations.Oh, y’all have kids?Alie: Speaking of little ones, when do all littles get jabs? What’s the status on that?Jessica: So, they are working on an age de-escalation process. Right now, the Pfizer vaccine isavailable for ages 12-15 and we’re going to see that very soon for Moderna as well. Thenext age group will be 9-12, and then 6-9, and then 2 years to 6 years, then 6 months to twoyears. And that will, kind of, happen incrementally as the data becomes available.There have been some estimates… and I’m kind of cautiously optimistic, that we initiallysaid Q1, Q2 of next year, but I’ve heard Dr. Fauci and others predict that it could be as soonas by the end of this year. So, I mean, I wouldn’t be surprised if most, at least elementary,adolescent kids are vaccinated by the fall school year time, or at least before the holidays.For the youngest kiddos, I think I’m probably still expecting it in early 2022.Alie: Okay. And until then, how are things going with herd immunity? At what point are thingsfeeling safe to gather? I know a lot of us have been chasing covid restrictions and saying,“Okay, what are we at now? This state versus this state?” How is herd immunity working interms of resuming, at least in the US, some kind of “normal” life?Jessica: I feel like herd immunity kind of got a bad rap. It became this fixation with folks when itcame to… It was almost equated as an on/off switch for the pandemic, like once you reachit, it’s over. And I think the better image to think about it is, like, a dimmer switch that youare, kind of, slowly making the virus less and less bright in the community. But it’s not amoment, right? It’s not a moment that we can specifically predict. We think it’s going to bewhen we’re close to that 80% fully vaccinated range.And the reason we say that is because we've never lived post-covid, right? We can say thatwith confidence about diseases like measles, for instance. When measles vaccinationcoverage dropped below 95%, we immediately started to see outbreaks. We see them inclusters of cases among kids in various parts of the country, in various parts of the world.So we know, because we’ve lived post-measles vaccination campaigns, what it takes tokeep transmission extremely low or nonexistent. We don’t know that yet for covid.So because of that, I think this obsession with a number is getting people really… Givingthem either false hope or just, kind of, false expectations on what it’s going to look like tobe either managing covid as a less disruptive, possibly endemic virus, or a virus that maybewe do fully eliminate from our population. I think that right now we’re in the 50%-ishrange for people who are fully vaccinated in the US. That’s not enough, right? We have along way to go to get to at least 80%.But again, herd immunity is not a moment in time and it’s also not something we canactually claim just for one country because we live in a very global world and people aretraveling. People are going to different places now, and countries are opening up, andbusinesses are resuming their travel. So we have to think about this in a much, much biggerpopulation.Alie: That’s a great point.14Aside: What will the summer bring? Will it be Vaxxed and Waxed Hot Girl? Hairy But Alive2021? Masks Off, Thongs On? That could be sandals or butt bonnets; it’s none of mybusiness.Jessica: You know, my Vax Girl Summer is going to be kind of a lot of the same. We do have travelplanned. We are planning on seeing some family who we haven’t seen in a very long timeover the summer. We’re planning on getting on a plane with the kiddos. I kind of wanted towait until a little bit later in the year to do that, maybe giving them a chance to getvaccinated or see those numbers be a little bit higher, but thank god my kids are not at highrisk of severe infection. They don’t have any underlying conditions. It’s not “No Risk…”I mean, this all kind of goes down to people’s risk tolerance, right? Everybody’s risktolerance is going to be very different based on your medical experience, any medicaltrauma, your risk tolerance in life in general. We’re kind of taking it day by day. I don’tthink that there’s one-size-fits-all for how people can have a good summer. I amencouraging people to, you know, celebrate the fact that these vaccines do actually changeyour life in the sense that you are at a very low risk of getting or spreading the virus onceyou’re fully vaccinated. So it’s not like nothing changes.A lot of things can change. But I also recognize that I and many other people have little kidswho are not eligible for vaccination yet. And a lot of people, too, have either kids who aremedically fragile or people in their families or their bubbles that are immunocompromised,on immunosuppressors, that it doesn’t make it a very easy answer to just say, “Okay, youcan do this and it’s fine and it’s safe.” A lot of people want me to just say, “Is it safe to dothis?” And I just can’t answer those questions all the time.I think outdoors is awesome, especially if the weather is, you know, pleasant. Doing thingsoutdoors, I’m like, really fine even being in mixed company with people who areunvaccinated because I know that my risk is really, really low to get it, especially outdoors.So, I kind of feel like it depends on the circumstances. I don’t love the idea of, like, hundredsand hundreds of people in a closed room for a long period of time with mixed vaccination.But you know, again, that’s risk tolerance and mine’s just not there yet.Alie: Right.Aside: What aboooouuttt… masks? What do we think?Alie: I mean, mask fashion is going to be around for a while, right?Jessica: Yeah, I don’t think masks, for individuals, are going anywhere for a while. I mean, it’s June14th here in California. Tomorrow is the day that we’re supposed to see mask mandateskind of eliminated and no longer needing to be enforced in private places. They willcontinue to be enforced in places of public transit, and major hubs like that, airports, etc.But you know, I think that it’s one of the, kind of, big public health takeaways from thispandemic that a lot of people have this muscle memory of, “I don’t feel comfortable in thisspace. I’m just going to put a mask on.” Or, “I’ve got a tickle in my throat,” or “I’ve got acough.” Let’s be honest, a lot of respiratory viruses are back with a vengeance right nowbecause they’ve just been waiting around.And I know that for myself, if I’m going to be traveling during flu season, I’m bringingmasks with me just in case. And I think for a lot of people that’s going to be a takeawayfrom this pandemic that lasts for a lot longer. In places like airports, and train stations, andsubways, etc., I think we’ll probably see them enforced for a bit longer until we get higherrates of vaccination, until we see really, really low transmission. There is a concern that the15fall could bring another surge. We hope that’s not the case, which is why we’re trying to getas many people vaccinated now, but that said, I think that we’re probably going to see a lotof places, in the near future, say that masks are optional or masks are not required at all.Aside: Okay, so that’s a lot of body talk. And really, where would we be without our lungsand our blood vessels? But what about the bucket of neurons trying to make sense of all ofthis?Alie: Do you think that there has been, psychologically, like a mixed response to reopening?Jessica: Absolutely, and I think we have to be very, very gentle with each other. I think the processof re-socializing ourselves… I mean, I’m seeing my kids be, like, really weird as they’restarting to re-socialize and being like, “Oh gosh, they haven’t been around other kids. Thisis stressful…” Adults are the same way, right? A lot of us have very different feelings aboutwhat it means to, like, hug again; what it means to be indoors at a restaurant again. And Ithink that we need to be patient, and kind, and gentle with each other because we’re not allgoing to arrive there at the same time.And you know, having those conversations with people that you love and people who are inyour community, to be like, “Hey, what are you comfortable with? Let’s pivot to make surethat we’re all in the same boat,” because I don’t think that it’s fair to just be like,“Restaurants are open! Let’s all go indoors right now,” and not everybody’s there.Alie: Yeah, definitely.Aside: So, there is some risk still, even if you’re vaccinated. But thank your basket ofbiscuits it’s very rare.Jessica: I mean, breakthrough infections are happening. They’re happening at an extremely lowrate. Like .1% of vaccinated cases. But you know, we need all that data to better prepare usfor the next pandemic. And I mean the next pandemic. This isn’t the last one. So, it’s kind ofput me back into full gear of pandemic preparedness, pandemic surveillance because we’venow lived it, you know, and it’s no longer something I fear will happen many, many yearsaway. I mean not saying it’s going to happen immediately, but it could, and I’m just doingeverything that I can with a number of incredibly gifted researchers to help us be way moreprepared to either prevent… not be as impacted by another virus again.I also want to leave people on a note of optimism. This is so much better than I expected,right? The fact that it is the middle of June and we’re having this conversation knowing thatat least 50% of the population has been fully vaccinated, this is wonderful. I think we’regoing to have a much better summer. I think we’re going to have a much better fall. And I’mreally hopeful that our holidays this year are going to be filled with so much more joy.Alie: And togetherness and casseroles, perhaps.Jessica: [laughs] Bring back the casseroles!Alie: [laughs] Hot Casserole Winter!Jessica: [laughs]Aside: Now that we’ve covered the history and the present-day medical ins and outs ofthis pandemic, let’s talk oceans. Let’s talk about your emotions. Let’s talk about the future.So, I hollered at my dear, dear friend who I met via Ologies, Cole Imperi, who is a triple-certified thanatologist, a thanabotanist, a death worker. She is President of the HistoricLinden Grove Cemetery & Arboretum, and honestly, America’s favorite grief counselor.16She took a break today from planting trees at the cemetery to run and record a message foryou, and I love her so much.Cole Imperi: Hi everyone. It’s your favorite thanatologist, Cole Imperi. Still mohawked, but now withgreen hair. You see, I have changed a little. And so have you. So let’s talk about that.There’s a word I developed as part of my research that might help you as you venturethrough post-pandemic life. The word is ‘shadowloss’.Aside: Shadowloss. Oooh, let’s get into it!Cole: So, in modern society, we are not great at honoring losses that don’t involve a dead body,but shadowlosses are often the things that hugely impact us. A divorce might be ashadowloss. Or maybe you got ghosted as an adult and it left you reeling. Or getting firedunexpectedly. Those can all be shadowlosses.Now, two people might both have gotten fired unexpectedly and one person was like,“That’s the best thing that ever happened to me. It was great.” But the other person maybedidn’t see it coming and maybe that was a shadowloss for them. Those are all examples ofshadowlosses. And if any of these things happened also against the backdrop of apandemic, that is a double whammy.How many of you had to cancel a wedding? Miss prom? Say a final goodbye through aYouTube live stream? Those can all be experienced as shadowlosses. You or somebody youknow might also be experiencing this: At the start of the pandemic, perhaps that was ashadowloss for you. You lost, maybe, your job, or at least every semblance of what wasyour normal life. Gone. A shadowloss is a loss in life, not of life. And it’s a word we use todefine and claim an experience for ourselves. When a shadowloss happens, something dies.Not someone.Shadowlosses can accompany what I call Big Deaths, which are the loss of a human or ananimal that we love, but it is up to you to decide if the pandemic has been a shadowloss foryou or not.Aside: How do you know? Cole breaks it down.Cole: We grieve both Big Deaths and shadowlosses. So if you have been a mess for months andmonths, or dealing with, like, you wake up and you’re like, “Oh my gosh, get it together.What is wrong with you?” It might be grief. You might be grieving. And grief is not just anemotion. In fact, grief, the definition, in modern grief theory, grief is how we respond toloss. And the way you respond to loss is unique to you and unique to where you are in yourlife.Our grief responses change as we get more practice with loss, and there are actually sixcategories of, like, symptoms in the grief response. You can have symptoms that arephysical, behavioral, cognitive, emotional, social, and spiritual. When I’m grieving, I notice aphysical symptom. I have the driest lips, always, when I am grieving. No chapstick can healthem. Also, when I’m grieving, my stutter… I have a stutter that always shows up on theletter ‘d’, which… there’s something there. Being a thanatologist, I say the words ‘dead’ and‘death’ and ‘dying’ a lot, but if I’m grieving… [laughs] it’s really difficult.Aside: So what if you feel like you should be joyous but you’re feeling wonky? First off,Whew! Boy howdy. You are not alone, friends.17Cole: Now, things are “going back to normal.” And for some reason you aren’t happy about it, oryou don’t want the thing that you originally wanted so bad. And basically, you don’t want to“go back to normal” and that is because you’ve changed.All loss is change. Whether it’s a Big Death or a shadowloss. And at this point, we’re so farinto the pandemic, it’s actually not possible to go back to where we were before. And infact, I don’t think we want to. My friends in the emergency management field, they’re sobrilliant because, after a disaster, the goal is restoration, rebuilding, and reshaping. Notreturning to normal. It’s not possible to go back because, well, normal died.Aside: Normal died. If you need a minute to scrawl that all over your binder or tattoo it onyour face, go for it. Normal died this year. That is why we feel weird.So, does she have any good news for us?Cole: I do have some good news. There are three things that each of us get to see, kind of, growand develop within ourselves after a loss. These are learned skills. So after a disaster, atrauma, a loss, what we see in people is the development of resiliency, empathy, andpresence.Ask yourself. Identify ways that you have been resilient this past year. How have you, like,fallen off the horse and then gotten back up? How have you done that? That is resiliency.These three qualities make us better people, and if we all are developing these threequalities more and more, the good news is that I think we will see a kinder, more caringsociety.That said, we all have that one family member who is, like, hellbent against personalgrowth in all forms. I always try to have empathy for those folks, because sometimes, forsome people, it’s a lot safer to stay the same, even if you’re unhappy, than to grow andchange, than to be different from who you were.Your life matters. Your life is precious. You have gone through stuff this year, and you havehad to spend a lot of time with yourself in a way that you maybe haven’t had to before.Maybe the last time you spent this much time alone was when you were a kid having tooccupy yourself all weekend. You might have felt really intense and even scary emotionsover this past year and a half. Things like feeling really scared, or despair, desperate, lonely.And I want to encourage you that now is a good time to grow.That said, growth is not comfortable. But now is the time to stand up for yourself. Now isthe time to take steps towards doing the things you always wanted to do. Listen: Takeadvantage of the extra empathy that is out there. Reach out, look inward, and jump in.Aside: So at this very weird place in time, and space, and world history, it might feel likeyou have one eye on the future, like, “Should you drag a keg to the beach for Hot and HairySummer and celebrate being not dead?” while then keeping the other eye on news reportsand variant graphs. What can we do?Cole: The pandemic is still here, but it’s also not, right? It’s like mixed messaging everywhere.And the reality is, the pandemic is always going to be a part of your life moving forward. Itwill always be a reference point, much like when people are like, “Where were you onSeptember 11th, 2001?” Same thing. The pandemic is a loss that is interwoven into thestories of each generation, each family, each person. It’s a scar of sorts that we all will carrywith us, always reminding us what we got through.18So for such an impactful thing, I’m going to recommend that we have a… we won’t call it afuneral, but let’s call it a funerary ritual. Something died. Your life as you knew it is gone.Whatever your shadowloss was for you. Humans have been having funerals, it’s theorized,basically as long as we’ve been dying. And our brains really, really benefit from that ritual.So if you need it, let me be the one to give you permission to have a funeral for yourshadowlosses as well as your Big Deaths. You can do that on your own, by yourself, and itstill counts.My favorite way to do this is to light, like, a 24-hour candle, pick some plants from outside,whatever works, even weeds, and then place a few objects or pictures representing whatyou’re having a funeral for next to the candle. It kind of makes a little space of honor and ithelps you validate your loss to yourself. It helps you stick up for yourself. Putting thisanother way, seeing is believing. Seeing is believing.Another thing you can do is take stock of the things you did before the pandemic thathelped you feel relaxed and the things you’re doing now that help you feel relaxed.Aside: Not feeling relaxed? There’s a term for our cloudy, murky brain problems, my littledoodlebugs!Cole: There’s something called allostatic overload, which is when we basically have so muchstress built up and not enough ways to, like, get it out, that we end up getting sometimesvery serious physical symptoms. Fatigue is probably the most common. So if you have had,kind of, unexplainable fatigue, you now have to sleep hard from 2-5pm every day, maybelook into this allostatic overload thing.Before the pandemic, for a lot of people, things like going to the gym or trivia night at thepub every Thursday, those were actually stress relievers, ways to get the stress out. And alot of the things that were forms of stress relief shut down during the pandemic. And manyof us didn’t replace those forms of stress release with anything. So that’s something you cando for yourself right now, take stock of that and say, “How am I getting the stress out ofmyself?”Aside: Remember when we replaced that stress relief with bread? I do. And Cole offers away to talk to yourself that is so helpful, and maybe you’ll use it for the rest of your life andshare it with a stranger on an airport shuttle. Who knows?Cole: Finally, everyone has had a different experience with the pandemic. Some of us had a lot ofBig Deaths, some had none. Some had more shadowloss than can be counted. And if you’refeeling like you made it through the pandemic unscathed or virtually untouched, thatdoesn’t mean you didn’t live through a pandemic. And if you were scathed and weretouched, that doesn’t mean you did anything wrong or somehow deserved it. The pandemicis a shared loss held by all of us. And I want to encourage you to stop asking “Why”questions and start asking “What” questions.When it comes to loss, typically we start by asking why. Why did this happen? Why me?Why my family? But the problem with “Why” questions is that even though we might get ananswer, it’s not going to change anything. Why did my aunt die from covid? Because therewas a global pandemic, and she got it, and she died. That’s why. That doesn’t make me feelany better.“What” questions are special magic grief medicine. “What” questions can help us getthrough the loss. Instead of asking why the pandemic, why someone died, start asking what.What am I going to do now that I’m restarting? In what way can I honor my loved one who19died? What would feel good for me right now? What can I do to honor my loss? In whatways can I take better care of myself moving forward?And that’s what I’ll leave you with. Ask “What” not “Why.” Take stock of how you’re gettingthe stress out of your body. And allow yourself the opportunity to have a funeral for all thatyou’ve lost, because all loss is change. Take good care of yourself. And hydrate. And thankyou, Alie, for having me back. Bye, everybody.Aside: Oh, Cole! Follow her everywhere. She’s on Instagram @Imperi and@AmericanThanatologist. Links to her are in the show notes and on my website. Also, gofind her October 2017 Thanatology episode, which has changed lives.Okay, onto another ologist who is a dear friend. You love him so. Many of you were reallytouched by the coronasodes featuring the words and the voice of New York City doctorMike Natter, who spent 2020 in the utter chaos of the front lines. And I wanted to check inwith him, see how he’s feeling, what he’s expecting.Mike: Hello, Dr. Ward.Aside: I’m not a doctor. But that’s fine. He is.Mike: It’s Dr. Mike Natter here. I’ve missed you. I hope you’re well. So, in terms of where we areright now in the pandemic, I’m just so optimistic. I’m feeling just so much better and thingsare really, truly starting to turn that corner and things are getting back to that pre-pandemic life. And truly, and dearly, it’s all thanks to the vaccine.So many people have gotten vaccinated to the point where we’ve finally gotten a handle onthe spread and what’s going on with covid. It’s allowed us to get back to our lives. And forme personally, I can’t tell you how much better I feel. I feel more like myself. I feel lessemotional, and sad, and depressed. I was not in a good way this past year afterexperiencing what I’ve experienced and seeing these horrible things. And for the first timein a long time, I feel hopeful and I feel good.And I really want to pay my respects to the people who developed the vaccines and workedhard to administer them. All my healthcare brothers and sisters. It was really rough. And itwas those people who got me through it, and also people like you, Alie, spreading scientificevidence-based information when we really needed it most.So I thank you and I thank my healthcare family and those who developed the vaccine. Andeveryone who’s been vaccinated, well done. And those who aren’t, please consider it. Andthose that are on the fence that have questions, talk to your healthcare providers. Talk topeople in your family. Talk to people who have gotten the injection. Understand there’s alot of misinformation out there and it’s important to educate yourself with credibleinformation. I’m really, really optimistic, and excited, and just really happy.----------Love you guys. Can’t wait to hug and kiss all my friends, and you guys. Let’s do it.