Oh heeey, it’s your younger stepbrother who somehow is old enough to have a sleeve tattoo, andyou don’t even know when that happened, Alie Ward, back with Ologies. Another ology you neverknew about, probably, with a charming person you wish you knew earlier. Trust me. So, shells. Hardstuff. Living chemistry.This episode was almost called ‘Conchology’, but it’s about so much more, as it turns out, than justsome swirly seashells. And this guest’s Instagram handle is @Biomineralogist, so when thathappens, you go with Biomineralogy. So, conchology, or shell collecting, that’s going to wait foranother time, another person. Also, Biomineralogy, technically -alogy, and I’m not accepting anyemails about it. It is what it is.This ologist got his Bachelor’s in Chemistry from Virginia Tech and is now completing his PhD atUCLA, studying geochemistry. And we met one fateful summer, the one before covid, at a backyardbarbecue at, none other than Raquel Nuno’s – your favorite Moon expert and Selenologist – house.And this guest told me, just offhand, that he studied shells, and I was like, “Mark my words! I’mgoing to drag you on Ologies, my new friend!”So, being at a barbecue and finding out that the person eating a veggie burger next to you studiesthe microscopic properties of shell structure to figure out what’s going on with the impendingapocalypse, is what this show is all about! But before we dive into this episode, thank you Patronsfor supporting the show. I am doing my first-ever live show – for everyone, not just Patrons – onMay 18th, next week. Tickets are on sale. They’re at the link in the show notes. They’re $12 generalor $9 for Patrons, who can submit questions for returning Volcanologist Jess Phoenix. She’s back,and we’ll get her reaction to her episode. Again, link in the show notes.Also, thank you for leaving reviews. And to prove I read yours, here’s a brand-new one fromRose141618, who wrote:Ologies has changed my life - SeriouslyDear Alie, I hope you read my review out loud. Just one request - can you explain the PodDadjoke? Thanks and love from a new listener and patron - A mama from Boston.Rose141618, we’ve got a lot of puns. There’s a lot of well-meaning life advice. And just a big Dadvibe, so that’s all. That’s all it is. PodDad. Thank you for the review, kiddo, and you’re welcome!All right, Biomineralogy. From words meaning ‘alive ore’. Biomineralogy is the study of biominerals,which are inorganic elements, such as calcium, iron, potassium, sodium, or zinc, and they’reessential to the nutrition of humans, and plants, and animals, and critters.This ologist, again, getting his PhD at UCLA while writing a book called The Hard Parts of Life, aboutbones, and teeth, and shells, and reefs. And we reunited to chat all about those things, plus thebrickwork of iridescent shells, the oceans, tiny pieces of alive artwork, shells versus exoskeletons,lobster lifespans, animals that glue other dead animal skeletons to their own skeletons, snail drama,fiddle leaf care, fashion versus function, spiraling, and more, with advocate, scholar, total sweetie,geochemist, writer, and Biomineralogist, the soon-to-be Dr. Rob Ulrich.----------1Rob: Rob Ulrich. They or he pronouns.Alie: Cool. And you are a biomineralogist, or a conchologist [hard “ch”] or conchologist [soft “ch”]?Tell me.Rob: Yeah. I would say I’m either of those. Conchologist [soft “ch”] is probably more accurate towhat I am now, but I feel like my goal is to branch out to be a more general biomineralogist.Alie: I’d never heard Biomineralogist until I met you at a summer pool party, seasons and seasonsago.Rob: Oh my god, yeah.Alie: I’ve been so excited about this for so long! [laughs] Ah!So tell me a little bit about you. Did you grow up seaside? Were you landlocked in Nebraska?How did you end up studying things by the sea? And does it even involve things by the sea?Are there inland things as well that are biomineralogy related?Rob: Yeah! So, biominerals are any minerals that are formed by living things. That includes, like,our bones, or there are even little biominerals inside the leaves of a lot of species of plantsthat act as, essentially, disco balls that help scatter light more efficiently throughout theleaves, which is really cool.Alie: Ooh!Rob: Yeah. But no, unfortunately, I did not grow up by the beach. I grew up in Northern Virginia,kind of just, like, in the middle of the woods. And I feel like it was just, kind of… I never reallyhad the goal of ending up where I am. I think it just, kind of, happened. And I feel like I owe alot of my direction into Earth science or geosciences in general just, to… I don’t know, I had acrush on a boy, so I followed him. [laughs]Alie: [laughs] Did you follow him to Los Angeles?Rob: No. Oh my goodness. This was just me, like… I was probably still in denial that I was gay atthis point, and I was just like, “No, he’s just a really good friend.” [laughs] So I was like, “Yeah, Itotally want to try to go to the same college.” So we both ended up at Virginia Tech. Andinitially I was in chemical engineering, but then I realized that wasn’t what I wanted to do,because chemical engineering’s a lot more, like, application, and process-based, and trying tomake processes more efficient. And I found that I was a lot more fascinated with basic science,like trying to figure things out, how do things work.So I switched from chemical engineering to just chemistry, but I was still in this mindset…because my parents wanted to make sure that I got a good job coming out of college, right? SoI was still trying to stay on this path to go into, like, the energy sector; go into, like, petroleum,and oil, and energy.Aside: Rob asked some mentors how to pivot from the petroleum industry and chemicalengineering, and many folks suggested that he try out the geosciences and geology, which wasa great fit, and also romantically convenient, because it turns out he was focusing on chemistryindeed.Rob: And that also happened to be what the boy was majoring in.Alie: Ooh! Did you guys ever get together?2Rob: No. He was… Not was. He is straight. I just considered him a really good friend; he consideredme a really good friend. And then in my second semester of college I had finally had a chanceto, like, explore things on my own, and then I was like, “Oh… Yeah. I’m gay.” [laughs]Alie: Surprise! [laughs]Aside: Cut to now: Rob is out of the closet, thriving. And after moving to LA for grad schooland looking for community, he founded Queer and Trans in STEM to bring together LGBTQIA+and other intersecting identities into science, technology, engineering, and math. And thegroup meets on Mondays at 9-10pm Pacific, through Zoom because otherwise, he says:Rob: It’s really hard to make friends. [laughs] So, I was trying to go really out of my way. I wasdriving to West Hollywood, like, every weekend and joined the gay kickball league becausethere wasn’t… At least in my department, there weren’t a lot of people that I knew were, like,queer or gay. I was thinking about it, and I was like, “I shouldn’t have to drive all the way,halfway across town to meet queer people when I moved to Los Angeles, right?”Alie: That’s the most… You know you’re an Angelino when you’re like, “I should not have to gofrom Westwood to West Hollywood at 4pm!” You’re a true Angelino! [laughs]Rob: It shouldn’t even be a problem! It’s only like, what, four miles?! [laughs]Alie: It’s like three hours in LA distance. [laughs]Rob: Exactly!Alie: So you were like, “Screw this!”Rob: Yeah. I was like, “Screw this.” I went to one of the events that is held by the UCLA LGBTQResource Center, and I walked in there, and I was like, “There’s nothing here for queer ortrans people in science and engineering.” And I, kind of like, stormed out of there reallyfrustrated. So then I just reached out to the director, and I was like, “Hey, I’m really interestedin forming this. How do I go about doing this? I don’t really know how to do anything aroundhere yet. I just moved here.”They were extremely helpful, and they were like, “Oh yeah, actually there are a few peoplewho have bounced this idea around. Let me connect you.” So, born somewhat out of just, like,me needing and wanting friends, we all got together and built this together.Alie: That’s amazing! And just think of how many people are now not having to battle traffic in LAto play kickball to meet friends.Rob: Exactly. We can all just, like, play video games online.Alie: [laughs] And what about getting into biomineralogy? Did you want to enter into it, kind of,through geosciences, or through human bones? What was it that really hooked you?Rob: I feel like I was trying to stay away from it at first because I feel like when I was in chemistry Iwas always really fascinated by, like, crystals and crystal growth in itself. And then when Iwas looking around for research opportunities, I ended up working for my faculty advisoreventually. And I was working with her PhD student at the time, Sebastian Mergelsberg, andthe first project that they had me helping out with was this project on lobsters. I was like, “Idon’t know any biology.” I still haven’t taken a biology class since freshman year of highschool.3And so I was just like, “This is super out of my element.” But that was my first introduction toit, and I realized that crystals are cool, but living things making their own crystals is evencooler. [laughs]Alie: Do lobsters just keep molting, and growing, and molting, and growing? Is that why they werestudying them?Rob: Um… Yes. Yeah, they were trying to figure out whether or not the chemical composition of thelobster shell is, like, the same throughout the entire shell, or if it changes at different points ofthe lobster. We found that, yes it does change across the lobster with, like, the claws actuallybeing more enriched in certain elements compared to other parts of the lobster. And we drewconnections from the differences in the chemical composition to the function of each part ofthe lobster. The shells have to be harder so they’re more enriched in these certain elements;at the tail it needs to be more flexible so it’s more enriched in these different elements.Alie: Ah!Aside: Please see various papers, including the 2019 Frontiers in Earth Science publication,“Composition Systematics in the Exoskeleton of the American Lobster, Homarus americanusand Implications for Malacostraca.” Malacostraca, sidenote, refers to the 40,000 or so shellyboys, including crabs, and lobsters, and shrimp, and woodlice, and many other beautiful andbizarre little beasts with exoskeletons.But this lobster paper Rob worked on found that magnesium, phosphorous, and calciumconcentrations in lobster exoskeletons are not uniform. There are different shellcompositions for the pinchy parts versus the flexy butts.Alie: And what exactly would you say… As a biomineralogist, what would you say the field mostlyinvolves? Are there biomineralogists that study totally different animals and structures? Andhow does one even get into that field?Rob: Yeah, I feel like it’s a really small field, at least my exposure to it. There’s a handful of peoplethat study things that create… things that live in the oceans and create, like, calcium carbonateshells. And then there are medical fields where they’re trying to mimic biology for, like, boneregeneration, tissue regeneration.I remember when I was researching for one of my fellowship application proposals, I keptcoming across a lot of papers by, like, dentists looking at healing teeth. And I was like, “This isreally cool.”Aside: One of the more compelling ones I found was titled, “Calcium silicate coating derivedfrom Portland cement as treatment for hypersensitive dentine.”Now, Portland cement, you ask? Is it locally harvested, organic concrete? No ma’am. It’s a finepowder made by baking limestone and clay stuff and then adding gypsum. And it’s so muchworse for the environment than I realized previously. But apparently, in dentalnanotechnology circles, they’re using derivatives to strengthen teeth? I don’t know.I don’t know what it’s all about, but yes, we’re going to need an odontology episode aboutteeth, like, yesterday. Also, gnathology is the study of chewing! So… Sorry, I’m never stoppingthis podcast. I can’t.Alie: When I first met you, I remember you telling me that you are looking at shells and trying tofigure out how the acidification of the ocean is going to affect them. Is that a big part of it?Rob: I use the chemistry of shells to better understand shells, if that makes any sense. [laughs]4Alie: Yeah. And so, tell me a little bit about what your work is like. Are you, like, scraping shellswith an X-Acto knife and tossing them into a spectrometry contraption? What’s a day in thelife like for you?Rob: Yeah, most of my lab work so far has been taking powders of shells… So, someone else has,thankfully, already cultured a lot of the samples that I’m working with right now. They’vealready been scraped off – I guess they use a drill – drilled off and then put into vials for me,and then I just need to weigh them out and prepare them to be put into the massspectrometer. And then I put them in the mass spectrometer, or whatever other techniquewe’re using to analyze it.But more recently, for newer projects that I’m working on, I seem to be moving towardsworking with algae, and specifically coccolithophores, which are these tiny little things thatmake these beautiful calcium carbonate plates. They’re really gorgeous, if no one’s ever seenone.Aside: Sidenote, I have seen one, because I had to google it. And first off, coccolithophores arethese musically named, single-celled phytoplankton that live in the upper layers of the sea.And they’re so cool. They make themselves a little house out of what looks like a bunch ofstarched, lacey doilies, or paper plates layered over a beach ball; just these round things withscales all over them. And at their largest, they’re the size of the width of a strand of hair. Andthen when they multiply, or die, their shed scales are helpful for sequestering carbon. And itbuilds up to 1.4 billion kilos of calcite in the ocean every year.And you’re like, “Calcite? What’s that, Dad?” Well, it’s a great question that I asked Google forus. Calcite is a form of calcium carbonate, and calcium carbonate is a carbon and threeoxygens. It’s the same stuff that’s in eggshells, and pearls, and seashells. But there aredifferent types of calcium carbonate.Calcite is calcium carbonate that’s in a really stable structure, but there’s another form calledaragonite, which has a different crystal lattice shape from a molecular standpoint. Andcalcium carbonate is also a supplement for bone health and is in the Tums that you chew onwhen you’re burping up chili dogs and you need an antacid because carbonates are prettystrong bases.Now, this information will prove useful in the episode. Do trust. But yes, very cool chemistryhappening to make strong shells out of thin air, and water, and other minerals.Rob: So, I maintain our cultures by just going to the lab, feeding them every once in a while byputting them in some new seawater media, and then doing some experiments with that. ThenI also have another project that I’m really excited about where we’re, hopefully, going to beplanting different types of fiddle leaf trees. So maybe I’ll get to work in a greenhouse soon.Alie: Ooh! And fiddle leaf trees, those are the ones that people have in their house but they kill a lot,right?Rob: Yes! [laughs]Alie: [laughs] Okay. I can’t believe I get to actually ask someone about this, but why are they hard tokeep alive? Because I see them in beautiful Instagram interior design photos, and I say, “Howlong will it take me to kill them?”Rob: [laughs] I feel like people probably overwater them. It feels like it’s either that they pay toomuch attention to it or they pay too little attention to it. But unfortunately, I’m not too much5of a plant scientist, I just am able to keep plants alive somehow. I always just tell people to,like, stick your finger in the dirt, and if it’s dry, it probably needs to be watered.Alie: Very scientific, Doctor. [laughs]Aside: Sidenote: I tried to look up some fiddle leaf tips because I knew some of you out thereare struggling, and apparently they like a lot of bright, indirect light, and you should dust theleaves often. And yes, stick your little finger in the dirt and water it if it’s dry. That’s what youdo, says a scientist. Also, Costco was selling these otherwise-pretty-pricey plants for, like, $20recently, in case you need to replace one you’ve killed while your roommate’s been away.Your secret’s safe with me.Alie: Okay, now when it comes to shells, let’s say you’re dealing with shells in the lab, are theyreally different across different animals? Are a lot of them, like, calcium carbonate, and othersare calcium silicate…? I am making up words because I don’t know what they’re made of.Rob: [laughs] Yeah, the most predominant biomineral is made up of calcium carbonate, and then Iwould say, maybe, the second most common are calcium phosphate, which would be likebones and teeth. And then maybe the third would be silicate minerals. And then at the endyou probably have… The more complicated ones, they have iron in them and they’re made bybacteria.Alie: Oooh! And when it comes to shells… This is a very basic question, but I don’t understand howsomething that’s, like, a slimy little flaccid little tongue is making something that’s harder thanmy bones, maybe. Where is it coming from? Where are they getting this calcium? Where… Arethey secreting it? How are these shells even made?Rob: Yeah, so bivalves, they secrete their shells from this organ they have called the mantle. Theorgan has… It’s lined with these epithelial cells that are what secrete the mineral thateventually becomes the shell. But what it has to do is take all of the parts that it needs fromthe seawater first. So, through some process of, essentially, absorption, it’s pulling in little tinypockets of seawater into itself, and as that pocket is traveling through the organ, its differentenzymes and transporters are changing the chemistry of the water in that pocket to make itfavorable for it to form a mineral.Aside: Rob says that crystalline structures form out of these minerals, plus a mix of someacidic proteins from the animal, to make these biomineral structures of varying hardness anduses. Ta-da!Rob: And then it turns into its final form.Alie: And is it hard as soon as it comes out, or is it, like, plaster of Paris? And how can somethingthat’s in the sea dry? I don’t get any of it! It’s so exciting.Rob: [laughs] I wouldn’t say it’s necessarily hard, because what they’re finding more and moreevidence for is, like, this intermediate mineral phase called amorphous calcium carbonate. It’ssort of counterintuitive because you don’t think of minerals as being amorphous because oneof the definitions of a mineral is it has a crystalline structure. It’s this, like, amorphous mineralthat seems to be what gets deposited, and then that’s what eventually transforms.It seems like it doesn’t want the water, like, as a part of it. So when it is released from thepocket that was keeping it stable, then it sort of dehydrates and pushes the water out becauseit wants to be this more stable form of the mineral.6Alie: Okay, so spirals. Is that a common thing with a lot of shells? Why are some, like, two littleclappy plates like a clam or a mussel, and others are, like, this incredible, beautiful, Fibonaccispiral?Rob: Yeah, so the shape has to do a lot with the function of it. So the things like the nautiloids andstuff, they have this spiral shape that, within it, has these different chambers that allow it tochange the animal’s buoyancy so it can move up and down the water column. And bivalves,like the different clams, and mussels, and oysters, their shape is very determined by how theylive. Do they live attached to a rock? Do they live on the surface of the sediment? Do they liveburied under the sediment? How buried are they? Partially, or fully?And I think the spirally shapes, like snails and things like that, I think it’s mainly for protectionas well as their sexual organs are the same shape, so they need it like that.Alie: Oh! So when you’re looking at a spiral, you’re looking, maybe, at their bathing suit area’sshape? That’s exciting.Rob: [laughs] Exactly. Yeah, and most of the gastropods, they’re chiral, so they’ll swirl in thisclockwise pattern because it matches the shape of their reproductive organs. That’s why theycan only mate with things of the same handedness, or the same rotation. And that’s why thesad, like, Jeremy the Snail, left-handed snails, they can’t reproduce.Alie: And so that is just part of sexual selection where they tend to be like, “Well, couldn’t findanyone so I guess I’m just… out of the game.” Is that how that goes??Rob: Yeah, it’s really sad. It’s surprising how new this research is that actually identified the genethat controls it. It came out, like, last year where they actually identified the gene. And theynoticed that, like, “Things that lack this gene are the ones that spiral counterclockwise.” So it’sjust a mutation, and it’s sad.Alie: Aww, Jeremy!Aside: I looked it up, and this lefthanded, or sinistral, snail could not get it on with any othersnail unless it too was a beautiful, backwards mutant. And in a tribute to horny soulseverywhere, the world found him two other lefty snails to fall in love with. All three were putin a love nest enclosure. And the two others mated with each other and made tons of babieswhile Jeremy watched from the sidelines before he died in 2017.But don’t cry yet. Researchers realized that he did mate before his demise. He produced 56babies, all of ‘em righties, who have a better chance at love and making more snail babies.Alie: Okay, you figure a tiny snail, tiny snail becomes a bigger snail, becomes a bigger snail… Arethey adding to the shell on the big end, or on the little end? Can it just keep growing like rockcandy in supersaturated sugar water? Where are they adding to it?Rob: Yeah, they’re adding to it at the little end. That’s the point at which things are growingoutward.Aside: So the snails hatch from an egg, and they have a protoconch, which is like a colorlesslittle shell that hardens with more calcium, which they have to get from eating their eggshell!Kind of like snacking on the placenta that you just slid out of. It’s resourceful!Now, as a snail grows, the teeny-tiny baby whorl stays in the center and it keeps making morenew shell at the aperture, or the opening end, which hardens and crystalizes as it grows.Alie: Okay, and crystals. You love crystals, obviously. It kind of drew you in.7Rob: Mm-hmm. Very LA.Alie: I know! [laughs] I like the idea that if you have, like, a crusty snail shell on your altar, that’skind of a crystal.Rob: Yeah. Smash it up a bit, look at it under a really strong microscope, you’ll see the crystals.[laughs]Alie: How are the crystals forming? Because we know that an ice cube is a crystal, right? Asnowflake is also a crystal, six sided. What is it about calcium carbonate or these otherminerals that allow it to make that crystalline structure?Rob: Yeah, it’s what’s available. It’s based on what they have around them; it’s what they can makemost easily. When they are putting these chemicals into the space, they’re really… They’re not,like, intentionally doing it. We don’t think about ourselves making our bones, but there issomething there guiding the crystals into being formed, and more impressively, formed intothese wild, beautiful shapes that we see.Alie: And I mean… Okay, favorite shells. Do you have some that stick in your mind? Are you, like, ashell person as it is? Are you a person who’s like, “Ah! I keep some on my bookshelf!”? Or areyou strictly, like, “When it’s powdered and under a microscope, then I care.”? Or do youmarvel over them?Rob: I marvel over them, but when I moved… Since I was moving across the country I had to leavemy rock and mineral collection with my parents at their house. I was like, “Oh no!” So I, sadly,don’t have any. But yeah, I think I’m always going to be fascinated by things that nature cancreate, especially with how beautiful shells can be. It’s kind of like, almost for no… They do itfor function, and then it just happens to be beautiful. My old research advisors used to alwayssay that nature was the best engineer.Alie: Aww! I mean, when I think about biomimicry and how much we borrow from nature, I alwaysthink, you know, we’re on iPhone 11 or 12 or something, but for every animal they’ve had somany iterations. Every generation is an iteration, and they’ve had millions and millions andmillions of years, so imagine an iPhone 35 Million. It’s going to be a great iPhone! Like, it’sgoing to be advanced. So of course they’ve figured it out based on, like, what works best.Can I ask you one million Patreon questions?Rob: You can ask me whatever you want.Alie: Okay.Aside: You hear that? Whatever I frickin’ want! Which is what you want, Patrons whosubmitted questions. But first, we donate to a charity of the biomineralogist’s choosing, andthis week it’s directed toward the Center for Diverse Leadership in Science. And CDLS at UCLAwas founded by Professor Aradhna Tripati and is an initiative to bring people from diversebackgrounds into science.A donation to them was made possible by these Ward-approved show sponsors.[Ad Break]All right. We have a shell of a lot of questions to get through. Let’s do it.Alie: Okay, a lot of people, Leah Darpel, Courtney R, Anne Blondin, Monica, Beatriz Bevilacqua, LisaMa, Zoe Jane, Paige Liberski, Flora Duff, Carissa Perry, Felix Wolfe, Kelsey Story, BeckyRoberson, Aleah, Sarah Sexton– I know these are a lot of names – Ann McHenry, Rebecca8Swerida, and Ellen Durnal, all of those people… It’s a lot of people – and I read them allbecause it is important – want to know, Kelsey Story’s words, she said: Is it rude to collectshells (empty ones, obviously) or am I robbing a little sea friend of a potential home? AndCarissa Perry said: Love my shell collection but can probably be convinced to quit the habit ifit’s no bueno. And Sarah Sexton has a million shells from when she lived in Hawaii, and shedoesn’t want to get rid of ‘em, but what should she do with them?What is the deal when you are collecting shells? Are you ruining life for the sea?Rob: [laughs] I guess, in short, yeah. Anything where you’re removing a material from the naturalecosystem probably isn’t the best for the environment. I’m pretty sure that hermit crabs arealready, like, very… It’s not their market for homes, so removing more potential homes forthem is probably not the best. But they’re also not the only people who use old shells. Thereare other organisms that use old shells to, like, weigh themselves down or even use them forprotection.There are some really cute pictures of sea urchins that actually put some old bivalve shells onand they kind of look like little tiny hats. I think there was an image circulating Twitter ofthese sea urchins wearing tiny little cowboy hats and they’re really cute. [laughs]Aside: Did I look it up? Of course. Did it deliver? Also, of course.So, Reddit user VanillaBean5813 has an aquarium, and after seeing their urchins pick upshells or bits of coral and damaging the coral doing it, they decided to 3D print them somehats to use instead! So you can see the links on my website if you need to look up a spiky, aliveKoosh ball wearing a witch hat, which you do.And apparently, scientists think they do that because it makes them feel protected. And theyalso, according to VanillaBean5813 on Reddit, they move them just to the side. They cock ‘emto an angle in order to poop, which happens out of the top of their head. They poop out of thetop of their head. Please tell everyone you know.Alie: Now, I was going to ask about hermies. Emily asked: Is it true that hermit crabs all line up totrade shells when they need a larger one? Felix Wolfe had this question too. I don’t know ifyou’ve seen the David Attenborough clip, but it is the cutest thing I’ve ever seen in my life.Rob: Yeah. I feel like… Yeah, they have a video of it, right?Aside: So, we happened to discuss this recently in the Nephrology episode about kidneysbecause one kidney donation might help ten other people meet their match, rather than theirmaker. So yes, David Attenborough narrated it beautifully; I think about it way too much. Ithink people should do it with houses, maybe. I’m just sayin’.Alie: A lot of people wanted to know… I don’t even know if I’m going to read their names, to behonest, because it’s like 75 people, wanted to know, like Bridget White says: First Patreonquestion. Why do the insides of shells tend to have a beautiful, shiny gas rainbow and theoutsides are just good for camouflaging? Also Ann McHenry, first-time question-asker wantedto know: Mother of pearl, what’s the deal? Why is the inside of an oyster like a fairy wing? Is itan accident? Does it serve a purpose, and do they know how beautiful they are?Rob: I would hope so. I would hope they have some sort of reflection where they look in whateverthey can use as a mirror and are like, “Yes, you are beautiful. You are gorgeous. You arepowerful.” [laughs] But that’s probably not the case. But yeah, so mother of pearl, or nacre, it’sbeautiful because of how the light refracts. Because it’s usually made up of… They’re, like,9prismatic tablets almost, and the way that they’re stacked bends the light in the way thatmakes it look like this weird rainbow.And it does have a purpose. So, its mechanical properties are very strong, and are very good,and very resistant to wear and tear. And it’s especially useful because it’s ductile. They can putit into odd shapes that are the insides of these shells.Aside: So ductile, sidenote, means that it can be formed into shapes without losing itsstrength. And kind of like an iridescent Lego set, mother of pearl has a brick-and-mortarstructure to it; the bricks being aragonite, which is another form of calcium carbonate. Andthe mortar, what is it? Thanks for asking. Well, it’s elasticy biopolymers, kind of like a silkyglue that holds the aragonite together. The mollusks that secrete it in their mantle tissue arejust always turning it over to help capture and get rid of parasites, and debris, and gunk andstuff.Under a microscope, the inside of an abalone or mussel shell looks like a brick building. Andthe stacked aragonite platelets are close to the size of a wave of light, so irregularities on thesurface scatter light, makin’ it look like a jazzy little rainbow. All of that chemistry, structure,strength, beauty, and your cousin just uses an abalone shell as an ashtray. Hmm. Do as youwill.Alie: So it’s function first and then it’s fashion.Rob: Yeah, it’s function and then fashion. Very much like my closet.Alie: [laughs]Rob: And the more surprising bit, even though it looks completely different to the outside of theshell, at the base level it’s all made up of the same stuff. It’s all calcium carbonate. It’s just in adifferent crystal structure, or it’s, like, arranged in a different orientation.Alie: Oh! I had no idea. Sarah Kulig wants to know: Is Marcel the Shell the cutest example of afictional shell creature? [clip of Marcel the Shell: “Guess what I use to tie my skis to my car? …Ahair. Guess what my skis are. …Toenails from a man.”]Rob: Uh, I think so, yeah. That’s a throwback. I haven’t thought about Marcel the Shell in… I don’teven know how long. [laughs]Alie: Can I tell you something? I watched Marcel the Shell three days ago!Rob: What! That show’s, like, at least 10 years old. [laughs]Alie: I know, but I just remembered how she was like, [silly Marcel voice] “You know what I ski on?A man’s toenail,” and I had to listen to it again. It always gets me right in the heart.Ellen Skelton wants to know: What is the most ridiculous shell that you have seen? Like, onethat you look at and think, “Why in evolutionary history did this squishy thing feel the need tocreate this elaborate thing?”Rob: Well, there’s this one xenophora, it’s called the carrier shell. It doesn’t make sense. It’s justlike, “Why did the shell of this snail decide at some point in its history that it was going to pickup and meld with other shells as it grows?” So, it just looks like this spiral that has otherrandom shells sticking out of it.Alie: Oh? And it just, kind of, picks it up as it goes? Like a lint roller?Rob: It just picks it up. [laughs]10Alie: Dang! I mean, good for it. It’s like the guy at the party that sees half-empty beers and is like,“Sure man. Why not.”Rob: Oh, ew.Aside: So, I’d never heard of these, but xenophora’s etymology means ‘bearing foreigners’because they pick up objects like pebbles and other shells, sometimes bottlecaps, and theycement them to themselves for camouflage. Or in deeper waters, scientists think it might helpthem from getting sucked into the sticky mud, to have a bigger footprint.But the objects they choose? Ah! They can be so beautifully curated. I was reading onemuseum exhibit about it that began, “It is not known to what extent an artistic sensibilityplays a part in this behavior.” Which, I bet a lot of mollusks right now are like, “Um, pardonme? This is handcrafted. And by handcrafted, I mean I made it with my slimy body. But that’snot the point.”This next question is about [computer pronunciation] operculum.Alie: A few people, Sarah Sutcliffe and Shireen Shipman, both wanted to know… op-hair-coo-lums…[struggling to pronounce] opPERculums? OpAIRiculums?Rob: It’s one of those words I’ve never read out loud. [laughs]Alie: I’ve never seen it before! But: They’re so cool. How do they grow as well as the shell?What is… Is it a lid? What are they?Rob: Yeah, they are lids, or like trap doors. They’re made of the same stuff as the shell, and they’rejust one of the ways that the organisms living inside of the shell can protect themselves frompredators because it’s like a little trap door that they can retract and close themselves into.[AOL guy: “Goodbye.”] And they’re… yeah, they’re just little lids for these little shell pots.Alie: [babytalking] That’s so cute.A lot of people wanted to know: Can you hear the ocean in shells? What makes them soundlike the ocean? Elizabeth Ross says: I heard that the sound is created by blood moving in ourown ears being echoed by the shell. Do people ask this of you when you tell them you studyshells?Rob: I feel like nobody ever asks me anything about that. I would love more questions about shells,all the time. And I really want to say yes because it sounds very magical. But the answer is, no,unfortunately. And it’s also not necessarily you hearing your own blood either. It’s just thatshells… And this is the reason why they’ve also been used for instruments in the past. It’s justthat shells are so efficient and effective at amplifying sound, that whenever you put your earup to the shell it’s really just amplifying the sound of the ambient noise and, like, air movingaround.Aside: So, flimflam busted. The noise that you hear from shells has a name. It’s called‘seashell resonance’. But that ambient amplification would also work with, like, an emptyStarbucks cup. So, I’m sorry to have just broken your heart, curious land mermaids, includingChrista Charter, Rachel Moore, Elizabeth Ross, Kate Rampy, Kelly Windsor, Teagen Andrews,Megan Younce, Olivia Meyer, and DeLene Oppelt.But on the notes of myths and thrumming blood in your ears:Alie: Remnant Muse posted: How do you feel about the acid bath lyrics “The sound of the ocean isdead. It’s just the echo of blood in your head.”? But that makes me want to know, along with a11lot of other people, in terms of acid baths, tell me a little bit about the ocean and what ishappening to shells these days.Aside: Ellen Skelton, Becky the Sassy Seagrass Scientist, Monica, Julie Dupre, Ryan Gwin,Sarah Sutcliffe, Seth Suchy, Zach Strickland, first-time question-askers Olivia Zanzonico,Natalie Rhoades, LettersFromEleanorRigby, and Jennifer Stone all had similar questionswhich I will read in Juliebear’s words: Sorry to ask the depressing question, but are wenoticing a change in marine shells due to global warming and ocean acidification?What a necessary bummer.Rob: Yeah, as most of your listeners probably know, the ocean is becoming more acidic and thetemperature of the ocean is increasing. So this, predictably, makes it a lot harder for livingthings that precipitate minerals to make their minerals. It affects animals in different waysbecause they all live in different ways. So, it’s not necessarily as direct as, like, “Oh, the shellsare dissolving.” It’s more along the lines of, “This is stressing out these living things,” and it’smaking it harder for them to precipitate the minerals in the first place. So, they have to… ifthey even can, direct more energy into that process. That’s what is killing these things.Alie: What types of shellfish or mollusks are having the hardest time right now? [“It’s… prettyrough.”]Rob: Hmm… I feel like it’s any organism that doesn’t have as much control over its internalchemistry. Like, some organisms control more strongly than others the composition of thatfluid pocket that’s traveling through the shell-making organ. So, if it’s something that has avery high level of control over that, corals or lobsters, they tend to have a bit more resistancewhen it comes to being faced with these stressors.However, things that have less control, like certain species of algae, certain species ofmollusks, they can’t really do anything about it because they can’t adapt quickly enough.Alie: Because they’re a little bit less complex of an organism maybe?Rob: Yeah. I think that’s one way of putting it.Alie: Daisy Goldstein Cross wants to know: Please talk about chalk. Also opals.Are opals shell-like?Rob: You could argue that they look kind of like nacre, but they’re not. They are not shells.Alie: Good to know.Rob: They are amorphous silica minerals that form more like via sedimentation.Alie: Oh!! I did not know that. I understand that they are less hardy as a gem. Like, they’re moreprone to flaking than some other gems.Rob: Yeah, probably because it’s amorphous. It’s not as hard.Alie: Okay, and what about chalk? Chalk is a lot of dead animals?Rob: Yes, chalk is a lot of dead coccolithophores, actually. So, it’s the old skeletons of tons and tonsof these algae that have sunk to the bottom of an ocean and piled up very high.Alie: Wow. Do you think if you’re a vegan, using chalk should be not something you do? Are theyplants, or are they animals?Rob: They are plants. They are a species of algae.12Alie: Okay, got it. So, they’re not dead animals. They’re dead plants. That’s interesting.Aside: Listen, I heard skeletons, I thought of bags of flesh, okay? My bad.Alie: A few people, Edward Rice, Sakura Rivas, and Alex Walker all wanted to know about coquina.Can you talk about how shells become coquina? And Edward Rice says: I’m living just south ofSt. Augustine and there are whole buildings made out of this stuff that were built in the 1600s.How did those tiny shells end up becoming rock?So, have you heard of this?Rob: I definitely remember it from class. [laughs] I’ve never imagined it being able to be somethingthat could make up entire buildings. Those buildings must be beautiful.Aside: Coquina is the material composed of shells all stuck together by the calcium carbonatethat dissolved over time and then re-stuck. And I had never seen this, but I just gazed atpictures and it looks kind of like a Rice Krispy Treat made with Frosted Flakes, only it’s shells.Rob: But it must be very similar to chalk in a way, where it’s all these organisms that haveprecipitated shells and they’ve died, so these shells have sunk to the bottom of the ocean andcreated this layer of sediment that’s just crushed-up old shells, but they haven’t beenpulverized enough to where they’re super sandy. It’s still very obviously, like, crushed-upshells glued together by other forms of calcium carbonate like limestone.Alie: Ooh! I’ve never even seen it.Rob: It’s beautiful.Alie: And Sarah Maas, first-time question-asker, such a good question: How are shells differentfrom exoskeletons? And do crabs have shells, or do they have exoskeletons?Rob: Yeah, so I think it completely depends on the exoskeleton that you’re talking about. I wouldargue that probably all shells are exoskeletons but not all exoskeletons are shells.But yes, crabs do have an exoskeleton, and yes it is a shell. I guess this also goes back to thelobster question, where it’s like, these arthropods are crustaceans, they’re molting, and atleast in the case of the lobster, every time it molts it’s shedding its old shell. But in thatprocess of shedding its old shell, it actually recycles a lot of the mineral in that old shell. Itresorbs it, which is really cool. So, depending on the species of lobster or even the location, itcan recycle from 20% up to, like, 90% of that old shell, which is really cool.Alie: That is cool. I had no idea. I thought they were just like, “Okay. Bye now. That was soexpensive,” just leaving an Audi by the side of the road. That’s good to know. I feel less bad forthem.Speaking of feeling bad, Sarah Kulig and Monica both had a similar question. Sarah says: I feellike this is unlikely, but I can’t help but wonder. Is there evidence of microplastics somehownow appearing in shells or affecting shell development? [dreading the answer] Ehhh… [“Thiscan’t be good.”]Rob: Um… Hm. I don’t know if they’ve found them, like, within the shell itself. I know that theorganisms are… they’re getting into the soft parts of the organisms, like the shellfish we’reeating and stuff, but I don’t know about them actually getting into the shells themselves. I didread an article at one point that was looking at the effects of microplastics on hermit crabsand they found that when hermit crabs are exposed to microplastics it screws with theircognitive abilities and it makes it harder for them to be able to choose a new shell.13Alie: [super sad] Aww… I don’t like that very much at all.Aside: Please see the April 2020 paper, “Microplastics disrupt hermit crab shell selection.”And then go whimper into your hands.Rob: It’s sad.Alie: I wanted to pet one softly on the head. No, it does not want that.Kelly Dredge had a great question: Can the chemical composition of shells be utilized toidentify where they were developed globally? Like, can we look at a shell and know it wascreated in Australia because of its chemistry?Rob: Maybe not that specifically. That’s a really great question, and that’s very aligned with whatsome other people in my lab do. I don’t know if we’d be able to pinpoint, like, where on theglobe exactly, but we would definitely get a lot of information of the type of environment thatit grew in.Alie: Along those lines, Juliebear wants to know… and I’m going to read it as it's written. It goes:H-have we found flushed manmade drugs in shells? :(Rob: Not that I know of.Alie: They’re not, like, jacked on steroids or on birth control pills?Rob: Maybe they have their own substances that they like to use.Alie: Perhaps! Just party shells.Vince Alasha asks: Why are Florida beaches covered in shells? So many cuts in my feet!!!!Rob: Yeah, it’s actually the shape of Florida and the surrounding bits of land or islands that causesthat to happen. A lot of the islands run parallel to Florida, so they’re aligned with the watercurrents running around Florida itself. However, beaches like Sanibel, it’s actuallyperpendicular, so it sort of catches all of the shells that come out of that current. That’s why ithas so many more shells than a lot of other beaches.Alie: Oh, okay. So do you think if you were to find a shell from someplace in Florida and there werea lot of them, it would be okay to take home? Or is it still, like, “Nnh, leave ‘em on the beach”?Rob: I think, to be safe, leave them on the beach. But I’m sure if you take one, it’s fine. Definitely notif they’re alive, but if they’re fully formed and together, you probably should leave them.Alie: Okay. Sikwani Dana asks: What determines the color of a shell? Like, what makes it white orpurple? And does the same color have a different cause in different species? Like beautifulpurple mollusk shells and stuff, any idea what causes it?Rob: That’s a really good question. So, a lot of shells have this… The final, outermost layer is thisorganic covering, sort of like a skin almost, and that’s what carries the pigment or whatevermakes the pigment. Usually what determines the color is similar to the shape, where it’s aboutfunction and trying to camouflage with its surroundings. I know that some species of bivalvesare actually able to change their color with the environment where others can’t.Alie: What! Let’s say a certain kind of mussel shell is usually purple on the inside, if there’s a purpleseashell out of the Bahamas, is it the same thing that’s making the same color?Rob: Yes. It’s probably the same thing going on. And it’s also interesting that it’s so much morefunction over genetics that it really depends a lot more on the local environment of the shellrather than it being closely related to other species of shell.14Alie: Wow. And is that partly because that’s what it’s pulling out of the environment to make it?Rob: Yeah, it’s partially, probably, like what it’s pulling out of the environment but also just what itneeds. We’re probably wearing a lot more shorts and t-shirts in LA than, like, up inWashington.Alie: True!Aside: Sidenote: These lilac-to-violet marbly colored shells of the Northeast coast quahogclams are used to make what some Indigenous nations call wampum beads, strung together invarious patterns with these creamy, white-shelled beads of the whelk snail. And this speciesof clam is called Mercenaria mercenaria, and those words, essentially, mean commerce. Butwampum beads and belts had much more significance than currency for many Indigenouscultures. And I was just reading that it wasn’t until colonization that their value becamemonetary to settlers. So, there’s gorgeous beadwork and a rich history in wampum beads andit’s worth going down labyrinths of rabbit holes to learn more.But yes, those purple striations in the shell are regional and they’re created by differentminerals in the mud. So color me plum surprised. Biomineralogy, my friends, in a nutshell. Ina clamshell.Alie: Erin Morris, first-time-ever question-asker says: The little holes you see in shells, are theyfrom worms burrowing into them while they’re alive? What are those?Rob: They’re not from worms but they are from these carnivorous snails. Usually it’s this type ofwhelk, I think it’s called the dog whelk. And what it does is it goes up to these clams and ituses its “tongue”, which is more of a drill. And it drills into these shells to try to get to the soft,tasty, gooey deliciousness that’s inside the shell. So once it makes that hole, it turns its insideinto goo that it can slurp up like a soda.Alie: Augh! What a dick! What a dick! Just piercing it like a Capri Sun.Rob: [laughs]Aside: Of course it’s okay, snail. You gotta eat. I understand. You’re not a dick. I wasprojecting.Alie: Okay, Molly Johnson has a style question, seconded by Erin Ryan. Molly asks: Why are dustyshells a thing in suburban beach-themed bathrooms, and how do we make people stopputting them there and just enjoy them on the beach? And Erin Ryan says: I second thisquestion and its precise wording. Thoughts on dusty bathroom shells?Rob: What do they mean by dusty?Alie: You know, you’ve got a bowl of shells. It’s been there for a year. You know?Rob: Yeah, I don’t know. I don’t know what’s up with that. I guess it’s people trying to… You know,you’re trying to transport yourself to where you want to be, so they put the shells in thebathroom.Alie: It’s very true. I’m going to see if I can trace it back to, like, a 2004 Martha Stewart edition ofbeach homes.Jude Kenny has an important scientific question. Wants to know: Can I use a conch to summonanimals to do my bidding?Rob: I wish. That would be great.15Alie: They would be doing some of your lab work, I’m sure, were that true.Rob: Yeah, I would buy one of those little microphones that people use to interview their cats and Iwould go down there and interview them. That would make my life so much easier. I’d just belike, “How do you do this?” [laughs]Alie: Have you ever blown into a conch?Rob: No, I haven’t.Alie: It’s pretty transformative. I have to say.Rob: Is it easy? Is it just, like, a trumpet? Do you have to do anything?Alie: Yeah, it’s like a trumpet. And it really does make you feel that there’s, just, elk that are going tostart filtering down, and a racoon’s going to peep its head out and be like, “My Queen?” Maybeone day you’ll get to “WHOOO.” It’s very exciting.Rob: I just want to feel powerful. Maybe I’ll try to find a conch shell before my defense. [laughs]Alie: [laughs] You should!Any myths that you really want to bust about shells?Rob: Myths… Not that I can really think of. Oh! Pearls! Pearls are very interesting. I always thoughtthat pearls were this, like, self-defense mechanism that different bivalves had to, like, protectthemselves against foreign particles, like sand or something entering into the inner sanctumof the shell.What I’ve come to eventually learn, now in the fourth year of my PhD, is that it’s not… Like,yes, that’s sometimes the case that there’s a grain of sand or sometimes a parasite that is atthe core of the pearl. But what it really is, it’s usually… It happens when part of the epithelialcells that actually secrete the shell, they get moved or misplaced inside, and so then they startmaking this shell. It doesn’t have the things really guiding it anymore, so the pearls are reallyjust these inside-out shells that have the nacre, shiny beautiful outside. But the inside is moresimilar to the outer shell.Alie: So, it’s just a mistake, and anyone who’s been seeding pearls to try to make more pearls… Isthat just not effective?Rob: It probably helps because it provides a site of, like, nucleation for crystal growth. So I wouldprobably argue that maybe seeding them does help, but it’s not the main reason that naturalpearls form.Alie: Wow. Have you ever gone down any of those rabbit holes watching people who open pearlmussels at home and do haul videos?Rob: I really should, but seeing people shell stuff makes me really anxious. Like, oh my god,oysters? Oh no. I’m never eating oysters. If the texture wasn’t enough, I’m… Ugh! Shellingthem scares me. I do not want to stab my hand. The only way I want to see an oyster is, like,deep-fried on top of a deviled egg.Alie: Me too! I like them canned and smoked. They look like toad turds but I prefer them that way.But when they’re raw and slippery, I’m kind of like… if the table orders them, I’ll have one tobe polite, but then I’m always the most generous person that’s like, “No, no. You have the lastfive.” [laughs]Rob: “It’s for you. I got this for you.”16Aside: Also, can I tell you that I just read an article about a man who got a bacterial infectionfrom cracking open oysters, and got an open wound on his hand, and almost died. But goodnews, he survived, but the newspaper article detailing his article chose the headline, “AwShucks: How Oysters Gave One Man a Rare Bacterial Infection.” Wow.On the topic of things that are the worst:Alie: Okay, questions. Things about your job that suuuuck. Worst than oysters. What is the worstpart about being a biomineralogist/ “conk”-ologist/conchologist?Rob: In my opinion, the least fun thing is, probably for me… I think it’s the lab work itself. I don’tthink I’m made for sitting in the lab for hours. I very much enjoy… at least I enjoy more, theside of science where I’ve gotten the data and, like, I’m at the point of trying to figure out whatit means, and writing about it, and reading about it, and sharing that. I don’t know if I actuallylike doing the stuff leading up to that as much.Aside: So some people like collecting the food. Some like cooking it up. Different scientistslike different parts of the process.Alie: What about the thing that you love the most about it?Rob: The friends we’ve made along the way.Alie: Aww!!Rob: But seriously, I think the thing I enjoy the most about, just like life and working in general, isbeing able to mentor more junior students. I work with a lot of undergraduates, and beingable to work with them is such a great experience. I love getting to teach them how to do labstuff and then have them do the lab stuff. That’s rewarding for me, they get experience, theycan write about it in their personal statements, they can collect a paycheck. [laughs] It’s a win-win for everyone.But it’s also just so rewarding to then… It’s rewarding and sad because they eventuallygraduate, or they move to another lab to get more experience, and then they stop workingwith me and I’m sad. But it’s very fun to see them grow and blossom into students or scholars.Alie: Is there anything you wish you knew, you know, growing up, or any advice you would give tosomeone who maybe has yet to go through that kind of journey of discovering what they’reinto? Either personally or professionally?Rob: I would say… I wish I knew what things to, like, look for; what things to look up. I grew up in areligious household, and then I also went to a, like, religious private school from kindergartento eighth grade. So I feel like, growing up, I was very sheltered in many, many ways because Ialso didn’t live in a neighborhood where I was seeing kids outside of school.So even when I finally eventually came out when I was in college, an undergrad, I was like,“Okay, I’m gay…” but then I still didn’t know anything about, like, LGBTQ history, or rights, oranything like that. And I didn’t start being able to explore that until I moved to Los Angelesand started meeting a lot more queer and trans people who are a lot more knowledgeable inthose things. And I can also attribute a lot of that to my partner, who’s a lot more in tune andteaches me a lot.Alie: So, find your friends.Rob: Yeah, find your friends. Talk to people. Yeah, for jobs… Oh my gosh, I think the best advice I’veever gotten from, like, a career center is, yeah, just ask people about their jobs. Ask to talk to17them about their jobs. People love to feel helpful and you’ll learn a lot about, like, what thatjob actually entails.Alie: I mean, I can tell you, asking people about their jobs is not as hard as it looks. It’s very easy toask people about what they like, and I think it’s great to reach out to people, especially if youthink you might be interested in the field.Rob: The worst thing is that they don’t respond. No one’s going to respond to you and be like, “Howdare you?” [laughs]Alie: “How dare you like the field I’m in!”Rob: “How dare you appreciate me!” [laughs]Alie: [laughs] “Gah!” Well, I appreciate you so much.Rob: I appreciate you too. I still remember when… I was really mad at you when we met because Iwas like… You walked in, you were like… I was like, “Here’s this smart, funny, gorgeousindividual walking in.” I’m laying down on this blanket playing with a kid. It was Raquel’s kid.I was playing with his pump-up rocket. And you introduced yourself to me and I was like,“The gall of this woman to think I don’t know who she is.” [laughs]Alie: [laughs] I had no idea you would know!Rob: I remember distinctly being like, “I binged every episode.”Alie: That’s amazing. I can’t believe… I still can’t believe anyone listens to it because I’m just… youknow, I’m sitting here recording it next to my derpy dog. It never occurs to me that there arepeople on the other side that actually would want to listen to it. I feel like people do it out ofguilt or something.I was so excited. You’ve been on my list of index cards as an interview I’ve wanted to do for solong. I keep an index card deck of ones I want to get to. I’m so glad that we finally reconnectedbecause I’m like, “Muahaha!”Rob: I feel like it’s been… The real purpose of me going through grad school and getting my PhD isjust preparing for this moment.Alie: [laughs] I hope this was easier than your quals.Rob: It was definitely less stressful and more fun. [laughs]