Oh heeey, it’s your friend’s cat who just had a $600 hairball, Alie Ward, back with an outdoorsy,quite frankly, a scrumptious episode of Ologies. So this Ologist – we’re going to get right to it –studied both science and performance at Ohio State University. But the role most know her in isteacher of the “Can I Eat This? It Grew in my Driveway” arts and sciences. She has a million – aliteral million – TikTok watchers who just eat up her lessons on making violet simple syrup, andmagnolia cookies, and garlic mustard pesto, and more. And I have had so many of y’all begging meto have her on that when I DM’d her, honestly I was shocked to get a response. This woman is busy!So we recorded this right as April was turning into May, and since it’s still spring and things are stillblooming, and shooting, and crawling from the ground, it’s time to grab a basket and see what’s fordinner. But we also talk about year-round edibles. We’re going to get into it!But first, thank you to all the Patrons who submitted their questions. You can become a patron for adollar a month – a dollar a month – at Patreon.com/Ologies. Thank you to everyone rating andsubscribing to the podcast. Thanks to everyone who has already bought a ticket to my first, andmaybe only ever, Live Show. It’s Tuesday, May 18th, 5pm Pacific. Tickets are between $9 and $12.They’re available in the link in the show notes. There’s a discount code for patrons.Thanks to everyone who leaves such nice reviews, keeping Ologies in the Top 5 science podcastsglobally, which is bananas. I read all the reviews, and each week I pick a fresh one. This week it’sfrom Bkcbkc6, who, after listening to the Speech Pathology episode, wrote in to say:I have just ordered 2 sets of the recordable buttons for my human son. Amazing what I pickedup from this podcast after just discovering it! Going to share a set with his teachers and workas a team to augment his language. Thanks so much!So yes, I read all your reviews, from Katie’s, who’s going back to school. That made me cry. Dianewho loves a good tortoise dick fact, wig makers, former podcast loathers. Thanks, everyone, forleaving them. They really do get me through days when I think I’m not doing a good enough job,which is like every day, but that’s my own problem.Anyway, speaking of: I know you want to get to this interview. Foraging Ecology. Foraging comesfrom a root for hay, or straw, or fodder, and then it evolved to mean ‘hunting about for edibles’. Andecology comes from the same root as oikology, for ‘the place we live’ and our relationship to ourenvironment. So, foraging for the things around us.Now, for breakfast, sidenote, I just want you to know that I ate some loquats that I stole from afriend’s tree. She didn’t even know she could eat them. She thought they were ornamental. So, we’redoing a good job today. Anyway, pull up a stump and lean in for a bounty of information on edibleversus poisonous plants, taproots, blossoms, tinctures, brews and stews, and cookies, and cocktails,and hikes, and eating invasive species; some dog pee talk, the best guidebooks, and how gatheringwhat grows around us is a radical act for internet hero, and teacher, autodidact, wild food maker,and your gathering guide. You know her on TikTok, and YouTube, and Instagram as @BlackForager,Alexis Nikole Nelson.----------Alexis Nelson: I’m so excited to be talking to you!1Hello. My name is Alexis Nikole Nelson, and my pronouns are she, her, hers. And my cat justclawed me in the butt. What a good time we’re having already.Alie Ward: [laughs] Get him on the mic!Alexis: Yeah. [to the cat] Hey Ozzy. You have words to say? Use your words! [laughs]Alie: Oh my gosh, people have been asking me for so many months to get you on this podcast.When you wrote back, I was thrilled! I’ve been wanting to do this topic for a while, whichwould be Foraging Ecology, I believe. Right?Alexis: Yes! Foraging Ecology, I think, is the -ology that we settled on for this.Alie: Yes! It works. It totally works. Your TikTok’s amazing, and informative, and you’re soprolific, and it’s so great. At what point were you like, “Okay, it’s time the world needs toknow what they can eat in their backyards.”?Alexis: I mean, I’ve honestly felt that way ever since I was really little. I guess I just didn’t have thetools to tell anybody outside of my parents, family members, friends, anyone who I couldget to listen to me in person.Alie: Do you remember what the first thing was you ate out of the ground? And were you safe?Was it dangerous?Alexis: The first thing I remember eating out of the ground, I must’ve been about five years old,and I was helping my mom in the garden in our old house in Cincinnati. And she pointedout some grass, but it looked different from other grass, and she broke it and it smelleddelicious. It smelled like onions and garlic, and she’s like, “Oh yeah, it’s onion grass, and it’sedible, but it’s not as good as the onions and the garlic that we get from the store.” And ifyou tell a five-year-old that something is edible, they’re going to put it in their face andthey’re going to get really excited about it. So I did, and it just kind of ignited a gentleobsession. A lifelong love.Alie: Where did you get a lot of your information? Did you start getting… For your sixth birthdaydid you get an encyclopedia of edible herbs? How did the information dump start?Alexis: Well, my answer to that question is yes, but for my eighth birthday.Alie: Oh, got it! A little late. Late bloomer!Alexis: I know! Oh my gosh, I was so late to the game! I just inhaled all of my mom’s books ongardening. My mom had an entire shelf in our house dedicated to just her gardening books,and yeah, I’d say by the time I was eight or nine I had read each of them front to back, wastrying to memorize every single one of the trees, and flowers, and herbs present in them.And when I was done with those, I bought more. Every weekend my parents used to let mego to this independent bookstore in Cincinnati, Joseph-Beth, after we’d go out to dinner,and they’d be like, “Okay, you get one book.” And it’d be really hard for me to choosebetween, oh gosh, whatever fantasy novel I was obsessed with at the time or a plant book.Alie: When it came time to figuring out your life’s course, did you want to stick with botany? Didyou decide to go more of a business route? I know that you have been a social mediamanager, which explains another reason why you’re, like, so good at TikTok. You’re aprofessional. But what did you decide when it came to figuring out, you know, careers?Alexis: I think I’m still deciding. Every time I have to remember that I’m a real adult, I’m just like,“Oh yeah. 28’s real. I can’t fudge it anymore.” Definitely a full-blooded adult now.2Growing up, in the fourth grade when we had to draw what we wanted to be when we grewup, I said that I wanted to be a geneticist by day and a pop star by night. [laughs]Alie: I love it.Alexis: I feel like this is closer than anybody, myself included, thought I was going to get, kind ofmelding this aspect of performance – which I’ve always loved. Right hand-in-hand with mylove of plants has been my love of entertaining people. And when it came time to choosewhat I was going to major in in college, I was pretty gifted in math and science, but I wasalso pretty gifted in theater. But nobody tells you to major in theater. Even when you’rereally good at theater, no one tells you to go and major in theater. So everyone was like, “Ohmy gosh, you’re a woman of color. You’re good at math. You’re good at science. If you don’tbecome an engineer, what a waste!”And I didn’t know if I wanted to be an engineer, but I did know that I didn’t want to be awaste. So I applied to all of my schools as an engineer, got accepted to Ohio State as anenvironmental engineering major.Aside: On the first day of her schooling as an environmental engineer, the dean addressedthe students just to tell them that most people will quit the program, about half. Which isabout as opposite of a pep talk as you can possibly get. Like, “Welcome. This is going tosuck. You’ll hate my program.” Attrition, perhaps, should not be something to brag about,but what do I know?Alexis: And I’ve always loved the pursuit of knowledge, but I’ve always hated when some sort of,like, very competitive aspect has been thrown into it. So, needless to say, I had a rough timemy first year in engineering school. So rough that I took a semester off to, kind of, get myhead right, and decided that I did love math and science, but that I also loved writing. I alsoloved performing. So I came back and focused on both environmental science because Ididn’t take all of that calculus, and physics, and chemistry for nothing. [laughs] But then Ialso went and got a theater degree and took, like, master’s classes in playwriting, put on aone-woman show before I graduated, wrote a couple of short plays. So I feel like everythingI’m doing right now makes sense.And in terms of where I see it going in the future, any opportunity that I get to talk to largegroups of people about the value in the green spaces around them, that’s how I woulddefine the career that I want to see myself in at any given time during the rest of my life.And if that’s as a TikToker, that’s great. If that’s, oh my god, on a TV show (Hey PBS!), that’sgreat too. If it’s writing field guides and books, that’s great too. I just… This is what fills mycup, and this is the type of thing that even when I’m working really hard, it doesn’t feel likework. [“It’s the best thing.”]Alie: Did you ever think that you’d have a million people tuning in to watch you make pesto?Alexis: No! [laughs] Never in a million years. I made my foraging account on Instagram originallybecause I was annoying my friends with the plants I was eating.Alie: [laughs] They were like, “We don’t want to hear about it.”Alexis: Yeah. They were like, “No thank you.” So I was like, “Okay, I’ll just make a Finsta but just forthe wild things that I put on my plate.” Now I feel like my personal account is my Finsta.Kind of a weird switch-a-rooney that I never in a million years would’ve called.Aside: Sidenote: A Finsta, for those of us not born in the ‘90s, is a Fake Instagram, or analternative handle that’s not, like, one that your boss follows or something your followers3would find off-brand. So perhaps it’s the real you, which makes me want to sit on a rockand ponder, “Am I living my most Finsta life in the out and the open? And why not?”Anyway, Alexis had an underground passion for plants, and at the start of the pandemic sheposted something to her TikTok about foraging if you couldn’t get to the store during thefirst few weeks of the covid lockdown. And she posted it, she woke up to tens of thousandsof views, and suddenly people were smitten, not only with her plucky delivery but herextensive botanical knowledge. Millions of views later, she’s really opened up people’seyes, and noses, and mouths to edibles that we walk right past all the time, all year round.Alie: It’s been really cool to see the seasons change and to see different things that you’reharvesting. Persimmons, and then going into blossoms and stuff. When it comes to keepingyourself educated, are you looking things up before you’re foraging? Are you alreadyfamiliar with them? Does it really depend on the region? How are you keeping all of thisknowledge? How often do you have to sharpen those tools?Alexis: I think it’s constantly a process of sharpening, and the more you interact with a certainplant, just like the more you interact with certain people, you get to know them better, youknow their nuances better, you know when to expect them. So there’s definitely a swath ofplants that I’ve worked with for a really long time. I know when to expect, like, apples andall of the other rose family trees to start blooming. I know when dandelions are coming up;I know when violets are coming up.There are definitely plants that I’m a bit newer to that I have to go and do a little bit ofdigging, a little bit of reading. Or my favorite, I see that someone else in one of the regionalforaging Facebook groups I’m in is posting about them and I’ll be like, “Oh, I did not knowthat we were already in cow parsnip season.” (I did know we were already in cow parsnipseason. That’s just the first plant that came to my head.)Aside: Of course she knew. Also, more on those densely hairy perennials later.Alexis: And that’s been wonderful, being able to have that community to always come back to. ButI’m always re-reading all of my foraging books. All of these poor books, their covers are justbent as all get out because whenever I have some free time, or if it’s before bed, I’ll just flipone open, do a little bit of reading. I feel like I notice something new every single time Iread one of my foraging books, so it makes sense to go back over them again. It’s just likewhen you’re in school, you have to keep practicing or you’ll lose it. Use it or lose it! That isthe TLDR.Aside: Maybe you don’t know what TLDR means, and that’s fine. It stands for “Too Long.Didn’t Read,” ICYMI, in case you missed it. So, Alexis is schooling us on internet culture atlarge, as well as precious, overlooked botany.Alie: A question that’s on my mind a lot when I watch your TikToks: How do you know ifsomething’s peed on it?Alexis: [laughs] I do sniff, because if it smells like fresh pee, that’s just, like, not appetizing at all.The answer to this question, and I know, Alie, that it is not the answer that anybody wants,is: If it’s out in a green space, odds are, at some point in time in that green space’s past,probably in the last year, something has peed there.Alie: That’s a very good point. Even tiny little invertebrates, they’re makin’ pee all the time! Andthey’re doing it on our romaine lettuce that we’re buying from the store. Everything’speeing on everything. There are things in us right now peeing on each other.4Alexis: Exactly. [singing] It’s the ciiiiircle of pee! [laughs]And that’s my thing that I always love reminding people, that the farms that we get ourgroceries from do not exist in a microcosm either. You don’t know how many field micepeed on your kale. You should wash everything you take home, whether you pulled it out ofthe ground yourself or if someone else did.Alie: Very good point.Alexis: I just try to help people put that out of their minds. Now of course, there are some areasthat I avoid because they get peed on more often than others, and that is what I call “TheDog Pee Zone,” which I would say is, like, a solid foot, foot-and-a-half into anyone’s lawnthat is on a sidewalk. [“Out of bounds.”]Alie: Yes!Alexis: It’s probably best to just leave that be.Alie: I bet there’s someone out there, a foraging ecologist getting their PhD on, like, theconcentration of urea within certain feet of a sidewalk. There’s gotta be.Alexis: There has to be, and if there’s not, that’s as good of a reason to go back to school as Ipersonally need. [laughs]Alie: I know my tiny dog, she’s got the perimeter of lawns absolutely covered.That’s a huge weight off my mind. I love foraging. I’ve always thought it’s so fascinating.And one thing I’m so curious about, what is something that you tasted that you weren’tsure if you were going to dig it at all and it was just delightful?Alexis: Ooh, that’s a fun one. I would say cow parsnips. They are in the carrot family, which isfamous for having some of, like, the best wild edibles, but also famous for having some verydeadly lookalikes to those same wild edibles. I’ve been eating Queen Anne’s lace for a reallylong time. I think I figured out that Queen Anne’s lace was wild carrots, Daucus carota,when I was in high school, and it blew my mind because where my family stays inMassachusetts, there’s Queen Anne’s lace everywhere. And I’m like, “You mean I could’vebeen just digging this up the entire time?!”Cow parsnip is also in the Apiaceae family. It’s also called pushki.Aside: These plants are not another internet acronym. Apiaceae [phonetic: A-P-A-C-A] is afull word, it’s just a long Latin one for a family of flowering plants. What are some otherApiaceae plants? Celery, carrot, parsley, dill, cumin, anise. So mane Apiaceae plants havealready made it into your mouth area, but some of them are in the not-to-be-messed-withcategory because they are straight-up poison, like hemlock, or are highly phytophototoxic,which means ‘plant and light makes bad.’ Think skin blisters that require medical attention,and a lot of well-justified moaning, and pouting. But cow parsnip is safe; however, itdoesn’t always look like it.Alexis: A lot of Indigenous peoples ate it, and still eat it, for millennia. But its dangerous lookalikeis giant hogweed, which has been in the news off and on in certain areas of the countrybecause it’s super invasive and it’s super dangerous. Third-degree burns if you interactwith the sap while the sun is out dangerous. We love a phytotoxin.Alie: I mean, you gotta give it to the plants. They figured it out.5Alexis: You do, and everyone gets really mad at them and I’m just like, “Listen, if it makes you feelany better, don’t take it personally, because we’re not who they did that for. The insectsare.”Alie: [laughs] “It’s not for you.”Alexis: They’re not out to get us. They’re out to get the small crunchy bois. Don’t take it personallyif you get burned. Cow parsnips, giant hogweed: leaf shapes are super similar. Thedifference is cow parsnips get to be, like, eh… six feet. Maybe even like seven or eight feettall, max. Whereas giant hogweed can end up being, like, a 16-foot tower of doom.Alie: Oh my god! They don’t call it giant for nothing.Alexis: I believe the species name is, like, mega-gigantium. It’s, I believe, a derivative of the Latinword for humongous, and it makes sense. Cow parsnip was one of those that I’d heard somany good things about it, but it’s really hard, even when you are so confident in yourability to ID plants, to get over the hump of the .001% chance of mortal danger.Alie: Yeah! Is there an identification trick for some of the more dangerous plants? Like, betweengiant hogweed and wild carrots, is there something you can look for? Like a purplish ring atthe top, or something discerning like that?Alexis: I’m glad you called out purple because I love how often purple is the color of danger innature. When it comes to differentiating Queen Anne’s lace and poison hemlock, purple isactually one of the identifiers, so purple splotches that you will see on poison hemlock butyou will not see on Queen Anne’s lace, wild carrots.For cow parsnips versus giant hogweed, cow parsnips have this very fine kind of fuzz allover them and these really cute papery sheets over their leaves before the leaves go aheadand shoot out. Also, their leaves are very even in their serration. Whereas giant hogweed’sleaves, similar shape, irregular serration, which I feel like makes sense. Chaos means bad.Organized means good. And there are a couple other tells too, like the hollowness of thestem on cow parsnips. But the moral of the story is, I babysat a stand of cow parsnips for afull calendar year to watch it go through its entire life cycle before I finally ate some lastyear.Alie: Oh my gosh. That is an investment of time. Did it pay off?Alexis: It did! Oh my gosh, absolutely delicious. The fried flower buds, right before the flowersopen especially, are just a taste to behold. Behold is for sight. Still a taste to behold. And theleaves are beautiful and aromatic this time of year, a little bit reminiscent of celery, whichmakes sense; another Apiaceae family member. Also a little reminiscent of, like, corianderand a little bit of burnt orangeness, which becomes much more prominent in their seedslater on in the season. So, absolutely worth it. I just made a flatbread with some cowparsnip leaves diced into the dough just yesterday. A+.Alie: A+? Nice!Alexis: 10/10, would recommend to a friend. My caveat is, if you are going to harvest it, I don’tknow, maybe babysit it for a year to make sure that you’re not going to get a burn and bevery sad. And also, only harvest from healthy stands of it. The stand that I harvest from hasdoubled in size year over year, two years in a row. That’s the only reason why I feel comfyharvesting from it.6Alie: Ah! Do you ever take people with you and give up your spots? How protective of certainplants are foragers?Alexis: Oh my gosh, it really does depend on the plant. There’s a handful of people who I’ve takento some of my, like, “secret spots,” some of my “this time of year there’s ramps andcutleaved toothwort as far as the eye can see” kind of spots.Aside: What are ramps? Despite sounding like a disease that you get from a dirty hot tub,ramps are just an oniony, leeky type of scallion, oniony type of plant, only they’re free if youfind them, and also trendy. And cutleaved toothwort, which sounds like another affliction,it’s a wasabi horseradishy-tasting plant that has ganja-looking leaves and little pinkishflowers.Also, did you know that ‘wort’ means root? So, toothwort plants have roots that look likediscarded teeth. Never let anyone tell you that science isn’t goth.Alexis: I’m not crazy possessive over any of the spaces because none of them belong to me.[laughs] And it’s just… it’s not worth getting all riled up about because someday someone’sgoing to find out about it. The only experience I’ve had with something that I tried to keepsecret and the beans got spilled, but not by me, is the persimmon tree near my house.A sweet, curious soul, using iNaturalist, last summer, probably looked up and said, “Oh mygod, this tree is full of these adorable, cute little green fruits. I’m going to figure out what itis.” iNaturalist, being the great app that it is, immediately was like, “Ooh! [talking fancy]Diospyros virginiana. Congratulations, friend. You’ve found a persimmon tree.” So theytagged it, and now I am not the only person who visits that tree during the fall and winter.And that’s okay.Alie: Do you ever see anyone else rolling up with a basket? Are you like, “Oh hello. Hello.”?Alexis: Ooh, I’ve just missed people before. I’ve seen people, like, taking their plastic bag andhopping into their car and driving away right as I’m walking up with my bag. And I’m justlike, “Oh no! Friend! Come back!”Aside: So foragers: Make friends. Just respect the supply and no one will have to grapple,sweat-soaked on a lawn for a handful of persimmons. So the first rule of forager club is notdon’t talk about forager club.Alie: Let’s say that you’re a baby forager, and you’re just starting, you’re inspired by someonewith amazing energy and knowledge on TikTok, and you decide, “I’m going to start eatingmy neighborhood.” Where do you think is a good place to start? Are dandelions an entrylevel? What’ve we got?Alexis: Ooh, I would say dandelions are an excellent entry-level edible, not just because they arealmost universally recognizable, but because every single part of the plant is useful. Youcan eat the flowers; you can pickle the flower stems. You can eat the greens. You canferment the greens, making like a sauerkraut with dandelion. Yum yum yum. Very tasty.The taproot, you can go ahead and eat it like a root veggie, though it’s a little bit bitter. So alot of people will roast it and grind it into a coffee substitute, or dice it, roast it, and thenthrow it into some alcohol to macerate to make bitters. [singsong] The whole plant isuseful.So I feel like that’s a great gateway plant because if you have fun with that, odds are youwill have fun with more of them. In terms of other really easily recognizable ones, and Ithink this accidentally ended up being a gateway foraging plant for a lot of folks, are7magnolias. So many of us have magnolias planted as ornamentals in our neighborhoods.They’re one of those plants that, for whatever reason, a lot of us know the names of. Andthose white and pink flowers, if we’re talking about, like, saucer magnolias, are sorecognizable, so hard to confuse with anything else. Because I mean, magnolias as a genusare very unique flowers. That’s what happens when you decide to push pause on evolutiona couple million years ago. That’s fine. It’s casual.So that one’s been a really great one too, and to see so many people going out, andgathering them, and making magnolia syrups, and making magnolia snap cookies, was soexciting.[clip of Alexis on TikTok: “We all know that magnolias smell amazing, but did you know thattheir petals kind of taste like ginger? So we’re going to do a play on a ginga’ snap cookie. It’s amagnolia snap cookie. Flow-er coo-kie! Flow-er coo-kie!”]Aside: Also, if you’re not on TikTok, don’t freak out. Don’t worry about it. Check out@BlackForager on YouTube, where Alexis has posted a ton of her recipes, including one formagnolia cookies uploaded about a month or two ago. And I was just over on this video’spage to grab that soundbite, and then I read the description and I had to include this. In thedescription, Alexis writes:I am super proud of these cookies! And not just because they passed the taste test withmy partner’s family, but because a year ago I don’t think I would’ve felt confidentcreating a cookie recipe on my own.And as I found myself sitting on the couch this afternoon smelling like nothing butmagnolia flowers and warm sugar, I realized I am quite happy with who I am rightnow.But yes, her TikTok, Instagram, and YouTube all have great recipes and the same handle,@BlackForager, and she has recipes including ones for dandelions and magnolias. Easygateway foraging plants.Alexis: So those would be my two recommendations off the top of my head. If you are in theMidwest or along the East Coast like I am, papaws are another great one, Asimina triloba,but it is not papaw season yet.Alie: What is a papaw?Alexis: Ooh! So, papaws are the largest native fruit to North America, if you’re not counting squash.Squash are really cool too.Aside: Okay, but back to papaws, which look like if green potatoes grew on trees. Mm! Butwhat do they taste like?Alexis: They taste as if a mango and a banana had a baby, if you get a good one. I’m going to givethat caveat, because last week a friend of mine pulled me aside and said, “I don’t know if Idid something wrong, but I tried a papaw last year and I didn’t like it.” And papaws are agreat adventure. They don’t breed true. It’s very hard to assume how a papaw from acertain tree is going to taste until you’re tasting it. But when you find good ones, oh buddy,they are fantastic. And they do look like little mangoes hanging out in the trees. The treeshave these humongous, glossy dark green leaves that make them very easy to recognizefrom a distance. Once you’ve seen one, you start seeing them everywhere if you live in aregion that they’re native to.8And they are a fruit that did not develop for us. They developed for megafauna. Theydeveloped for giant sloths to eat the fruits whole and poop out the seeds. But now we get toenjoy them, which is cool.Alie: That actually brings up the point of native and invasive species. Are we doing the Earth amitzvah by eating invasive species? And how do you find out in your region what’s gotta goand what’s gotta flourish?Alexis: Oh, I absolutely think we’re doing mother nature a solid by eating invasives because eatingthem is much better for the environment than spraying them, which is what I see a lot ofcities, towns, and municipalities turning to when it comes to eradication of certain species.Two that come to mind for all of us kicking it on the eastern half of the United States aregarlic mustard, which is very much in season in, oh gosh, pretty much early through latespring. Here in Ohio, right now, while we are recording this, it is flowering. So I’m just goingthrough and picking the flowerheads off of all of them that I see and bringing them home tohave them for dinner, but mostly just because I don’t want them to set seed because theyare very prolific spreaders. They are a non-native brassica. And brassicas are just so good attheir job, and their job is being spicy and spreading seeds.Aside: And what is a brassica, you ask? That’s why I’m here. Brassica are things such asbroccoli, and cabbage, and kale, and rutabaga, and kohlrabi, and brussels sprouts, andmustards. And the oil of the brassica seeds is where Canola oil comes from! There’s no suchthing as a canola! The word just means Canadian Oil Low Acid, because it was invented inCanada![to Jarrett:] Jarrett, did you like when I told you all about that earlier?Jarrett: I loved it! I love learning about Canadian Oil Low Acid!Alie:[laughs] There’s no such thing as a canola!Okay, but back to yellow mustard flowers, which bloom in early springtime in California,and everyone gets so hyped up about nature not knowing that it’s wildly invasive and mayhave been introduced by Spanish missionaries tossing it out like confetti on their path upthe California coast. Mustard.Alie: It’s so good for Instagram pictures, but native plant enthusiasts haaaaayte it! Hayte it!Alexis: Yaaah! Oh my gosh, if you are in California, go find all of the mustard, pull it up, eat it!Blanch it, put it in pesto, put it in a stew, pickle the stems. Eat all of it.Alie: Get rid of it! Eat it!Alexis: Please! And I know, here we also have Japanese knotweed, which is a prolific spreader andit is kind of becoming a scourge in a lot of areas in the northeast. You’ll just see towns justspray the worst kind of chemicals onto them because it’s a very hardy species. It’s verygood at the game of survival, so you’ve kind of got to drown it in a lot of things that are notgood for the rest of the environment if you want to get rid of them. But what a joy it wouldbe if instead, you know, in the spring when they start putting all of their chonky littleshoots up, people were just going through cutting them off or pulling them up andcollecting them for people to eat.Aside: Eat that knotweed, Northeast United States, and actually every state except NorthDakota, Nevada, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, Florida, and Hawaii, who aren’t yet overrunwith it.9If you’re like, “What is the knotweed?” Okay, so it’s been in the US since the 1860s when itwas given to a nursery owner in New York, and now it’s everywhere. Japanese knotweed.Its root systems can span 70 feet. It grows up to one-and-a-half stories tall. Eight inches aday! And it has these large green leaves and a bunch of little white flowers, and the stemslook a little like bamboo, which is why it’s called American bamboo. It’s not bamboo.And in spring, sprouts look like reddish asparagus and it has a sour flavor, or kind oflemony like rhubarb, which is where it got the nickname ‘donkey rhubarb’. Now, if youwant to name your EDM EP Donkey Rhubarb, think again, people. British electronica outfitAphex Twin already beat you to it. Why? Why does Aphex Twin care about donkeyrhubarb? Because in England, if you have this invasive knotweed on your property, banksmight refuse to give you a mortgage because it’s so robust and so hard to eradicate, and itruins foundations of buildings.In prepping for the 2012 Olympics, London spent the equivalent of $100 million to get ridof Japanese knotweed on 10 acres. $100 million! That’s $10 million an acre. Connecticutweed scientist Jatinder Aulakh has said, ominously, “There is no insect, pest, or disease inthe United States that can keep it in check.”So what do you do? One, make sure it hasn’t been doused in herbicides, and two, eat it. Itgrows through the cracks in Alexis’s deck.Alexis: Because for a species that is very quickly changing the landscape on the outskirts of a lot ofcities, it is delicious. It’s very rhubarb-esque, but slightly more vegetal than rhubarb. Thatbeing said, it does lend itself both sweet and savory so well. I made sorbet with it last yearthat I was obsessed with. I need to make it again this year. For a class over the weekend, Idid a fun little sautéed grains and threw a couple of the shoots in, and they just add a lot oflemony brightness to any dish.And when the shoots are young and you cook them just right, they get kind of, like, melt-in-your-mouth when you cook them. For my friends who do eat the eggs, I hear that they’re awonderful addition to an omelet. They’re delicious, and what a joy it would be if we justsuddenly had cities with armfuls, truckfulls, of free, lemony, Japanese knotweed shoots thistime of year instead of just going and dousing them in herbicides.Alie: On the topic of herbicides, that’s something I didn’t even think of, but when you’re foraging,is that something you have to be more careful of than pee? And how do you do that?Alexis: Oh yeah. I’m way more worried about herbicides than I’m worried about pee. There are acouple things that I tell people to look out for when they’re foraging in urban spaces. I thinksome people don’t realize how visually apparent it is when an area has been treatedrecently with herbicides. You will see, like, rings of discoloration around the very obviouslysprayed weeds. So if you’re looking at someone’s lawn and it is otherwise… like, it’s 98%,99% beautiful grass throughout the rest of the lawn, and you look around the fringes, andyou see some weeds doing their thing because they’re hardy AF and stubborn AF , youshould probably stay away from those because the way that people get perfectlymanicured monoculture lawns is help from herbicides.So, those guys I typically leave alone. If you see any odd discoloration either on the plant orin a, like, little perimeter ring around the plant, leave it alone. Absolutely. Any irregularwilting that you wouldn’t expect to see this time of year, absolutely leave it alone. And justfor the sake of things like runoff and whatnot too, and exhaust, I give a pretty wide marginto streets that are wider than two lanes and an even wider margin to railroads.10Alie: Oh really? Because of diesel engines?Alexis: Yeah.Alie: Ooh… I wasn’t sure if it was that or just the, you know, getting lost in a playlist, headphoneson, and just… choo-choo! You know?Alexis: [laughs]Alie: Yikes.Alexis: “And that’s how we lost the forager. Wow.” [laughs]Alie: So sad!When it comes to where you forage, how do you do it differently in the city versus if you’reout on a hike? And what kinds of stuff do you find in each place?Alexis: Yeah, so in the city it’s going to be a lot more of the kind of classic, quintessential weeds;the plants that like taking advantage of disturbed ground where they don’t have to, youknow, outcompete any of our other native species. So right now in the cities I’m seeing a lotof Queen Anne’s lace already putting up their new sets of leaves for the year. A ton ofdandelions, a lot of clover; white clover, red clover, and now sweet clover is starting toshow up to hang out. A ton of mugwort. I passed a couple of very healthy stands ofmugwort while I was on a walk around the neighborhood today that I will be visiting thisweekend because I’m in the mood for mugwort roasted potatoes.Aside: So what does mugwort look like? Okay, I had to look it up. It’s a member of thedaisy family, so its leaves look like daisy leaves, and it has clusters of these drooped-bellbuds at the tip of a stalk. And mugwort can grow meters and meters high. And whilescientists call it Artemisia vulgaris, close friends call it riverside wormwood, felon herb, oldUncle Henry, and naughty man. And I feel like I have to buy mugwort a beer to hear how itgot those nicknames.But mugwort just means ‘marsh root’, and it’s best to pick the leaves and buds between Julyto September, and you can season some meat with it, you can make a mochi dessert, or lookinto its medicinal purposes. Indigenous people in North America used mugwort for a widevariety of ills, like pit stank, to colds and flus, rousing folks from comas, and even inducinglabor. So, ethnopharmacology episode, anyone? Yes.But yes, when this was recorded a few weeks ago, Alexis was planning to gather somemugwort and roast potatoes with it.Alexis: A lot of the friends who you see enjoying spaces that maybe have been modified forsomething else. We have a couple of empty lots in our neighborhood in which the groundwas turned over before the winter, and now that ground is just covered in weeds. Whereasif I’m in the forest right now or out in the woods, oh gosh, it’s almost a completely differentbiome. We’re still in the middle of spring ephemerals season, so I’m seeing trout lilies,trilliums, ramps, cutleaved toothwort, Virginia bluebells.I’m starting to see pheasant back mushrooms, oyster mushrooms, morels of course. Andthen you have a lot of the trees whose early leaves are edible starting to leaf out, likemaples. You have pines, spruces, and firs putting out their new growth and their needlesare very soft right now and great to incorporate into meals too.11So, it’s a fun game having a change in the mindset of what you’re looking for depending onwhere you are. And I’m lucky that where I live here in Ohio, while I very much live in thecity, Columbus proper, I do not have to go very far to not feel like I’m in the city anymore.Alie: By the way, congratulations on your mushroom find.Alexis: Thank you!Alie: Pretty big deal.Alexis: Oh my gosh. I know. I feel like morels are just, like, a badge of honor in the foragingcommunity. I feel like I haven’t been an official forager until now.Alie: I saw that. There are so many questions from patrons and so many of them start off,“Congratulations on the morel!” Like, so many. [laughs]Alexis: Ah! That’s nice!Alie: People are so thrilled for you. I was wondering, what percent of your diet do you think isforaged versus market?Alexis: Ooh. I love this question because it varies a lot throughout the year, and we just finishedthe time of year where it’s like maybe 10% or 15%, in the winter through early spring. Andnow I think we’re kicking it up probably closer to around 25% just because there’s not awhole lot of the high-caloric-value, high-nutrition-value plants out to play.But oh my gosh, once we get to late summer and into the fall where it’s like: Acorn season!Papaw season! Hazelnut season! Persimmon season! That’s the time of year where I canhave entire days where everything that I’m cooking with the exception of maybe a little bitof flour being thrown in, or an olive oil being added into a pan, is something that I foraged.So, it very much fluctuates as we progress through the year.Alie: I have so many questions from listeners. I have 35 pages of questions from listeners.Alexis: WHAT?! Oh my gosh! [laughs]Alie: Yeah. 35 pages of questions. Single spaced! A lot of questions. So many people who just loveyou, I mean… I should just forward you all these questions just so if you’re ever having anykind of bad day, oh wow, people love you so much! Can I ask you some of their questions?Alexis: Oh my gosh, yes! Do we have time to go through all of them?Alie: I wish we did!Aside: 35 pages of questions! But before we start answering them, first we’re going to takea pit stop to donate some money to a charity of the ologist’s choosing, and this week Alexischose Backyard Basecamp, which aims to inspire Black, Indigenous, and all people of coloracross Baltimore city to find nature where they are and empowers them to explore further.Backyard Basecamp also offers garden consultations, educator training, habitat discoveryprograms, and more. They are awesome. We’ve donated to them a few times in the past, socheck them out and consider donating too. That is BackyardBasecamp.org. That donationwas made possible by sponsors of the show who you may hear about now.[Ad Break]Okay, let’s rifle through a basket of your questions and then feast on her answers.12Alie: Okay, two great questions I really loved. One from Lynn Hodnett, who says: It seems to methat it’s important to keep in mind that there are respectful ways to forage, or at least thereshould be. Are there guidelines for this and do these guidelines draw knowledge orinspiration from the Indigenous people of the region you’re foraging? Lynn also says: I feellike Native people are routinely harassed for performing traditional actions like foragingwhile white people get away with taking more than they need.And Sikwani Dana says that she: Learned about plants and their medicinal values, amongother things, from my parents – she and her dad are Penobscot – and that knowledge hasbeen passed down. But she is wondering how you gain the knowledge to know you’re notgoing to poison yourself because she trusts learning from elders more than books. Shewould rather learn in the field hands-on.So yeah, any thoughts on what you’ve learned from Indigenous cultures in foraging?Alexis: Oh my gosh, I mean, that’s… The Indigenous peoples of the Americas, that’s the crux ofeverything that foraging is here right now. Their knowledge is the foundation of theknowledge that everyone else has had the opportunity to interact with and build upon.I know… Michael Twitty talked about this a little bit in this book The Cooking Gene becausea lot of enslaved Black folks in the South foraged, but obviously, the people who they gotthat information and that knowledge from were the Indigenous people. So, coming frommy dad’s side of the family, my dad’s mom hails from the Seneca up in the New York area.But she passed away when my dad was in high school so he got, like, bits and pieces, andlittle, like, inklings about certain plants and certain foods, but not in the way that he wishedhe had.And honestly, he also knew a whole lot about plants. I’m very lucky that as a person ofcolor, both of my parents are very outdoorsy. Also, he got a lot from his dad’s side of thefamily down in Mississippi from bits of information that they had been passing through thegenerations since they had been enslaved there.So yeah, of course. I feel like, in some way or another, every single one of us who’s talkingabout foraging in North America is only doing so because of the generosity with knowledgeof the Indigenous people, who now, yeah, do not get to continue some of those practicesand some of that land stewardship that is the whole reason why this nation looked the waythat it did. Period.I honestly feel like we need more Indigenous voices front and center when it comes toforaging here in the United States. As well, I like to think that I know a whole lot aboutforaging in a way that preserves for not just me next year but me in ten years and childrenin 20 years, and their children in 50 years, 60 years. I know that I don’t know everything.Aside: Alexis notes that we could do an entire series of episodes on the role of Indigenousland stewardship before colonization. And this field does have an ology: EnvironmentalAnthropology. Further proof that I will make this podcast until I die because there are somany good ologies. So please just get used to me, friends.Speaking of friends, first-time question-asker Alexandra Holland wrote in to say: I loveAlexis so much, I’m going to die of excitement. And Alexandra wants to know: How do youuse foraging to connect to other people and to yourself? And Konstantin Gutnichenko asks:Are there any clubs that I can join?13So yes, do foragers hang out together? How does one get invited to those gatheringgatherings?Alexis: Oh absolutely. We have a whole little community. I love it. I love it so much. We haveFacebook groups divided by region, and divided by country, and divided by continent, andjust global foraging groups too that really let us bond with one another past all of ourborders. So it’s great. You get to know the people very closely who are near to you.I’m in a Midwest foraging group, I’m in an Ohio foraging group, I’m in a Central Ohioforaging group. So we definitely have a community, and we exchange recipes, and weexchange ideas, and we build each other up, and we buy each other’s books. It’s really nice.I’m so thankful that the internet makes it possible to digitally get to know all of thesepeople and spend time with them. Especially in the age of covid, because it’s not like any ofus were able to go out and actually see each other in person.Alie: Such an interesting thing about the last year for you is, you know, when so many people feltso isolated they gained a new appreciation for being outside, and then also had, like, areally cool new friend to show them, you know? So great.We have so many questions that use the word newbie…Aside: By the by: So many people, literally almost 50 folks asked this question, so I’m justgoing to shout out for this one the first-time question-askers, including Katelyn James, AlexNelson, Curtis Roderick, Dane Schuckman, Katie Kyle, and…Alie: Bennett Gerber wants to know: What are some go-to foraging tips? The Mushy asks: Whatare your favorite tools for different kinds of foraging?So just one huge question: How do you start?Alexis: [laughs] My “The Black Forager Guide to Getting Started Foraging” is three-fold. Numberone is, get a foraging guide that is as specific as you can find for your area. For some places,that’s just going to be a regional foraging guide like the book Midwest Foraging. For someplaces, like where some of my family lives in Massachusetts on Martha’s Vineyard, there isliterally Edible Wild Plants of Martha's Vineyard that their conservation society putstogether each year. So, find a guide as hyper-specific as you can find, number one.Number two is to join a regional foraging group on Reddit, or on Facebook, wherever youfind groups of people hanging out digitally, because one, it will introduce you to peoplewho are like-minded but maybe have a bit more experience than you. And two, what aperfect way to see what is in season, because you know, 10, 15 times a day, other peopleare posting what they’re seeing and they don’t live too far away from you.Aside: So get a book, join a group, and then what’s the last step?Alexis: And then three: make friends with one of the folks in that group and go out with them,because you can’t replicate seeing the plants in real time in all three dimensions. For me,that’s where the real learning comes, and that’s where the real memorization comes from,just for me personally. I can see a plant or a mushroom in a book until the cows comehome, and the way that it’ll stick in my mind and the way that I will be able to point fromacross a field and be like, “Look! It’s yellow rocket!” is being able to see it in person for thefirst time and get a good gander at it. So, hit the trails with someone who’s been at it for abit longer than you. There is no replacement for it.Alie: Also, I guess you can’t smell a book, can you? But smell must come into it, right?14Alexis: You can’t, so when people are like, “Pheasant back mushrooms, they smell like cucumbers,”well, yeah. There’s no scratch-and-sniff that I know of, at least, in the foraging books. Yet. Idon’t know, that could be a million-dollar idea for somebody out there. Scratch-and-sniffforaging book. I’d buy it.Aside: Okay, I looked it up and I found one title, The Scratch & Sniff Book of Weeds, butalas, on second glance, it just said Weed. Not weeds. So, the Scratch and Sniff book of Weed.The blurb on the front boasts: This book is dope!Also, I looked up, when is a plant a weed? And essentially, a weed is just any plant that isunwanted in a human-controlled setting. So weed, as a name for marijuana, perhaps asironic as they come, because for the most part it seems pretty wanted.PS: Is weed, and reefer, and trees, and laughing grass, cabbage, that smoochy-woochie-poochie, is that even native to North America? Nope. It originated in central Asia beforemaking its way to Africa, and then the Caribbean, and South America. And then afterprohibition ended, the agency that became the DEA was like, “Quick! What should we bannext?” And they turned their attention to this smokable plant that humans have used foreons. That sticky-icky skunkweed. Which brings us back to smells.[Jarrett in the background: “The devil’s lettuce!”]Alie: But that must be good to know when you’re out foraging that you’re using a lot of yoursenses at once too.Alexis: Yeah, and that’s one thing… I think so many people get very worried about lookalikes,which you should. That little layer of anxiety is something that keeps you safe. But I can’teven fully communicate how you are truly using all of your senses for IDing. Yes, I made avideo on how to tell the difference between Queen Anne’s lace and poison hemlock whenthey are still wee bebes, just little rosettes, when honestly the best way to tell the differenceis that poison hemlock smells like rat pee and Queen Anne’s lace doesn’t. [laughs] Poisonhemlock does not smell like something you want to put in your face, and for good reason.Alie: If you don’t like rat pee.Alexis: If you don’t like rat pee. If you do like rat pee, I don’t know what to tell you.Aside: But what if something smells like fungus genitals and you like it and want to put itin your mouth? Well, all mushrooms share that characteristic. Maybe not of you wanting toput it in your mouth, but they’re all fungus genitals. And so many patrons, including NedLansing, Dorit, Brenna Anderson, Eden Sunshine, morel hunters Madeline Duke and CurtisRoderick, Rebekah Weinzetl, Hayley Everson, Rachel Stearns, Kate Bell, Madelyn Winter,new listener Nicholas, Maritime Archaeologist Chanelle Zap, Christi Kazakov, SébastienPapineau, Anya Marion, RJ Doidge, Catherine Jameson, Annie C, and Zoee Hull all askedabout this. In ThimbleWhim’s words: I love foraging for garlic grass, fiddleheads, anddandelions. I never forage for mushrooms because I don’t know enough and I’m way tooaddicted to not dying. And Rachel Casha wrote in: All mushrooms are edible. Somemushrooms are only edible once. Where do you even start learning proper identification?Alie: I have a lot of questions about mushrooms, because… Okay, set me straight here. I feel likemushrooms is… like, you level up to mushrooms. Is that correct?Alexis: So, I feel like you level up to mushrooms because I grew up being very plant specific in mystudy of what’s growing around me. So I think it kind of depends on what you feel morecomfortable learning first. For me, I guess I just… I’ve been learning about plants for long15enough and interacting with them for long enough that I can go into a new space in a regionthat I’m somewhat familiar with and be like, “I have a good idea of what I’m going to findhere, flora-wise.” Do not ask me what I think I’m going to find fungi-wise because I will nothave a good answer for you. [laughs] Every time I find a mushroom it is a pleasant surprise.Alie: Yeah! Someone, about your morels, asked… Zoee Hull says: Oh my goodness, I love Alexisso much. Yay! She just found her first morel, so I’ve got to know what is the secret to thiselusive, cerebral delight?Alexis: So, unfortunately, the only secret that I know that seems to be worth its salt is the one thatI did have in that video, and it’s that if you are in an area that is known for having morelmushrooms and the ground temperature has been consistently between, like, 40-60° and ithas rained within the last week, look for trees that are dead and have bark starting to peeloff of them.The cool thing about morels is they begin their life in between the cells of those trees, andthen when those trees die, that is when morels then, kind of, convert to breaking down thatdead matter and put up those fruiting bodies. So, you’re going to be finding them near deadtrees, but not trees that have been dead for a very long time, just because they would thenbe devoid of the nutrients that the morels need to grow and to fruit. And honestly, I’ve hadthe knowledge up in my noggin for a while and I still only found my first morel last week.Alie: That’s so exciting. How did you cook it?Alexis: I brought four home, and everyone was just… Because I’ve only had them dried before,which are still delightful, but there’s something about, like, not having to reconstitute themthat everybody says is just miraculous. So, I went super simple. I melted a little bit of veganbutter, I added in a splash of white wine, and I added in a little bit of diced field garlic, someAllium vineale, just to get some aromatics going. And then I halved the morels and tossedthem in the sauce, cooked them until the wine had cooked off and had caramelized themjust a wee bit, and then just ate them that way. And Alie, they were so good I cried a little.Alie: Oh my gosh! That’s so exciting. Is this the season for it, or are they a seasonal mushie?Alexis: They are a seasonal mushie. Here on the eastern side of the United States, we are, like, rightin the middle of morel season right now. In the Midwest specifically, things are a little up inthe air right now. We’ve had some very chaotic weather. It has been both 80° and we’vehad an inch of snow, all within the last seven days.Alie: Oh wow…Alexis: So we have no idea if that means good things for the rest of morel season or if it means badthings for the rest of morel season. But on the West Coast, where you also have things likeburn morels, those are going to be dependent on wildfires, whether or not you’re going tobe able to find them. And morel season is much more, like, late winter.[clip from Alexis’s TikTok, singsong: “Morel mushrooms, they’re kind of creepy but at leastthey taste good.”]Alie: Kendra St. Clair wants to know if you write your songs ahead of time or if they are musicalimprov?Alexis: Oh my gosh, what a great question. It is a little bit of both. If I’m just riffing in a video, that isalmost always just musical improv. I was in an improv group called Affirmative Distractionhere in Columbus for a couple of years. [laughs]16Alie: Amazing!Alexis: An all-Black improv group here in the city, and I love musical improv. It used to scare thecrap out of me and now it’s one of my fun little side hobbies. It’s something that I reallyenjoy doing. But things that involve instruments, absolutely written ahead of time. I am notone of those people who can just pick up an instrument and be like, “And now, here’s asong fresh out of my brainhole.” I mean, I can do that, it just won’t be good.Alie: Understood. Great question from Catherine Jameson. They want to know: Why are so manyforaged plants so mucilaginous?Alexis: [laughs] I think the answer is, a lot of plants are mucilaginous and we just don’t cultivate alot of them, so then when it’s time to go out and forage things, you just get constantlysurprised by the plants and the fungi that do a slimy when you cook with them.Alie: [laughs] Do a slimy. Well you know, you compared it to okra as a, kind of, thickening agent,right?Alexis: Yes, and that’s exactly what I was going to mention. I was going to say, for folks who grewup eating okra, that is not a crazy surprising thing. But for people who didn’t, giving themsomething made with, like, mallow for the first time might be a bit of a squicky experiencefor them if they’re not prepared.Alie: It’s just a little slippery! Just a li’l bit.Alexis: Just a li’l slippy. It’s good for ya!Aside: And from slime to something more serious, a lot of patrons had cultural questionsabout foraging, like Riley McInnis, Emily Richardson, and Claudia Dana, and first-timequestion-asker Vikki Preston, who wrote in to say: I’m an Indigenous person living in myrural homelands, and for us, foraging or gathering is still a common a necessary practice,much as it’s always been. But Vikki wanted to know, alongside listeners Alexis Jarvis andAmani Al-Kidwa:Alie: How and why can it be empowering as a Black, Indigenous, or person of color forager?Alexis: My Instagram handle is @BlackForager, and that was 100% on purpose, because one, Ididn’t see a lot of people who looked like me in this space, and I still don’t see a lot ofpeople who look like me in the space. I honestly think of it kind of like an act of restorativejustice to be a person of color who is foraging because historically, culturally, and legally, alot of barriers were put in place to prohibit us, historically, from being able to do so.I talk about it a little bit in a video that I’d made for Black History Month, but in the South,immediately after the Civil War, a lot of laws were put in place to purposefully curbrecently freed Black folks from being able to forage and trap to provide for themselves,essentially holding them in economic bondage to the plantations. So, they weren’t enslavedanymore but now they pretty much have to be sharecroppers because there’s not muchelse you can do.Trespass went from being a civil offense to being a criminal offense, which suddenly makesit a way more expensive problem for you if you are on somebody else’s land and they don’twant you to be there. But also, if you’re recently freed, you don’t have land of your own tobe foraging on, to be growing things on, to be trapping on, to be hunting on. And, bothphysically in some places but mostly metaphorically, fences were put up around publicproperty, and in a lot of spaces it became illegal to forage and trap there too.17A lot of that also has some history in the very beginnings of the National Park movement inthe late 1800s, the 1880s and the 1890s, when a lot of white men wanted to preserve thepristine conditions of the green spaces they saw around them while completely ignoringthe fact that the way that those green spaces became the way that they were was becauseof a lot of these symbiotic relationships between the people who were living off of themand the land itself.So, when a lot of laws are put in place to purposefully disenfranchise people from beingable to do something, it usually has a lot of generational and cultural spillover. There’s apretty big cultural barrier to hop over to be a person of color, even just existing in theoutdoors, when a lot of us had grandparents, or even in my case, parents, who grew up in atime where there was, like, a very real fear of being a Black person, in the case of my family,by yourself, out in the middle of the woods. That wasn’t a situation that you would everwant to find yourself in for fear of, like, extreme acts of violence.So for me to be a Black woman foraging, yeah, it feels like justice to me. It’s an act that I feellike we should begin reclaiming. We have just as much of a right to do it as anybody else,but because we have all of these historical and external factors working against us, there’sjust not a lot of us out here. Thankfully, I do see that beginning to change and I hope to seeit change even more rapidly as we move forward.Aside: Alexis notes that if your great grandparents aren’t foraging, well, they’re not goingto teach your grandparents how to forage, and they aren’t going to teach your parents, whoaren’t going to teach you. And not to mention so, so much oral tradition and teaching hasbeen lost over the years. And I think one of the things that’s so powerful about Alexis’slessons are that she has been captivated by foraging since she was five, and has beenstudying it for years, and years, and years, and part of her work feels like carrying on acertain oral tradition of her own; telling stories, showing us exactly what to look for, how toprepare it, in a manner that has been missing through generations of trauma.And her work is igniting a new interest in folks who have been kept from this knowledgeand resources. Gathered around the glow of our phones, folks listen intently to her lessons.Alie: I think it’s so great that you’re bringing so many people together who feel similarly.Actually, we have one question… Jessica Duncan says: first-time question-asker and fellowBlack girl who loves plants here. From the Pacific Northwest. I’m interested in getting intoforaging for mushies; however, I’m also concerned about trail erosion and the negativeeffects of trampling through forests. Do you have any tips on how to ethically andsustainably forage?Alexis: Yes. Well, since she said that she is specifically interested in mushroom collecting, I wouldsay, if you have, like, a little pocketknife and you go ahead and just cut off the fruitingbodies instead of, you know, disrupting the mycelium that are doing their thing… A lot offoraging is, honestly, evaluating space by space, where you are at any given time. If you arein a place that is having issues with erosion of soil, and you look around and you see signsof erosion of soil; you see a top layer with poor soil quality, the wind blows and you see awhole lot of nutritionally depleted topsoil blowing around, that’s probably not an area thatyou want to be taking any biodiversity out of. You want to, kind of, give it as much of achance to thrive as it could possibly have.So a lot of it is just reading the space that you’re in visually. Reading up on a space thatyou’re going to be in ahead of time. And that doesn’t just go for things like erosion. When18I’m on the East Coast, if I’m foraging seaweed, I’m checking the water quality. Those arelevels that are usually posted for commercial fishermen, but anybody who is out there, youknow, fishing, clamming, and in my case, dragging seaweed directly out of the ocean to putinto their gullet, you also want to be knowing about the water temperature, algal blooms,any spills that have happened in the area. So, a little bit of it is just doing the research thatyou can if you are able for a space that you hope to be foraging from.Alie: Are those the dead man’s fingers?Alexis: Yes. Oh my god, I love dead man’s fingers so much. They’re so creepy!Alie: Dead man’s fingers, a healthy bouquet of them.Aside: So, we’re not talking about the mushroom called dead man’s fingers, which trulyare a ghastly, grayish, fingery-looking sight on the forest floor. Rather, these dead man’sfingers are also called green sea fingers, stag seaweed, green fleece, and oyster thief, alsoknown as Codium fragile, if you’re feeling specific.Now, Alexis says that she tries to use the binomial nomenclature, or genus and species,format because so many foragable foods have tons of local names, and she says that if athing is important enough to have different names in a bunch of different places, it’sbecause it’s really tasty or it’s really, really gross. Or lethal.Now, how do you make sure that you keep eating dead man’s fingers without having deadman’s fingers?Alie: Hope says… and maybe this is some flimflam you can bust. Hope says: I’ve been told thatyou can test for berries being poisonous by rubbing them on your hand and seeing if ittingles or numbs. And then if it doesn’t, doing the same with your cheek, and if nothingthere either, you might be able to eat it. Is that true at all? Is it flimflam? Is it reliable?Alexis: For a lot of us, especially who grew up being very outdoorsy, that was kind of the way thatwe were told to deal with a situation if we [dramatically] found ourselves stranded in themiddle of the woods! The way I always heard it was, you know, you’d rub it on the inside ofyour ankle… You pretty much travel to more sensitive pieces of skin and wait a few hoursto see if it reacts.Because I am a cautious being, and because not every hazardous plant behaves the sameway or possesses the same toxins, I’m just going to go ahead and say that unless you aredying, probably not the best rule of thumb to go by. And even if you are dying, probably notthe best rule of thumb to go by.Also, if you are looking for berries, I can say with confidence that if you are in NorthAmerica, we don’t have any poisonous compound berries. So if it looks like a raspberry,you’re good to go.Aside: Okay, so compound or aggregate berries include the dewberry, the blackberry, theraspberry, so that should help, Rebecca, Rachel Sortor, Mandii Smith, Donnielle O'Neill, andMegan Burnett Tarasiewicz.On that topic, this is a very, very good question:Alie: Emma Kiley is a first-time question-asker and their greatest love is for serviceberries. Is aserviceberry like a raspberry?19Alexis: [gasp!] Oh my god, serviceberries! I’m so glad someone brought serviceberries up because Ialways want to shoehorn them into the conversation, but I never know if people are goingto know what I’m talking about.So, serviceberries, which are the Amelanchier genus, there are a couple of different speciesthat fall under it but we call them all serviceberries, or juneberries, or saskatoon berries. Insouthern Ohio sometimes they just call them sarvis or sarvisberries. They actually look alot more like blueberries. They are crowned berries, so they have the little points stickingout of them, the little last signs of their flowers. They… Man, they might be my favorite. Ilove papaws, just from a purely ethnobotanical history standpoint, but serviceberriesmight be my favorite thing to forage. They taste like apples and blueberries mixed together.Alie: Oh man! Can you make a cobbler… Can you get enough to make a cobbler out of them, or isit, like, if you get three of them you’ve had the best day of your life?Alexis: Oh, no. So, last year, just from the sole tree closest to my house, I gathered enough berries,while still leaving all the ones that I couldn’t reach, which was most of them, for the birds, Igathered enough to make, like, ten hand pies.Alie: Aaah!Alexis: Last year, for whatever reason, I gathered one big jar of serviceberries, and I was like, “Youknow what? I’m tired.” And by the time I wasn’t tired anymore, serviceberry season wasover. So this year I’m going to stock up all of my energy and my strength and we’re going togo ham on serviceberries. My neighborhood loves planting them as ornamentals, so theyare everywhere!Alie: Oh man! That’s gotta be in, like, apartment listings. “What is around you that you couldeat.”Alexis: I honestly think that people need to start listing it because if someone told me that a housethat I was maybe going to move into has a serviceberry tree out front, I’d be like, “I’m done.Sold.” You don’t have a washer or a dryer but you have a serviceberry tree? Who cares? I’llwash my clothes in the sink. That’s fine. It’s better for the environment anyway.Aside: Now, a certain film came up a few times, and Lina Zikas and Julia McDonald wantedto know how to avoid the same fate. Julia asked: Please tell us how to not Chris McCandlessourselves.Does Alexis get this question a lot?Alie: Are there any movies about foraging or survivalism that are inspiring to you or that youfucking hate, at all?Alexis: Oh my gosh, people do bring up Into the Wild all the time. That’s like everyone’s literaryexperience with foraging. And I feel like for a lot of people their literary experience withforaging is, like, people being in mortal peril. It’s always either Into the Wild or it’s thatfrickin’ scene in the Hunger Games, where it’s like, “That’s nightlock, Peeta! It’ll kill you!”That’s the way that everybody thinks about it.I’m trying to think if I know of any movies in which the portrayal of foraging doesn’t makeme big sad…Alie: Oh no!Alexis: Oh no! None are coming to mind. Quick! Someone write a heartfelt children’s film withforaging in it. You can consult me. I’ll do it for free!20Alie: Yes! First, PBS show, and then consulting also, please.Alexis: Yes, please.Alie: Last questions I always ask: What sucks the most about either foraging or having a millionpeople watching your foraging? What is one thing that you would change about it?Alexis: Oh man… [laughs] I don’t think there’s anything that I would change about foraging.Processing what you bring home is sometimes tough. I feel like that’s what I don’t get asmany questions about but I feel like I need to warn people about. If you’re getting intoforaging… Like, 80% of the fun is going out and finding the thing, but you do have to bringit home and do things with it, or… Either cook it immediately or do something, usually alittle labor intensive, to it so you can preserve it for cooking with it in the future. I don’t getto just bring the acorns home, and crack them open, and have a snack. Unfortunately.Acorns especially, that’s a weeks-long process every fall.But, that being said, I also find processing my finds to be very, like, meditative. It’s like agreat thing to do after a busy week. I’m a freak. I will process plants for two hours incomplete silence in my kitchen and be just the happiest version of myself after.Alie: I bet! Especially after you’ve had a… Each thing that you’re processing has a narrative too.When you found it, how you decided to pick that one over the one next to it. There’s somuch context for every single leaf, you know?Alexis: Exactly. There’s so much to consider, and I find that taking the time to really pause and toreally think about how thankful I am for everything that I brought home for each one ofthose plants, and for all of the people, places, and books where I’ve gotten my knowledgeabout that plant from. It fills my heart up, makes my heart feel all warm and fuzzy. Andthen at the end, you get a snack. Who doesn’t like that?So, since I would change nothing about foraging because foraging is amazing andwonderful, I will say that being a person who a lot of people are watching on the internet,nine times out of ten, super cool, very surreal experience. But a lot of people talk to you, orat least leave comments on your things, as if you are, like, not a real human person whothen has to process what it is that they have said. And that stinks.Additionally, being a woman and a woman of color in the space comes with a lot of addedpressure to be so incredibly perfect. And I mean, yes, this is a line of study and a line ofwork in which you want to be perfect and you want to be accurate because you care aboutall of the people who follow you, and you want them to be safe, and you want them to feellike they are prepared knowledge-wise to go out and find something, or at least preparedto ask the right questions when they go and find more information about it. But being aperson of color, I do find that I tend to incur skepticism a lot more than some of mydelightful white peers.Alie: God, that sucks.Alexis: Yeah! It sucks. Thank you. It sucks.Aside: Alexis recounted that online her knowledge gets doubted more than others eventhough she’s been studying this for years. And it’s impossible to ignore that sexism andracism. But it’s also partly why she knows the work and being in this space is important.And also, she’s just entertaining as hell.21Alie: I think what’s so compelling about it is it’s outdoorsy, and it’s funny, and it’s personable,and it’s science, and it’s food, and it’s history! It’s like a septuple whammy!Alexis: Just a one-stop-shop for all different kinds of content.Alie: It really is, and I just love the way that it gets people to notice their surroundings more andnot take for granted all of the things that are growing around us.Alexis: Yeah, I think a lot of people have found solace in nature, and a lot of folks who maybewouldn’t have otherwise. For me, my M.O. has always been: when you see more value in aspace, you take better care of it. And foraging is absolutely a way to see more value in thespace around you.Alie: That being said, I always end on your favorite thing about it, but how do you even pick afavorite thing about it? I also feel like your microbiome must be so good! You must havesuch a healthy microbiome.Alexis: I don’t know, I eat normal things too. Like right now, I do have a glass of a redbud anddandelion fermented beverage that I just bottled earlier this week. And I’m like, “Yay! Goodgut bacteria! We love to see an active fermenting drink.” But I also ate two Oreos forbreakfast this morning, so… Jury’s out on that one. I guess I don’t get sick a lot. [laughs]Alie: What about your favorite thing about it? What just gives you butterflies?Alexis: Oh man, getting to see, either in real time or to have people relay to me, like, abreakthrough that they have had or a special moment that they have now had in theirsurroundings because of my content. One of my best, best, best friends has never beensuper outdoorsy, but she loves food. An amazing chef. So, her foray into the outdoors hasbeen through foraging, and watching the lightbulb go off for her now when we go on hikestogether and, you know, watching her being able to recognize things so confidently on herown, I’m just like, “Yeah!! That’s why I do the thing that I do!”----------Those moments supersede the negatives by so many degrees and make me feel like I’mdoing something beneficial, I guess. I hope.So ask smart people simple questions because chances are they do what they do because they really