22 million years ago, there was a collision in the asteroid belt. That collision incredibly has produced some meteorites that only recently actually back in 2015 landed in Turkey. Incredibly this is evidence of a cataclysmic in 22 million years ago. And we've now, because of research team, that our own pediatricianiscence has been part of, have determined that these meteorite fragments found in Turkey just again recently have been now discovered to be remnants from that incredible collision. So an amazing, I guess an amazing event of scientific sleuthing. It's long been thought that some meteorites and meteor showers are leftover vestiges of this great collision, but now we've got some definitive proof. So today we're gonna meet Peter. Some of you have met him before, another steady talk seer at the Institute for Facebook Live, but we're gonna talk to him again about this program, about this event, and we issued a press release actually a couple of days ago on the 18th of March, about this research. It's a large research team about 75 scientists. So there's a picture on the front of that press release of the asteroid Vesta. All right, so my name's Bill Diamond of the CEO here at the City Institute in Mountain View California. Let's go talk to Peter and find out about this 22 million year old detective story. Peter, how you doing? Good. All right, good to see you. It's a lovely shot in the back, I like that picture. And so, good to see you from NASA. Curtis, you've got the names. I'm good with pictures from our friends down the street. Well, anyway, I've just kind of described this as like a 22 million year old detective story. Yes. So it's really fascinating that we've been able after all this time to kind of definitively determine that these fragments are from as a result of our byproduct of that collision. How was that? How did that happen? Yeah. The definitive part is the part that we've discussed. But it's definitely strong. It's definitely a very interesting story. It has many little leads to the ultimate trying to solve the crime. All right, so like any good detective story. Where do our retrites come from? Yeah. A lot of the retrites we're getting on earth from the asteroid belt. Most of them actually are. We just don't know exactly where the asteroid belt comes from. And we've so we don't know where or from which object. Yeah, exactly. We just want to even determine where. But another it seems to determine that not only do we know the region where they came from, but the actual source. Yes. That's that's the holy goel. That's something to be put to the crater or the site where there was a big collision. And a lot of the debris was created and then after a long time it hit the earth and some of it fell on the ground and we could collect it. There is one case that people have always been a little bit more certain about and that has to do with the asteroid Vesta. Vesta is a you know the second largest asteroid in asteroid belt 500 kilometers. It's really so this is how far out it is from it. So this is the area between Mars and Jupiter. There are a lot of asteroids there. Most of them are the product of collisions between asteroids that created these debris fields. And we have lots of debris fields there. It doesn't collect over remnants from the formation of the source. Exactly. It does a couple of asteroids that are still pretty much the size that they were when they were formed. So it's serious as an example where the Don Mission visited. Vesta was another case. Vesta was hit badly. Long time ago because on the southern hemisphere there was a big impact crater, a big impact basin. Two of them actually that kind of big chunk of the southern part of you know what nobody would be a spherical thing. It kind of big chunk out. It's called the Rhea-Selvia impact basin. And what I did was it created a lot of smaller asteroids that are big debris fields. It stretches from Vesta all the way to what we call the three-ton resonance which is an area in Astro-Pelt from which you also can meet right. It's where the asteroids move three times around the Sun when Jupiter goes around once. So if you have that sort of resonance in time that you go around Sun that's dynamically dangerous area to be in and it sort of marks you know a spot in dynamical space in Astro-Pelt that's important to us. So if we think of the Astro-Pelt as sort of a ring is this on an outer inner boundary or is it a particular portion of this? It marks the outer edge of the inner part of the Astro-Pelt. So the inner part of the Astro-Pelt is marked also by a resonance but it's a secular resonance called the new six and then the outer part is marked by this three-ton resonance and then you have the middle part which is marked by the five-to-two resonance and then you have the outer part of this. Most of our beachwights are coming from the inner part and from the middle part of this so we have me think. If they come from the outer part typically what happens is an Astro you have a collision event you have a lot of the pre-coated little pieces those then are exposed to sunlight. The sunlight heats the rock, the rock spins around, it radiates the light in different directions and so all the time that changes the of the period of the rock and so it can get into a wider orbit, it can get into shorter orbit. In both cases at some point it's going to end up in one of these resonances and when it does then very quickly the orbit becomes from a self-circuit, it becomes elongated, the nearest part of the sun comes in, the first part from the sun goes out, if the first part of the sun goes out and hits Jupiter's orbit and Jupiter very quickly sends it away. So that's why in the outer Astro bell things tend to be you know send away before they can have an effect. Now when you say send away they just go out into yeah they get into an orbit that's a really long way. A really long way. Very elongated or closer to the way out of the system. So how do the orbits of these debris fields get to a point where they intersect the Earth's orbit? It's mostly because they then get very eccentric, very analogue. So this point that is near us the sun comes in closer and closer and at some point it can actually intersect with Earth's orbit and then we have a chance it's something that's us. By the way Peter that's excited when things get us but not really big things just one thing. No small thing. Then he can find them. Even just a little small things. So the story is too fold you have this this is impact in Astro bell that creates a lot of small pieces. Then you have this process where very gradually you have changes and yet one of these resonances. So basically it is the debris field there. Then some of that he hits the resonances and then once it hits the resonances then very quickly it gets into this eccentric orbit and then comes closer to the Earth. That can actually interact with you. So it can come close to us. That can actually steepen up the orbit and at some point it's going to be fatal and then this cork is going to hit the planet. And that's sort of the sequence of event. So when we find a Mietwite on the ground the question is how what can we do to try and figure out where in Astro bell this came from? Yeah. And this case the Sariji check Mietwite that fell in Turkey on September 2 in 2015 turned out to be just a fascinating story, fascinating detective because we basically started you know where we found it and then we sort of twisted in various steps all the way back to assigning a crater on vast stars. And you were able to trace it back by virtue of knowing the trajectory of it. Oh there is a lot of little pieces to this story and all of the pieces have you know can debate endlessly about it. How good it is and how far it is and so I'm sure that this story will develop over time and we'll show more certain. But in this case we have a really cool lead I think and and you know we hope we hope that it will hold up in the future. So now the research team is pretty large in 75. Yes 79. 79 people participated in this. And they're from all over the world different academic institutions and very prestigious group of researchers. Is there pretty much consensus within that group in terms of everybody in the group contribute their little piece and puzzle group. And they all you know with some nuance articulate what it is that they found and then in the end you build up this picture where you know you put all these puzzle pieces together and then you see how that turns out. So that's the cool thing about this paper is that a lot of groups came together focused on studies at the beach wide for instance on dynamical aspects of the evolution of rocks in space. There were of course the work that was done when you don't mission visited Vesta and it mapped out all the craters on on on and when was that by the way what is the garbage. It's been a couple years. So Rite check when it fell in 2015 was just a few years after that and so we had all this information about Vesta and suddenly here was a beach wide that turned out to be very similar in composition that is stuff we find at the surface of Vesta. It's an upright ridge hard out. Now before you go into that composition aspect and you speak of meteorite was how many fragments were found was it only one piece or were there lots of little fragments. Yeah the story of the fall is very cool. Did you went to Turkey? I did. I did. So I brought with me the little notes that Oh Edmund left on my desk and says please call the gentleman from Turkey ASAP. He sent you email too thanks. So this is back in 2015. That was back in 2015. That's the oldest poster I've never seen in the same poster that long that's pretty cool. So this gentleman was Ozan Oonzalan and he's a young researcher at He's watching. He's watching. He's online. All right there is All right everybody give a shout out to his hon and say hello. Yeah that's very cool. I had just met Ozan at a same conference probably a few months before that and we had talked about you know what it takes to recover a meteorite but also to observe how the rock is coming to the atmosphere in order to get a trajectory and orbit and impact the orbit. And Ozan was setting out to set up cameras in Turkey and to try and film the impact of these meteorites and so a few months later suddenly there was this massive impact and it happened in an area around the city of Bingo. A Bingo is in the eastern part of Turkey. It's a very restless area. A lot of safety concerns and so the local universities had a massive amount of video security cameras set up and so because of because of all the security concerns. All these cameras were just one answer for us because a bunch of big captains saw this. No it's fine. And so when Ozan told me that yes there was a if there was a meteorite fall in Turkey and very interesting fall big one and so on I was very interested but you know you really want to have the observations of the primary you want to be able to get a track and you want to have a piece of cover. So I asked him well see if he can get a piece and send it to us and see if it's something you know interesting track. And so when Ozan sent me a fragment very quickly to now to have this shiny crust is very different than the other meteorites. Is that what you see in the picture there because it does but that first picture has a very shiny. This shiny structure. That's a that's a whole mark of this time of meteorites so the ones that come from faster. And is that and shiny is a result of the heating that happens when it goes to the earth. So this was one of the aspects studied in our paper. I grew up in Bulgaria. I did a lot of work on this and grew up in Russia and they found that the reason it's shiny is because the crust is filled with little bubbles. So the crust that you see in the covering of the rock it's a melt crust. It's based what happens when the rock goes to the atmosphere gets hard and also cools very quickly because all the melt is blown away. You're left with this little thin layer confusion crust. It's like a glass layer. Yeah a glass layer and that's what it is it's a glass. That's what how you recognize the meteorites. So if you look for meteorites you don't find it by holding a magnet to it. You're find it by looking for for this crust. It's a very thin layer. So as a sidebar when we did the FDL project where you develop the using artificial intelligence and machine learning you can develop this algorithm to recognize from drone a flyover meteorite and distinguish a meteorite from a rock was that one of the characteristics we were looking for. If the rock is broken then you can very clearly see that. It's a very distinct and inside is a lighter color usually and then the other side has this really dark thin layer on it and in this case that layer that glass is just riddled with bubbles. And that reflects the light and gives you this sort of shine to it. And what's the scale? That made it actually very easy to find them. Yeah because it's a very reflective right? It took us just a few minutes to go there and I found myself one of these meteorites. So it was very exciting because of that. How many fragments were found all together? So in the end 343 fragments were found. And now this was a pretty big fall that it appears. Did any fragments do any damage anywhere or were any things like falling through people's roofs or? No, not in this case the meteorite is found in the fields. And there was no damage down as far as I know. But they fragment as a result of the heating process of coming through the atmosphere as well that breaks them apart. Yes and that's actually a very important process because if you have a really big one like chanibans it really depends on what altitude all this energy is being. The energy of motion, the fact that you have a case of chanibans 20 meter rock coming in a 19 kilometers per second. All that motion and you have this big collision where does all that energy go? And that depends on how it breaks up. Yeah. And so one of the aspects that we were interested in in this case was to investigate how how to drink the pack. Yep. So, so, was that called me? No, just let me, let's go back to this for a second. Yeah, this is worth noting. So, Ozon, I want you to be very proud and impressed. So, I don't know, I've been alive for, I don't know how many hundred years. I've never had anybody call me that it was so important that the post it, that told me about the call was safe. So, this is pretty cool. This is a three year old post it, the day you call Peter. So, that's pretty, that's pretty cool. Anyway, all right, back to the call. Back to the call. It was a great moment that started the project. And so, a month after the fall, Ozon took us into the field to the city of Bingo. And in Bingo, he organized for incredible support from the peace department. We were picked up at the airport by our host there. I vividly recall the first thing she did, so you know, came fresh off the plane with Ozon, who joined me in Istanbul. We arrived on the ground, we agreed by this very funny person, the vices to come and sit on the ground. The first thing she did was she grabbed into the glove compartment, took a handgun out and put it between her legs. And in that way, she drove us back into town. Nice. So, thinking, okay. What am I going to go myself into? Wow. So, I have a wonderful souvenir from the Bingo Police. I was very impressed. They stayed there as they gave us. We're doing here. The game was a lovely place to stay. And that's where we spent the nights in that area. This is my post-sales kind of stuff. I mean, that's just amazing. You know, I thought you were going to say, well, we have these special slippers if we use an emigrate field. Okay, so that's your souvenir from the hotel. That's my souvenir from the hotel. That's awesome. They then took us to the University of Bingo. And the University of Bingo was also immediately excited about this project to have this rave of a metro. I'd come down near the town. And they immediately wanted to give us all the support we need. So, we visited the Video Security Office. They had 200 video security cameras set out. Big bank of video screens. You still know. Scan through them. And we spent some time just looking at all the videos and going through the time when this happened and to see what we saw. And in the end, the five best videos that we thought were good. Most of them had just the shadows in them because in Bingo, we're so close to the track itself. The media itself is high in the sky. As most of the cameras are looking down on the... Down the ocean. And so you see shadows. And from that, you were able to derive project. Yes. And I bought another picture. This was sort of the story I just summarized on. But this is a picture of the retro building in Bingo. And the tip of the corner of the building there was seen as a shadow on the on the classroom here. And they brought in a fire truck. To help us measure how high that exactly is. Come on. So here is a photo sign. Do you see me there up in the... You're out of the fire? Oh, that's incredible. So first of all, you had the... You had it done exactly the height from the tip of the... That structure to the glass. So we had our angles. So this is why people go into science. Because they get to climb on the top of a fire truck, they get to have an armed escort from the research field. I mean, yes. It's pretty exciting. It was fantastic. That's all believable. So we got... With the shadows, we got the angles measured. And from that, we could actually see the meteor moving this time. So these are shadows caused by the light from the media? Night of the media. This was a nighttime... So it's a glowing event. And so we did as in Bingo. We then traveled... Wasand and I traveled to Mus Al-Baslan, which is about 100 kilometers closer to the Rene in the order. We kept the low profile so we're traveling in one of these... These little fans. On the way back, the driver was on his cell phone with his pouring lane. And he was making shortcuts on the highway. And Ozan was sitting in the back of the van. White knucklembail. And Ozan, we got upset. And he told the driver to please pay attention. I later learned this because it was on the Turkish. I later heard that the reply from people in the van was, why do you worry? The driver's always driving like this. Okay, standard procedure. Exactly. So in Mus Al-Baslan, we got incredible support. So we again found a hand to a mother that on video cameras. I think it's fair to say we're like Peter back in one piece. Yes, there we are. And so we got some video from that. And from Mus Al-Baslan and Bingo and also from some other sites, we were able to then triangulate the track, get the project to be out. And determine how far this thing is coming in. And at what altitude it woke about. And so then once we had all that information, you know, we're very keen to go to the area you want to meet right now. This is the hotel of Sariticek. Sariticek means the yellow flower. Okay. So it's very appropriate name. Yeah. Lovely farming community. Not too far from Bingo. On a little hill and surrounded by air has fields. Yeah. And it was really, you know, this was on a night and in that air, talking to people. Oh, he's got his california athletics shirt on. He's got a funny athletic shirt. So by the way, so we know that Ozon is watching. If there's anybody else watching us from Turkey, let us know when we'll give you a shout out. Cool. Because we, and like always, let us know. We have somebody from, where's it? Istanbul. Yeah. Somebody from somewhere else. Istanbul. Begu from Istanbul. Begu from Istanbul. All right. Welcome. Very cool. Very, very first thing was obvious that people were incredibly friendly. Yeah. I mean, again, helpful. Helpful. Again, the person who was really putting this on the, from the local village of Sariticek was, Missy year. Tell them in the middle. Yeah. The person in middle. Oh. He really understood that this was interesting and important. Good. He took us to the area where they had found a bunch of mutuals over at the, as I said, within minutes of time, going on. Yeah, yeah. And here we're looking at one of the, one of the finds in someone, so the local. Now, was that typical of the size of the fragment you're looking at? Yes. Yes. Yes. Very small size. Very small pieces. Yeah. This rock really broke into tiny tiny fragments. Very small. And so Missy year, I go, yeah, he was really the person that really made a lot of the research possible that the real ultimately ended up. So they made some material available for our studies that we couldn't go inside the rocks. But more importantly, they could get at all the information from the town. And they started gathering where exactly different which was being found. And that in the end really mapped out the Stunfield very nicely. So this was one of the meanwhiles. OK. OK. This is the end of that case. That's a good scale shot. Yeah. This shows one of the other being found. OK. So this is a centimeters. And you see that these are all small, very small. They also have sharp edges. It looks like. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. So the way they, in the end, we were able to determine that the way they fragment it was that big chunks were weighted to smaller chunks. And the smaller chunks were played into even smaller chunks. So there was this fragmentation going on. So what in the same process it was a piece of. It's really a cascade. Cascade. Yeah. Yeah. And that's reflected here. Because you can see this side was only very, very mildly. This may actually mean a fresh surface. And this was very mildly fusion custard. OK. So it woke really late when it was coming down. It was still moving pretty fast. But that was fusion custard a little bit. Yeah. There's much of Southern ground and that process stuff. Yeah. Interesting. So yeah, those are the things we're looking for when we find these. If you find a meat right to yourself, then the one thing you can do is you could try and collect it, but steam it. So you can make sure that you know, organic material doesn't get on it. It's like people don't breathe on it. You don't touch it. You've collected it some aluminum foil. So that's what you got here. This are actually some of the pieces that originally made a fail for the study. So this is actually the meatchweights. So would you pick them up like that with tweezers of some sort and be careful? And then be careful with the jar. I actually use aluminum foil to this. That works just fine. All right. So this is. And we bring the camera. Yeah. Close for this. This is one of the meatchweights that was studied in this rock. And you can see on this very nicely the fusion custard. So you see this very black material that is, that makes it mild. That's where it gets classified. The glass that is this Chinese stuff. And then this is the inside. You can see the inside is very diverse here. You can turn it. So the inside here, that's really interesting. So you go from a shiny dark gray smooth outer service to a more rocky, it looks more like a conventional rock. So if you find a rock like this on the ground, the clay rock, you wouldn't recognize it in the inside. I mean, it's not the inside. Right. That looks like a rock. It's not the inside that makes the meatchweights. Right. It's really this shiny surface on the surface. And in fact, that's a fusion crust. So it's really a covering. That's what gives it away. And in this case, the shininess was also something that we just stood out. So you could see a lot of other rocks in the field here. There's a little black dark rocks sitting here, for example. But just the look of it is quite different. This is a lot lighter. And it had this shiny, shiny tone. It also disappeared. I'll leave it here. So folks, that's a visitor from outer space. Yes. From a collision 22 million years ago. That's pretty cool. So of course, you didn't know that at that point. That was the information we laid up. I got out of it. Sure. But the chance. So this was the twin field we got. It was a two kilometer bar. So you can see the areas where these rocks fall. I always cut out. It's always hard to find. All right. So just to plot this. But in this case, plot a little bit. Yeah. The green dots, which are very small pieces. That's where they're physically located in this grid. So the overall grid looks like it's about four to five kilometers by a couple kilometers in dimension. So it was very unique about this case. So the meter came from the top. Yeah. From that direction. And the winds were also blowing from that direction. Yeah. And what that does is it takes the small pieces and blows those on top of the big pieces. Oh. But instead of things being even spread out more, I think there's sometimes a, in this case, everything was compacted. It's safe to the other. And that's why we went to this area here. It took on in a few minutes to actually find the mitchwights. Now what's the significance of those gray lines with the air? That's what it's all about. So it's such as. Really? OK. We did some vertical scans, basically lining a group of people, a lot of people from the very job doing these tracks. And finding mitchwights in the process. And so that was quite a success. So this is before you had the FDL drum. And that was before you had the classic underneath. Yes. But this was a very lucky case in a sense that the winds were helping us. They were really keeping everything compact. And from this, we also, we learned how the rock was baking apart. We also learned that almost that the mitchwights when it came in the atmosphere, how to get out really well, until about 27 o'clock, just that last flair, at that moment in broke and created this the breaker that we got. We haven't performed mitchwights that came from earlier flares. So we think that there were four flashes before four different break up events. Four different break up events. But it looks like it's the final break up event that it's when the rock fell apart. So there could be a IC, but not so. So there was no other. So it's more or not a break. Less the peak coming off early on. So what it says is that flashes are not always proportional to how much material you're baking. It's breaking up. So it's an interesting complexity there. It's how to interpret if you see a meter in the sky. Or there's a meter in terms of what's going on. So I want to get into composition for a second. But I see already that Rebecca's taking some questions down. So if you do have questions that you'd like to ask Peter, let us know. And we'll try and get to as many as you can. And again, we always love to hear where you're watching from. So let us know. And let's have some hearts and thumbs up for meteorites, meteorite hunters, detectives, solving 20-year or 2 million-year-old detective mysteries. And Peter tells us a little bit about the composition, the analytical techniques, and also the significance of what the composition tells us. Yeah. So this is the detective story. There's many puzzle pieces to it. It's difficult to say what order to go from it. But maybe it's best to start here. So the first thing we did was we were able to determine that this rock came in on an orbit that was very short. It actually didn't quite grace the inside of the asteroid belt coming in just to let's orbit. And to have that short of an orbit, basically means that the resonance which delivered it was in the inside of the asteroid belt. So this was the first evidence that our head meteorites, at least this one, came from the inner part of the asteroid. That was sort of step number one. Now it happens that the fester is in the inner part of the asteroid. So that was a good indication. That was a good indication. So it was a good thing. The inclination of this rock was fairly high. It was about 23 degrees. Normally, if you find a rock fresh out of the asteroid belt, then the inclination is a sign of the inclination, the angle in which the origin family is moving. But in this case, this stiffness of inclination was probably caused by interactions with the uruomás, so the terrestrial plants. And so we had a very number of passages by the before and finally hit us in 2015. And that angle you're talking about is the angle of attack ultimately when it comes in. No, it's the angle that the orbit is at. So if all the planets move in one plane, the rock moves at an angle to it. But how are you arriving? So how to sound like this. And you drive it from the way it impacts the Earth. So you are driving death from the end of the attack? You get your trajectory, and then from that, you get your orbit. You have to take out the uruomás to the asteroid. It will curve the orbit in. Yes. OK. All right. So that was step, that was the first interesting clue. OK. The next step was that we found that this particular meteorite was actually from the very surface of faster, which is fair. So maybe 15 out of 300 somewhat meteorites of this time that are known most finds have this property. And so what it is is this particular rock was found to have a lot of global gas. Gas comes from the sun. Solar wind basically. OK. So it's captured. So it's really at the very surface of the asteroid, the solar wind penetrates these rocks. And you're talking about like argon, yeah. In this case, neon. Neon. Wow. And it also had a high admixture of the radium. The radium is one of its elements that are fairly bare on the west of the asteroid or in the jelly in the reach white. But that are being brought in by impacts from other types of other sun. So result of the collision? Yes. So it shows that you're really talking about the surface area and that things get getting, things are impacting. Things are impacting. And ultimately, that brings in this addition of the reach white. Came from the very surface layer of the asteroid. And it was over time that a lot of stars come and this is the sort of you cry-tritch how do I put you know. And it's the howdy that showed up. And so that's really an indication of the howdy. And what is that composition of the howdy? That's really an indication that you're also dealing with the stars. Yes. It's that surface of the asteroid has that howdy material. And then the very material that's the surface of the star, that's what we are seeing here as an oxygen clock. What's the chemical composition of that material? So the rock is different from other asteroids in a sense that you have what is called a basaltic reach white till here. So it's an acondrite. It's not the primitive material that most asteroids are made out of. This asteroid is protoplanet. We're talking about the star. At some point in its history differentiated, that is, iron, iron-loving materials, sank to the core. And whatever was left over, king to the crust, interesting. And just like the Earth that we have an iron-clone up and the material we are sitting on is poor. And that's the case with Vestas. There are very few asteroids known that have this property. So that makes Vestas all of unique. And so when you find that material, that is a reason why people for a long time have said, well, it has to be this link, this type of reach white and this stuff. But there are other reach whites. And as a matter of fact, the one other type of this type of reach white was photograph coming in. It was Bumboa Rock home in Australia, Kapias earlier. And that mutual turn out to belong to the other category. It had isotopic signatures that were very different. And so we were pleased to find that this mutual actually had isotopic signatures that were common at work. One third of all, HGD gone right, coming in, have this belongs to just the common, most common type of a HGD form to the other. And that means that this rock came from a really big collision event. We're talking an impact or a disruption of a Vestoid that generated enough material to now be responsible for one third of all that. And that collision happened 22 million years. And is it possible to estimate the size of the other object that impacted Vesta in that collision? If you can identify the crater. OK, so you don't know which crater. You don't know, yes. So that was the next step. The evidence we had was that this came from a significantly impacted end. It looks like it came from the surface of Vesta being like a logistic howardite. It had a 22 million year, what we call a costume grade exposure age. That means that as a rock, about a meter in size, sort of when it hit it, it was about this big. As a rock, this size, it had been in space for about 22 million years. And during it's going around the same over time. And that meant that we were looking for a crater that was 22 million years old. And so the next step, of course, is to go and look at Vesta, look at all the mapping of the crater star background, and to see if you can find a crater that's 22 million years old. And how do you age the crater through an image analysis? And you need to find a big crater that's 22 million years old. Yeah. And so the way craters are dated is really interesting. Because a lot of controversy there are too. The crater, the crater statue can date are the ones that still have this jack-up like it on. And I have a picture here of this. Oh, that's good. Yeah. This is actually the crater we identified as the one where we think of Mietro and Kins. So pretty much. Antonio. If you're looking on your Facebook page, pretty much that crater in the middle of the image. Yes, exactly. OK. And this is a color composite made of different images. So it brings out the mineralogy of the terrain. And what is green colored is basically a material that is freshly exposed to the surface. Oh, so that's the ejective. That's ejective like it. You can see that some craters have this. And most craters do not. I mean, none of these craters have this ejective like it. But this one has it there. And this one very clearly has it. Yeah. So there's a lot of green here with a big fan going on this out. Yeah. So this one has it as well. And so these are the craters that you can try and date. And what you do is you look at this terrain and you count the number of small craters on it. On top of the bigger craters. On top of this ejector. OK. So the impact happened. You're spreading all this debris around. So now you're creating a new clean surface. Fresh surface. And now you're going to pumble it with small impacts all the time. And then only you wait the more important. OK. And so it's an averaging technique. It's an average. Yeah. And so what makes it controversial is that you really don't know how many small impacts happen. But you get. Yeah. And so you have to be some assumptions about how many of these small impacts happen. And whether that's uniform or not. Whether it's uniform or how it's distributed. And so what are the impact speeds? And there are two, especially two models out there that people use to get these ages. And one is based on telegrams. Where they look at the asteroid population, they put a lot of dynamics in it. A lot of what happens to me towards when they're in space, they get moved and disappear and so on. From that you get a size distribution, velocity distribution. And from that you can determine how much stuff is hitting the asteroid. That asteroid model, that sort of asteroid-based technology, makes all these greatest two worlds. So it basically would say that all of these greatest, you see here, smash greatest, that recently, they are all way too old to have created this stuff. You'll see. I see. OK. And so that doesn't work for us. If it turns out to be the correct chronology, it's then we are all. And then the story is applied. But the other chronology age, which is basically to look at the moon, the lunar surfaces, which we've been dated by the Polo Landers. Sure. And to look at those surfaces and look at the impacts on those surfaces. And from that, get a distribution. You see if you can make a correlation. And then many correlation. And if you do that, then you get what it's called the lunar-based chronology scheme. And in the lunar-based chronology scheme, this equator is 22 million years old. Interesting. Now, in the other chronology base, how old is it? I forgot the number, but it's like four times, or two or four times older. Older. Yeah, yeah. So could be 100 million years old. Yes. And that would make it way past any of our mutualized. Most of the mutualized we're getting are less than a hundred million years old. OK. So you know, we looked at other craters on West. Yeah. We looked at other mutualized that have different custom-grade sports ranges. And if you look at the distribution of those crater ages, you to find that you can build up a case to say that this is actually the correct age. Because a big crater that is somewhat older looks to be responsible for a peak that we have around 15 million years. Yeah. And some craters that are younger look to be responsible for some H.E.D. sort of little younger. A different one. And so that's another piece of the puzzle. There you say, OK, with that chronology age, you're consistent with what you're getting to come to Earth. Yeah. And that makes that particular crater, a significant crater, 16.7 kilometers in the answer. That makes that our source of this mutualized. Excellent. And then of course, you know, other steps in the puzzle are that you cannot play the street just on the jacked up lake. You can also look in the area around it. And you can get a sense on how old is this terrain. And turns out that that terrain is about, I think, 1.4 billion years or so, about over a billion years. Yeah, I haven't talked much about it that much. And the reason it has that age is because, as you can see, Vester gets constantly pummeled by stuff. And so all that debris from this crater slant up on the surface of the work planet. And so it builds up this layer of material. And that on average has sort of at one point for the, is it turns out that our reach wide also seems to have experienced this sort of impact in a sense that it has lost some of its helium. And we'll think. So in other words, even after it was injected, it had its own impact. Yes. It had its own. It experiences own nearby impacts. So he did it at that price of it. And that made some of the helium go away. So you're not finding as much helium as you would expect. You would expect, it's interesting. And so that age too is consistent with the terrain. OK, so that's what you're saying. And you've got a lot of evidence from different perspectives all pointing to the same answer. All the little puzzle pieces. And then, of course, you have the study of the dynamics, which we've got, we've got the invented, where you look at how long does it take to get from Vester to come to one of these residences and then go from the residences, have these interactions with you, and ultimately get you. And we found that the first step is very quickly. So getting from a collision on Vester and then disclosing the stuff to the residences that happens within a million years, two million years. But then once it gets into the shorter orbits, where radiation doesn't matter so much anymore, but it's really the interaction with the planets that makes the change. It turns out that that timescale is also consistent with it. So the arriving right at the peak of the rival time. So basically, at this moment, we are seeing the stuff from Antonia, come to the Earth. The younger craters, the craters that have it more recently, they put out a lot of material, but until it's still on its way. And the bigger craters that are older, they have long, all of them has long been lost. And so Antonia sits right at this time, that sort of is at this peak, that you want to expect stuff to come from Vester. And then of course, that will settle arguments on, OK, so how much material do you need? If you're not right at this peak, then you need long, multi-lead, a lot bigger crater. It turns out that Antonia is big enough for the general to have generated enough pieces to be the bait of impacts of the no-seeing idea. So it's a long detective story as a piece. And you had quite an international team, right? You had guys, how many different countries represented on this team seems like? A couple of dozen or more. Well, first of all, we'll do a little shout out to all the parts of our own planet, where people are watching from, and then go to some questions that have come in. So we have people from Port Orchard and Washington from Christian Saquen, Norway. This must be the same person, because we're always getting someone from Christians, and so great to have fans in Norway from Saskatchewan in Canada, Burbank in California, Charleston, South Carolina, Christchurch, New Zealand, Berlin in Germany, Kassel in Germany, from Italy, from Scotland, from the UK, from Barcelona, from Edinburgh, from Osaka in Mexico, from Pennsylvania, from the Jersey Shore, or the Joyce Shore, we would say, Palm Springs, California, Texas, or Texas. Pasadena, California, Joinville, Brazil, if I'm saying that right, Mountain View, right here, Connecticut, Arkansas, Columbia, Maryland, Melbourne, Australia, Lisbon in Portugal, Milan in Italy, Genoa in Italy, Sinatra in Portugal, up in there, Tasmania, Cape Breton in Nova Scotia, Cedar Town, Georgia, Phoenix, Arizona, Kent, UK, Kurdistan, Istanbul, there we go, Tokyo in Japan, East Mayor in Turkey, another visitor from Turkey, from East Mayor, so welcome everybody, and thanks for joining us, it's again, it's, to me, a sign of how science unites us as a people on one planet by having curious people from all over the world joining us on these. So question comes in from Brandon, which is, what is the scale? So if you, yeah, I had that same question, if you go to the back of that first picture, the paper background, what was the scale? How big is that, you write peace in that first photo? That me twight piece in the first photo is this one, that I know. It's the one you showed it. It's just very small. A little less than two centimeters or thereabouts. Okay. Okay, and then how does the material affect how it will look? So I think that may refer to, how does the composition affect how it will look? Because there's also what happens as it heats through to your satinist, or the effects of how it looks. What can you say about that? So the blackness of the crust of a mechwight is caused by iron. Oh, yeah. So it does depend on how much iron that is in your rock and how dark it's going to look. Funny I would have thought carbon, but iron. It's the iron in the glass. And so in that sense, composition does affect the look of it. And certainly if you have a metal mechwight, it will look very different. Yeah. But as a sort of role of most mechwights that are falling to the earth will have a really black crust. The inside can be light, it can be very dark, but the outside will have this black crust. And that's really the burning. And that's really from the melting. It's really the smell, and then the fact that you create iron that rasts, and one of the things that the Bulgarian team found to make a back-and-tight crust also. So that question came from the International Science Fiction Society. We may find something about this in a future science fiction novel. I've seen mechwights that were made of pyroxene that are very little metallic iron in it and so on. And they turned out to have a green crust. OK. So the composition does reveal itself. Does reveal itself in how it looks? But yeah. Somebody asked, demon asked, what is its mineral composition? So we've talked a little bit about that. Anything more to say about it? It's makeup. Is it the largest percentage of material iron? If you break it down in terms of the percentage distribution. I think that it's fair to say that basaltine materials, which is unlike on egg-on whites. But in this type of basaltine materials, it's really in composition somewhat similar to if you go to Hawaii and you look at the lava rock. A lava rock. But in detail, of course, it's not a case. Because the depth from which we all come and the evolution has been different. But it's been the same sort of process where you differentiate the mantle from the core. Another question was, how do you estimate the winds? Maybe that's a reference to how the wind affected that debris field. I guess you've got wind speed from the meteorological surface. Yeah, exactly. You know, you need that. That's important. We get our wind data usually from wind zone measurements. They're all public on a global scale. And you can find sites not too far from where you live. That has a vertical wind profile measured by meteorologists who let a lot of blues. And so from the ground until about 20 kilometers, it's where you get your wind field at point. And that's usually precise enough for what we need. If you want to more precise or want to look at higher elevations, then you can go to atmospheric wind models. And then you can specify where you are. And then you can take your data from that model. And the models are really good these days, very well. So we will find small discrepancies. And that's part of the interesting thing to come out of here. Cool. OK. Let's see. What is the largest meteorite you've found and where did you find it? Don wants to know. I don't think size matters. It's more. It's more. I mean, it's more about what is most interesting to me to write. So what are the things that are both? What's up? Because some people think all of what's a big ones are cool because they make more noise. But the thing is up with that. And what's the most interesting? The type of studies we do usually in a small meteorite gives a lot of information. You can get a lot of data out of a small meteorite. So if a meteorite is found in a small piece, can we be able to science? Then we can do a lot with it. Really learn about this meteorite. In interesting meteorites, at this point in time, is almost everything. Because even for the meteorites that are very common, what we call ordinary gonorrhoids. We call those ordinary because that's what you usually get if you actually have a meteorite. It's an ordinary gonorrhoid. Even ordinary gonorrhoids, we have a very few for which we actually have the approach that Jack Twin mentioned. And from the three types of ordinary gonorrhoids are the most common, the L, L, L and ages. For each we have maybe five. And those five tend to be from five different collision events. And so for us to get statistics on where, for what direction, for what orbits do our meteorites fall to the Earth, we really want to have lots of meteorites. So if we have a lot more meteorites from this particular type, then for example, we should be able to see this phenomenon where the rock interacts with the Earth. So we should have a tail of inclinations. We have low inclinations, and going to island inclinations. So I don't so much care for size. I care for size. So that answer is an interest. Where is there one that you consider the most interesting one you've ever found? Yeah, so my interest, I have an interest in the meteorite. The moment we have video data, or video data, any time of data that shows the impact to Jack. OK, so it's that combination of knowledge of having the physical meteorite itself, but also knowing from a direction, somewhat direction. Because that is ultimately going to help us with this detective story on which the briefields in S.O. Bell is given as a meteorite. And is this an example of one where you had the best kind of trajectory information because you had so many different of your own? No, no, this was a case where we may do with what was synonymically obtained with video security counts. Yeah. But so video security cameras are not cameras designed for doing this work. So you have to put a lot of effort in calculating the data. But we did. And in the end, the result we got, I think, was good enough for what we wanted. It gave us an inclination, gave us the same exercises. Besides enough to tell the story. Great. All right, we just got a couple minutes left. So let's get to the last couple of questions. Demediaurs get tested for signs of life. Like bacteria may have survived inside the meteor. Done. Again, it's asking me the question. Yeah. You ever look for organics or what? We're looking for organics. So very interested in organics. And so in a way, the answer is yes. The way we do it, though, is you don't look for DNA. You look for the basic organic compounds. So there are typically end-meat rides, also for mother sources. And what we did for saliti check is we specifically looked at the amino acids. You know, we have live, then you would expect to see that. But live has a way of selecting one type, the L versus the D type of amino acids. And so from the relative ratio of the two, you can actually tell whether you deal with live, or as we call it, contamination. Or whether you deal with the intrinsic material that was there for the meteor. And so we do that. We also look at methanol, soil will, also the amino acid work is done as a product. And the organic work on methanol soluble compounds is done in Germany to help us institute. And they do ultra-high mass spectroscopy. So they look at things that are soluble, but then they look at incredible detail at what compounds there are. And they can see these different groups. They can see organic compounds also from things that interact with the minerals. So they see more these in compounds. So it's very interesting. So we do that. And then we also look at paths. It's not in cigarettes, you know. Also contamination sign, but also very a sturdy type of molecule that you find in many places. These organic compounds tell also a story on what happened to this rock of a time. And usually in this case, the organic source very little. We expected to find more from just the combination of the concrete hitting the rocks. In this case, it was very little. But we did find some of those in terms of. Excellent. OK, here's an interesting question. Aren't there materials in space that are outside our periodic table? So far not. No. Not too unnoticed? Not too unnoticed. Not too unnoticed, because otherwise, it would be in the periodic table. Right. But there are materials in space that you typically do not find on the cross of the environment. That we have the temperature, pressure, water being here. And we are interested in those compounds. Well, it relates to the story. It relates to the story of the demise of the dinosaurs, right? It was in finding a layer all over the planet of material that was really unique to asteroids that suggested it was asteroid impact. A massive one that did it. Just to remember that space is nothing like a vacuum. It's a variation. It's a heat. It's just conditions that are extreme for us. And that means that if you bring a piece back and you can keep it in a pristine, good shape, you can find things that are really interesting. And so we very much like a meteorite. When somebody finds a meteorite in the backyard, please don't touch it. Don't touch it. Use a piece of aluminum foil to pick it up. Keep it away from you. Call Peter. And if you're lucky, you'll get a post that he will say for years about the call that you made that said, hey, I've got a meteorite in my backyard. Question from Aralya, it's Rebecca. How do you know it is a meteorite and not just a regular rock? So you look for diffusion crusts? That's clearly the thing. OK, but what if you're just a regular person and you've never heard of a fusion crust? You go on the internet and you go go to the fusion crust. Well, I mean, I think because that's really the one thing that you usually tell to the meteorite. It doesn't always work. That glassy black surface. But yeah, if you find something and you're curious about it, as Peter says, don't touch it. Pick it up with aluminum. You could probably take a good high resolution picture with your camera phone. Email it to us if you do think you've got something interesting. Yeah, follow those steps. And we can perhaps out there. I guess they're common enough that he happened all over the world. So he has to find them. To the level that a meteorite could be sitting in your backyard. Italy. Yes? A meteorite falls. That's quite frequently. They're very, very found. So we only have about between 8 and 12 or so times per year that somebody reports having a new form. So this one in third, he was very exciting because he was against. Well, on these meteorites tell us a lot about the formation of our solar system, about the composition of materials that are left behind from the creation of our solar system and about the formation of the planets and about maybe how origins of life stories. So they're very important. And exciting and interesting, which is why Peter here has been spending his entire career looking for them, studying them, analyzing them, and has traveled the world. And actually put his life in peril. It apparently in pursuit of them. So Peter was great talking to you about this. If you want to learn more about this event, again, you can go to our website and find the press release that was issued on March 18th called Turkish meteorite Trace 2 Impact Crater on asteroid Vesta, 22-year-old collision mystery. And with that, we want to thank you for joining us again from all over our planet. And for spending some time with us here in Mountain View California at the City Institute, Peter thanks as always for helping us again and for sharing this great story and this exciting news. And thank you for your colleagues and for Ozon for joining us from Turkey. That was great to know that he was watching us. All right, so from Mountain View, California, at the City Institute, Bill Diamond and Peter Yanniskins and our crew saying goodbye. And we'll see you next week. Thanks, everybody.
