Hello everyone and welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host Sean Carroll. We've all heard stories of families living in small towns where the children grow up and make different decisions. Some of them want to go to the big city and test their fortunes. Others want to stay behind and live a comfortable life within the traditions where their family grew up. This kind of difference between moving to the city and living out in the country or even the suburbs is increasingly becoming a major partisan divide, both in the United States and worldwide. As Will Wilkinson puts it in a recent paper he wrote, there are no Republican cities anymore in the United States. Republicans live in suburbs and the country, Democrats live in urban areas. Wilkinson is a vice president for policy research at the NISKANEN Center in Washington, D.C. and he's dug into this question in a paper he wrote called the Density Divide, Urbanization, Polarization and Populous Backlash. It's not just that people who go to the big cities become liberal and people who stay in the country become conservative, there's interesting cause and effect relationships. What kind of people move to the city? What kind of people leave the city and move to the country? What do changing demographics, immigration and birth rates and so forth? What effects do they have on how people think about the world, not just who they vote for, but their outlook on life, their outlook on other countries, their outlook on the economy? This difference between city life and suburban and country life is increasingly becoming the important difference between different kinds of people here and elsewhere and so it's important to dig into how that's happening and why it is. So let's go. Wilkinson, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. Thanks for having me on, Sean. So you've written quite a wonderfully interesting research paper about the Density Divide, which I want to focus on for the podcast, but first just to get our listeners oriented as to where we are. Why don't you say a little bit about who you are, what perspective you're coming from, and also I'll give you a chance to plug the Niskenin Center, which is a recent new appear on the scene. Great. Well, I am Wilkinson. I am the Vice President for Research at the Niskenin Center in Washington, DC. You pronounced it correctly in Finnish. It's a Finnish last name, but the guy we named it after pronounced in the scanin. So it's the Niskenin Center. Some of my best friends are Finnish. So I do, I do learn a little bit. Yeah. Yeah, the old, some of my best friends are Finnish line, huh? Yeah. And what we do at the Niskenin Center, we're a think tank. We focus mostly on climate and energy, immigration, welfare, and economic and social policy, as well as a few more areas, regulation, so forth. And we've been around about four years, and we started as a sort of moderate libertarian institution. Most of the senior staff at Niskenin are expats from the Kato Institute, which we all left for various reasons. And we have over the course of the last three years or so been trying to find our niche and we've become less and less ideological and more and more pragmatic and just consider ourselves a moderate think tank, but we tend to have a pre-marketing sort of focus, but not in a traditional right of centerway. We are big fans of social insurance and the welfare state and one of our themes is how capitalism and the welfare state mesh well together. But so for those who don't know, the Kato Institute is, I take it slightly more straightforwardly ideological in the sense of being pro-capitalism libertarian kind of place. Yes, it is. It's, you know, it's got a very orthodox version of libertarianism that people may be familiar with if they've read Ein Rand or Robert Nozick or Murray Rothbard. You know, it runs, you know, there's some diversity in views at the Kato Institute, but it's a narrow band that's within a pretty orthodox libertarian perspective. And a lot of us, you at Niskenin, used to work there, left for because we grew out of it in one way or another, started to see that we were making certain errors. One of the nice things about arguing for a living is that you end up encountering people who are smarter than you. And you can never accept that you lost an argument in the moment. But in afterwards, when you're opening the fridge to make a sandwich at two in the morning and you're thinking about it and you're just like, yeah, there's really something wrong with my position. And as you try to work it out, you know, you try to cover the chinks in your armor, you know, you try to shore up your position. And by the time you figure out how to like fortify your general position, you find that you've given up something that you had been standing on before. And as you iterate that process, you just actually end up with a pretty comprehensively different set of views over time. But because it seems gradual, you don't really notice it necessarily. Yeah, actually. I mean, this is not what we're here to talk about, but I'm very happy to talk about it because it's awesome. You know, there's the idea of a phase transition in physics, which is very similar to this. And I was always skeptical of things like the backfire effect where you say that, you know, you give someone some piece of evidence against their position and they hold their position more strongly. I'm sure that's true sometimes, but there's clearly a time scale question here. Presumably, when they do those psychology tests, they're asking the question right away. And underneath the surface, these little thoughts and facts percolate. And then a long time later, there can suddenly be whoosh. You're like, oh crap, I got to change my mind about everything. You might even forget where the initial input has came from. Yeah, sometimes I, you know, I think the funny thing psychologically is said, I don't know if it's the same for other people. I know I'm a little bit weird. But I tend to initially resist the idea that I have changed to my mind when I have. And I think that has something to do with kind of holding your the narrative around your self identity steady in a way. And so there's a resistance even acknowledging that you changed your mind. You just kind of tend to interpret it in terms of, well, I didn't really change my mind so much is I, you know, I changed the emphasis on this point. And you know, the view that I have now is just a better way to articulate what I thought all along. And there's a lot of rationalizing that goes around, it goes, you know, that that that goes into, you know, telling yourself what you think. And, and, but after a while, you start to notice that actually now I, I, I, I, I, I, I'm, I'm straightforwardly contradicting what I used to say. The very first episode of the Minescape podcast was with Carol Tavris who wrote a wonderful book called Mistakes Were Made, but not by me. All about how we rationalize every single thing we do. And, and you're right, just continuing our sense of identity is, is a big part of it. So, but anyway, okay, good. We could, I think we could talk about this for an hour, but we have other things to other fish to fry. And so in this paper you've written is actually, let me, let me finish the thought of the Niskehnen Center, because I think that a lot of things we're going to end up saying are going to seem to the outside observer, like slightly critical of Republicans or of right wing people more generally, but did, have you been a Republican most of your life? Is that a fair statement? Um, I, it's fair to say that I've been on the right, uh, for most of my life, because I, I, I have been a professional libertarian for most of my professional life. You know, I went to grad school, uh, you know, got some grad degrees and philosophy. And out of that, I started working at the Kato Institute. I've also worked at the place called the Mercatis Center, which is part of the large network of organizations that are run by the, by the coax or by the coke now. And the, um, and so I voted for Republicans before, but, you know, in most presidential elections, I think I've, you know, when I was younger voted for libertarians, but, uh, you know, I voted for Mitt Romney on identity politics grounds. Um, uh, I grew up a sort of Mormon. And I was like, you know, that's my people, uh, Mitt Romney. And I'm not, I think I might have voted for George W Bush in the over Gore. I'm not sure. You're so busy. I don't, I don't, I honestly don't remember. I, or I might have voted for whoever the libertarian candidate was. I remember favoring George W Bush over, over Kerry, but I don't know who actually voted for it might have been a libertarian. But, um, yeah, so my, most of my professional life, I've been in some way, um, a part of the right, um, and the libertarian movement was part of this right of center coalition that was initially forged around anti-communism. Uh, and libertarians were always the, the socially liberal part, the most socially liberal part of the right coalition, uh, you know, tend to be in favor of drug legalization and the decriminalization decriminalization of sex work, um, tend to be anti-war. So there's a lot of commonalities with people on the left. Um, and, in, in fact, that's one of the reasons why I ended up leaving, um, the Kato Institute is that my colleague, Brink Lindsey and I had, you know, both decided that we were tired of what, you know, what people call right fusionism and the, the kind of fusion of social conservatism and more libertarian economic views, uh, and at the Kato Institute, um, as libertarians, we would often say that we have just as much in common with people on the left is on the right, but institutionally, and just as a matter of the practical, political reality, you're hanging out with Republicans. Yeah. And those are the people you're helping. Um, and, and so we're like, well, let's make good on this thing that we say. And so we had a project where we were reaching out to, um, people who worked at ThinkTanks, uh, on the left of center, left leading magazines and, you know, journals of ideas. And we're building a kind of, uh, left fusionist, uh, sort of, um, libertarianism that for a while, what we called liberal tyrannism, which is a terrible name. I remember those days. Yes. I was very offended that. And that was going okay. Um, and then the Tea Party came along. Um, and a lot of people at the Kato Institute got super excited about it. Um, and thought it was the, uh, kind of, uh, the president at Kato at the time had sort of believed that there was something essentially libertarian in the American, in the American political culture. And that this, you know, strand of our cultural DNA would someday, you know, rise up. And there'd be this great efflorescence of, you know, populist libertarianism. And he thought the Tea Party was his moment. Uh, and, and, and, the stuff that Brinkett and I were saying, um, uh, what, uh, was, uh, a bit critical of the Tea Party and all of a sudden our concentration on building this coalition with Democrats, um, seemed counterproductive. And, uh, so we kind of had a, a bit of tension in a parting of the ways over that. Um, but, uh, but, but for the most part, but, you know, I, I, I've seen myself as part of the right and what we do at the Niskehnaz Center mostly. And, with though it's not publicly visible, as we go down on the hill, we work with moderate Republicans on, um, our issue priorities in the Trump presidency, uh, has been a horror show for us because our, our main goals are things like getting Republicans to, um, support carbon tax, getting, you know, something like comprehensive immigration reform passed, um, things like that. And, and Trump has not been very friendly to those efforts in the Republican Party under Trump has been friendly to those efforts. But that is where most of our, our time goes that we, you know, we had, and this, I guess, gets to my, the, the, the, the point of my paper, the genesis of my paper, we, like most everyone had expected Hillary Clinton to win the election. And we thought that our, and a comparative advantage was going to be, um, bringing along some moderate Republican votes to support things like, um, legislation on climate change, comprehensive immigration reform, and things like that. Uh, and, because there's going to need some Republican votes to get through, uh, we were building the kind of, of, of, of network of allies on the hill that would be able to make that happen. And then, uh, Trump won the election. And we were like, oh, no. Um, and like a lot of people, I was like, what the heck happened? You know, like, what, what, you know, something's, something's gone screwy, um, or, or, or, or, we're missing something. And, and, you know, at this, you know, just a bit before that, there'd been the big Brexit vote in the UK. Uh, and you're starting to see these, um, uprisings of the populist right, um, in Europe and elsewhere. And it seemed like a general thing that was going on in the explanations that I was hearing, you know, to account for it, weren't that satisfying to me. You know, like it's a backlash to neoliberalism or it's, uh, a backlash to a political correctness or, um, demographic change and immigration. You know, there, there was a lot in all of those things that have, you know, make some sense. Um, but it seemed somehow bigger than that and more general. So I started digging into the kind of wide Trump question and the, uh, and, you know, with an orientation to try and understand where, kind of right leaning populism was coming from, why nationalism was all of a sudden a thing again. Um, you know, like, it turns out that history didn't end. I was never quite taken in by that one. Yeah. Yeah. And so I was like, okay, so like what's, what's, what's happening now? Um, and so the gendises of this paper was trying to understand, um, basically why Trump won the election, but also why Brexit was happening, why, um, populist nationalist parties keep winning, um, more and more vote share in even the most liberal, European countries. Uh, and, and I hit on a couple of things that I thought had been overlooked. So I dug into them. In this, especially interesting to me because I, I'm finding this, you know, a year plus into the podcast that certain themes keep reappearing, even though I talked to very different people about very different things. So the idea of cities and urbanization as a major driver of the future of the world is absolutely one of them. I talked with Jeffrey West who talked about how innovation and creativity are driven by high density populations. And I talked to Joe Walston about how there's this optimistic future where we can save the planet by getting everyone into cities and, you know, preserving the environment outside. And now you're saying that in some sense, uh, major political trends worldwide. And then the United States especially, uh, have a lot to do with urbanization as a phenomenon. Yeah, that's right. So, so the, the thing that really got me started is, you know, after 2016, um, and it was Jonathan Rodin at Stanford, especially, uh, published some things about the relationship between population density and party vote share. Uh, and Rodin's stuff, I thought was just mind-blowing that, that there's this almost tight, almost linear relationship between higher density, higher democratic vote share, lower density, higher Republican vote share, you know, as you go to the densest part of any town in the country and then start walking towards the edge of town, it just gets the, you know, you, if you're at the middle of the town at the densest part, it's the most democratic part. And if you just kind of walk toward the country, it just gets progressively less democratic. And the, and then the less dens it gets, the less democratic it gets, the more Republican it gets, that struck me as crazy. Like, how could that be the case? And then the second thing, which is, relates to an interest that I've had for a long time, uh, in political psychology, um, my, in my grad studies, so it was a PhD student in philosophy and my studied stuff at the intersection of political philosophy and cognitive science. And I have long been interested in, you know, what explains why people have the moral temperament's dispositions that they do, why people have the kind of political impulses that they have. So it's aware of all of these literatures that correlate um, personality types to, um, you know, different political attitudes. Uh, and, and so I was looking at those pictures of the relationship between population density and party vote share, um, and just kind of mapping that on to what I knew about the relationship between, um, partisan loyalty and kind of left right ideology and personality. And I was thinking, well, if both of those things are true, this means that there has to be, um, that, that gradation along density from less democratic to more Republican has to be a gradation in terms of personality as well. Like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, like, and, and, and I was like, could that be the case? And I got really interested in that. Um, and, and, and the paper started to take shape, um, out of that. Like, how did we get this kind of division, um, in, uh, in our politics, like, it seems to, you know, reflect a real division in, you know, real spatial division in where you're left and right leaning kind of people and up living. Let me pause for a second to talk about the great courses plus. We all know that college or university has good parts and bad parts. The bad parts might be, you know, doing homework or paying your student loans. The good parts are the best lectures, the best courses that you took. So what if you could have just the good parts? That's basically what the great courses plus is. It's a streaming service or there's also a great courses plus app. So you can listen to and watch some of the best lectures and some of the most interesting topics you've ever heard from the best teachers all around the world at major universities Harvard Yale Stanford. I personally have done three different courses with the great courses. You can check out my course on dark matter and dark energy, the dark side of the universe. And right now for mindscape listeners, there's a special limited time offer, a free month of unlimited access to the entire great courses plus library. To get this offer, you can sign up now through this special URL, go to thegreatcoursesplus.com slash mindscape. Remember all the words there that's the great courses plus dot com slash mindscape start learning today. Yeah, the personality stuff I think is especially fascinating. In fact, listening, I listened to your paper, I listened to the fact you did an audiobook reading of it, which I thought was fantastic because now if you ever have a viral tweet, you can actually say, you know, go to my soundcloud and listen to my reading of this paper. But also it induced me even to take the big five test online so we can talk about that later on. But before we get, I can guess you, Sean. I can be doing this so much. I, yeah. Well, when we do that, when we get to there, I want you to guess me because I guess myself four out of five, I would say. But let's just emphasize the size of the effect that we're talking about here because it really is remarkable before we get to explaining it. You know, a pithy summary is that you say in the paper, there are no Republican cities, which, you know, when you put it that way, sounds kind of dramatic and not only that, but it didn't used to be the case, right? I mean, this is a relatively recent phenomenon, but it's extremely strong now. Yeah, it didn't used to be the case. I mean, so in the paper, I go through three different mechanisms of sorting. I mean, maybe I should back up a second and just mention the overarching context of urbanization. That is one of the things that I felt was being overlooked in a lot of explanations that I was seeing for just a lot of social developments badly. Like, if you look at it, like urbanization is clearly the most momentous thing that's happened in human social life over the past 200 years. It's this just absolutely immense transformative force. The entire human population has basically filtered itself out from, you know, we used to be really diffusely spread out over the territory. When we had agricultural economies, that sprinkles people around in a relatively uniform sort of way, but the end of the agricultural economy, the beginning of industrialization led to this slow shift of the population towards these big concentrated hubs of commerce and trade. That is a worldwide phenomenon. It's just absolutely immense. A lot of people don't realize how big the effect is. In 1790, when the Constitution was written, a New York City had like 33,000 people in it. That's about the size of my hometown, which I talk about in my paper, in Marshalltown, Iowa, which is just a bit less than 30,000. But now we have just scores of cities that are over, you know, metro areas that are over a million people and all over the world, just populations are continuing to concentrate more and more and more. And that fact has to really mean something, right? That's going to make a difference to the way people are relating to each other. And then thinking about that, one of the things that immediately came to mind was Thomas Shelling's work on segregation, which may or may not be familiar to. I wrote about it in my book, The Big Picture. And you did. That's also, do you want to explain it? Because I can tell. No, no, no, this is why we're here for you to explain it. But, you know, it's a way of explaining segregation, even when people have only mildly pro-B by my own in-group kind of attitudes, right? Yeah, exactly. So Shelling, and if you've, you know, he's a big influence on me. I loved Thomas Shelling. He was an economist at Harvard. He won the Nobel Prize for his work in Game Theory. And he's got this terrific book called Micro-Motives and macro behavior, is that what it's called? And, you know, and the whole point of the book is to show how you get, you know, aggregate effects out of, you know, individual choices. And he's got a very, very simple, elegant model where you can do the, you can do it on the checkerboard. If you want, like, you can take the white pieces and the black pieces and just distribute them on squares randomly. And the rule is that each of the pieces wants to, you know, we're imagining each of the squares as like a house. And, and, and so there are eight squares that touch any square, unless it's at the edge, right? You know, the up, down, left, right, and both diagonals. And, and, and the constraint is, everybody, you know, nobody minds being in the minority. It's fine to be in the minority. You just want three of those eight squares to be the same type, you know, white or black as you. And, and so what you have to do is you have to move each piece until it satisfies that constraint. But, you know, so you do it over and over again because if you move one, then it opens up a news base and it violates the condition for some other piece. And as you get them all situated, you find that you've like pretty radically segregated the board. Right? And so, so even this mild preference for, you know, homophily as the social science call, homophily is just, you know, liking sameness. And that seems to be a pretty deep feature of human psychology that we, everybody likes people like them. Yeah. We're, you know, our friends tend to be people like us. You know, people, you know, it's even, it's interesting. Like, people's friends even tend to be like the same height they are and stuff like that. You see, see homophily in all sorts of different, different things. And, and so that's an assumption of, you sort of uniform, we come off of. And I talk to Nicholas Christakis on a previous podcast and he labels it mild in group preference, mild in group bias or something like that. One of something that he says just appears all over the place in the animal kingdom whenever social structures become to exist at all. Yeah, absolutely. And so if you look at selling experiment, which, which it was just this little model and, and tons of people have done all sorts of elaborations on this and you can watch them on YouTube with like people, you know, you can set up a population of, of, of millions of reds and blues or whatever you want them to be. And you can change the constraints. But like if you use shelling's assumptions, you know, it can take, you know, if you've got a huge population, it can take millions of rounds. But over time, those populations segregate fairly cleanly. Like, like, you know, not just like in half, but you'll get these very clear clusters of reds and blues that are sharply demarcated from one another. But those are those assumptions again, our week, that's week in group preference. And, and, and, and you can change those assumptions and, and you can say, like, well, suppose the whites and the blacks on your checker board have slightly different preferences. And one of them has stronger in group preferences than the other. And you can mess around with it, and you'll get even sharper segregation. And, and, and, and I was thinking about that in the context of this massive, you know, glacial shift of populations from the country to the city. Like, if there is even small differences, and this is what I think shelling is telling you, like, like, like, like, you know, even if everybody's the same in terms of, um, wanting to be near members of their in group, uh, if there's, you know, differences in the nature of those groups can, can make a big difference. So this is one of the first cut in my paper on in terms of what, uh, uh, of, of what predicts urbanization is just ethnicity. Right. So almost the entire non-white population has sorted itself into cities. Um, it's, it's, and that is explained largely by, um, in group preference. You know, everybody likes to be around people like them. Uh, and especially if you're a minority who has, uh, who is discriminated against, uh, who has a, who has a history of, of, of, of oppression, right? Like, you're gonna want some safety in numbers. And, and, and so you're gonna have to coordinate on a place to be. Um, if you just scatter a minority around the territory of a country at random, they're gonna be isolated and that's scary, right? So they tend to gravitate, um, toward cities, um, pretty much any minority and it doesn't have to be an ethnic minority, um, you know, gays and lesbians are very, very heavily concentrated in cities and other kinds of minorities are as well. Um, and, and, and, you know, there's a lot of reasons for that, but it's a clear thing that you see and it's not that, that, um, African-Americans or Hispanics or Asians are, are have more ingrued bias than anybody else is that, you know, they're the same on average, but, um, in order to satisfy a, even a weak preference for being around people like them, they're all gonna have to basically go to the same place. Because they are a few of them, yeah. That's the, that's the, the, the few of them. Um, there is no real option if you're, um, a person of color, you might prefer, um, to live in a rural place, a low density place. Um, but there's no way to satisfy the preference of being around people like you and living in a rural place for the most part, if you're, uh, an ethnic minority. Um, so you have to give up on one of those two things. Um, and most people, uh, who would have, um, you know, who, whose residential preference is lean more in the direction of low density, uh, if they're, um, an ethnic minority, they just generally give up on living in the country and end up living, you know, in a slightly pastoral suburb or something like that. In a way, in a place that's close enough to other, um, members of their, of their, of their group. But whites, uh, the white majority in the United States has, um, uh, it's easy. Um, if you, if you really like to live around other white people and you don't like urban density, you're in, you're in luck. You can live basically anywhere that's not a city is, uh, almost entirely white. Um, and, and that is, you know, kind of the crux of, uh, a lot of, um, the, the thinking in my paper where I'm just like, oh, so are there difference? Because one of the things that then you're starting, so if you, if you, you know, first pass is ethnicity, non-white ethnicity, sort into city, some white people sort into cities, but others don't. Um, and if you're, and if you're trying to explain why the Republican Party is the way it is, and the Republican Party is almost entirely composed of white people who haven't sorted into cities, um, then there's an interesting question about if there are systematic differences between the white people who sorted into cities and the white people who didn't. But also, before we get there, uh, there is this issue of sorting in the sense of picking up and going somewhere versus just choosing not to leave, right? I mean, how many of the white people who are outside the city started inside of cities and said, nope, this is not for me. I'm, I'm gonna, I'm gonna move out to the country. You know, I don't know the number, but it's surpassingly small, but just given the overall trend of urbanization. So, yeah, it's a huge, um, percentage of moves are toward higher density. And that's one of the most important facts about urbanization. That means that almost all mobility is from, uh, lower to higher density. Um, it's, it's not always the case. I mean, there's, there's been a big shift of populations within big urban areas where, where, where, where suburbs gain, or gaining population faster than the denser cores. Um, and some of that is because housing prices, um, and, uh, and some, and, and, and part of what it means is, you know, that a lot of people, but there are, are a lot of people who are getting priced out of urban cores and moving from higher density to slightly lower density suburbs, but those suburbs are still urban, right? Yeah. And so there's not a lot of movement. Uh, so there is some movement, um, from higher to lower density, but there's very, very little movement, um, overall, and the aggregate from metro areas to, um, rural areas or from, from, you know, from the city, from the core of the city to, you know, at the, the, the fringe excerpts. You just don't see a lot of that. There are places like rural places that are gaining population. Uh, a lot of them are people who are from cities moving to the country that, but they tend to be, you know, in the recreational rural category. Like, um, yeah, people who are buying a country home or, you know, you, you're moving to a ski resort, or you love to hike and mountain bike. And so you move out into the, you know, um, to some, you know, nice spot, um, you know, outside boulder or something like that. So there, there, there's some rural growth in those areas that involve people moving from cities to those places. But overall, speaking, yeah, we have, you know, sort of whites who want to be in the city, moving to the city and minorities also moving to the city and then whites who don't want to be in the city just staying put where they are. Yeah, so there's a lot of staying put, um, but then there's also the trend of urbanization is so strong that, that still there's a lot of movement in any case, right? But, but where you stop is going to reflect these differences among individuals that determine what kind of place they like to live in. So the incentive to urbanize is so strong that even people who are resistant to cities, um, or, you know, still they're going to, you're going to earn more in a city. Um, the, the, if you want to capitalize on the wage bonus to higher education, it's hard to do if you don't move to a large labor market. So, you know, I live in Iowa most of the time. Um, my wife's a professor at the University of Iowa. Uh, and there's a lot of students here, um, you know, like I grew up in a smaller town in Iowa. And if you want to, if you go to a public university and you get a bachelor's degree and you want to benefit economically from the, from that training and that increase in your skills, uh, you just can't go back to your, my can't go back to Marshall town, Iowa and make what I make, um, as a think tank vice president in Washington, DC, like I can't, right? Like, uh, I'm lucky that I can also live in Iowa city, Iowa. But like the, you know, sorry, I think this is worth digging into a little bit also because, you know, I grew up in the 70s and 80s where cities were just thought of as, you know, vast oceans of poverty and crime. And, uh, it's still correct me if I'm wrong, but cities still have a lot of poverty in them, not just rural areas, but there's a lot more inequality in cities, right? There's very wealthy people. There's a healthy middle class and there's poor people in cities, whereas there's a little bit more homogeneity, uh, in the rural areas and it's homogeneity at an overall level of lower income than you might find in a city. Is that a fair if rough? Oh yeah, absolutely. There are cities have a massive amount of inequality. Like it's, um, that's where poverty is very heavily concentrated and there are a lot of reasons for that. Ed Glazer has some great stuff on why cities are better for poor people and why they're particularly attractive if you have less money. Um, yeah, but cities are increasingly productive as you're some of the podcasts that you've done. There are these efficiencies, increasing efficiencies from the population density, from agglomeration as the economists call it. And, and, and that is increasing the wage bonus to urbanization. So you've got these two things happening at once. You've got a, you've got a wage bonus from higher education. Um, that's increasing because of technological change as technology changes, it doesn't affect everybody's productivity equally. You need to have a higher and higher level of education to have your productivity amplified by the new communication and information technology. So, so the, you know, the, and, and we aren't educating people fast enough to keep up with demand. So there's a, a rising bonus to getting higher education and higher levels of education. Um, and that is amplified by this independent, not independent, but, but, but, but related thing that's happening in cities where, where there's something about the knowledge economy and the information economy, um, Paul Romer, the economist has, you know, another Nobel Prize winner has done great work on how, how growth is increasingly a function of just coming up with new ideas. Uh, the, the, the ideas drive growth you, and, and that idea production, um, really seems to be higher when you concentrate a lot of really, really smart people together. Like, you're, you're a professor at, you know, one of the world's great universities. And, you know, it's kind of obvious when you're at, you know, a Caltech or something like that, that, that, that, you're more productive there than you would be, um, you know, somewhere else because you have all these incredibly smart people that you interact with every day and that levels you up. You know, it's like, I, I like to play pickup basketball and, and you pick up a better basketball player if you play with better players, right? Like, like, and that's just what it is for a large part. There's, so there's two aspects of that increase in productivity from, from concentration is that, you know, if you're a coder and you are, are around other great coders, you learn a lot from them, and there's a kind of competitive pressure that pushes your level up. Um, but that's not where most growth comes from, comes from, most growth doesn't come from just these marginal increases in individual productivity. It comes from these bigger ideas that lead to innovations that, uh, that, that, that increase productivity in a way that scales across huge port parts of the population. Um, and so those ideas tend to get produced more quickly when you get smart people, um, together, um, you know, to kind of shoot in the breeze. And so there's a, you know, increasing concentration of economic production in cities and that, um, makes them, as I say in the paper, more magnetic, right? Like, like, a good way to think about urbanization is that, that over time cities, you know, cities are like magnets and the, uh, incentives to urbanization are like the, you know, level of magnetic attraction and it keeps getting, you know, it's like an electromagnetic, you keep turning it up and, you know, it keeps getting, the, the poll keeps getting stronger and stronger and is that cluster of people gets bigger and bigger. It turns up the magnet again and again and again. And which is why pop, the whole population is filtering toward, uh, toward the cities. Um, unless, you know, you're, you know, I'm not very magnetic kind of person. Like, like, like, as I say, the paper like, you know, if you, if you imagine to just ball bearings, just distribute it on the table with a magnet in the middle, um, and the ball bearings are made at all sorts of different metals. All the magnetic metals are going to get drawn toward the, toward the, uh, the magnet eventually in a, um, but if, you know, you're aluminum or a plastic ball bearing or something, you're just going to, you know, basically sit where you were the entire time. And I think there's something like that going on in, in the way urbanization has been working. Um, some of us are less magnetic than others. And so despite this very strong, um, just dynamic, this is happening, drawing millions of millions of people towards cities, some people are just less likely to filter in. Um, and, uh, and my conjecture, which I think, uh, there is some basis in is that is that the things that make people less likely to urbanize are also things that predict more right leaning political views. We're very fond of the physics based analogies here on the mindscape podcast. So we approve of that. But, uh, but yeah, I, so that's what we want to get into, you know, that this, there's urbanizations of fact and it affects the environment and it affects the knowledge economy and everything, but it also sorts. It's right. It doesn't affect everyone equally. And, uh, political leanings are one of those, but maybe the, you also talk a lot about personality types in the big five and maybe causally that comes before the, uh, political leaning. Yeah, I think so. I mean, there's, there's, there's controversy about, um, the extent to which, you know, personality is, uh, independent variable, um, you know, to this extent, the extent to which is sort of exogenous of people's political opinions. Um, right. So the question is, you know, you know, you know, maybe just, does moving to a city make you a more liberal personality type, does living in the country make you more conservative and, and more education, right? Or education. Um, so the, so the trait of the, uh, among the big five that, uh, that are, that are most politically relevant are, uh, openness to experience and conscientiousness. These predict whether you're more liberal or conservative in your social views, you know, that's, I'll tell you all five of them are because we might not know. Um, like a good, uh, namanic is ocean, uh, openness to experience conscientiousness, extroversion, um, agreeableness and neuroticism. Uh, um, neuroticism is often called emotional stability. If you kind of flip the sign of it. Um, and, uh, and most of those have no relationship to political views, but, um, openness and conscientiousness have pretty significant relationships. Uh, how do you get to split my, do you want to guess what my results were? You are, well, so all academics are relatively high openness. Yeah, you're, you're, you're, yeah, you're high openness. You've got a podcast about, I know, ideas, uh, and, and, and that, you know, that illustrates what openness is. So openness is, you know, is curiosity, uh, is a large part of it. Um, it's a, it's a large, you know, it involves just interest in new things. Yeah. So if you're high in openness, you're more interested in reading the new novel, you're interested in the cool new movie, uh, you're interested in traveling to places you haven't been before and encountering other cultures, uh, encountering people who aren't like you, you're interested in trying new cuisines, things like that. Um, and that correlates, that's the strongest correlate of, of, of, um, liberalism or conservative. Oh, highly, high openness, people tend to be, uh, more liberal, uh, lower openness tend to people tend to be more conservative. The other, the other trait, uh, that, uh, has a significant relationship is conscientiousness. And conscientiousness is the, is the, you know, getting it done, uh, uh, personality trait. It's a, you know, highly conscientious people like keep lists, uh, you know, meet deadlines. They just generally have their, their shit together, right? Like that's, that's, that's what conscientiousness is. Um, and, um, but it's, it's, it's, it might not be clear how that, how that relates, um, politically, uh, high, high conscientious people tend to be more conservative, low conscientiousness. People tend to be more liberal. The conservatism of conscientiousness is, is, is, is involved in one thing that conscientious people really dislike his uncertainty. Um, they, they, there's a strong, conscientious people want there to be a clear relationship between, uh, effort and reward or inputs and outputs, right? Like, and, and it, it's like, it's, it's, it's the A student, um, personality trait, um, I mean, I was, Hermione Granger. Yep. It like, like, you, you want to know what you need to do to get the thing. Yeah. Um, and so, like, what do I have to do to get the grade? So like the conscientious students are the ones who like, bad you after class about what exactly the syllabus means, you know, uh, because they got in the world to be just. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, and, and, and, and, and, and, and the low conscientiousness people like me, uh, it is like, you don't keep this and, and, and, and, and, and like, and, and, and just are amazed if they ever make a deadline. Uh, you know, like, you know, have, uh, are much more tolerant of, of this kind of uncertainty and inflexibility. Uh, and so, so, so, so there's, there's an inflexibility in conscientiousness, uh, and, and there's a, there's, there's, there's, there's a slight fear of just a strong desire for stability. Just want to know how everything works. So they can hit their marks. I was, I was very low on neuroticism and completely middle of the road on conscientiousness, extroversion and agreeableness. But it's interesting to me this, uh, you know, both conservatives and liberals get one good quality that they correlate strongly with, right? Because most people would probably say being conscientious as good, being open as good. That's, that's, uh, the sort of normal valence that those terms have. But is there, I take it that because they're supposed to be useful dimensions in five-dimensional personality space, there, there must be people who are high conscientiousness and high openness and low in each, right? And, and they don't have an obvious place to fit. Absolutely. Yeah. Like the, the, the, the, the way these traits emerge, I mean, you know, like, it's not exactly the real things, uh, but, you know, but the, the traits come out of like a factor analysis where you're trying to figure out the minimal set of traits that don't correlate very strongly with one another, right? So, so, so, so the whole idea is that they're independent of each other. Um, and so higher, high, you know, openness and conscientiousness just swing completely freely of, uh, of one another. Like, so that, like, the academic personality type is very high openness and relatively high conscientiousness. Like, like, academics tend to be a students, right? Like, you know, it's hard to become a professor if, you know, to get through that much school if you can't turn papers in on time. Right. Um, and low conscientious people struggle with that. Um, but, uh, conscientiousness is the best trait to have in terms of predicting success in school, um, and in your career. So higher conscientiousness people are more likely to finish school. They're more likely to, um, more likely to finish anything if they start it. Um, and, yeah, high conscientiousness predicts, um, higher salaries. Uh, people, high, highly conscientious, people tend to be a little more productive. Um, my conscientiousness doesn't make you want to do anything, right? Like, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's a kind of, um, auxiliary or kind of workhorse, um, trait, um, like openness has more motivational drive to it. It, it, it, like, so if you're high openness, it makes you attracted to certain kinds of things. So conscientiousness is the trait that makes you good at school. Uh, openness is the trait that makes you want to learn, right? Um, and, and, and, and those are, you know, and those are relatively independent of one or another. Um, you know, one of the sad, there's a sad finding that I report in the paper, um, from Shelley Lundberg, labor economist at Santa Barbara, I think. And, uh, which is that, you know, generally conscientiousness predicts academic performance, but it actually doesn't for, uh, for for, lower socioeconomic, um, status students, um, like, like, you'd want to think that the, the, the working hard and getting stuff done dimension would, uh, predict academic success for, for less wealthy black students, for example. Um, but it doesn't, uh, but it turns out that openness does, right? Like, and, and, and I think that, that's a good example where you're seeing the, the motivational aspect of openness that, that, that, that, if somebody's less privileged, um, and they've got a lot, the, the deck is stacked against them. Uh, the thing that really pulls you through is just the desire to learn. Um, interesting. Yeah. Um, and, and so the, so the, so these traits, uh, uh, uh, they're, they're interesting. And one of the things that one of the reasons why I fixed on the big five is because there are other kind of personality theories that, that, that, that are specifically intended to explain political views, um, and moral views like Jonathan Heights, moral foundation theory. Um, but some of those are a little bit problematic. Uh, it's hard to, uh, uh, it's hard. Sometimes the, um, it's, it's not so clear that the, you know, that if, that if I identify as a conservative that that doesn't just affect my answers on the, yeah, you know, the, the moral foundations quiz, but the big five isn't intended to explain your politics. And it explains lots of other things in this, but been replicate really, really well. Um, and, and, you know, helps explain all manner of behavior. And that's one of the things that I found interesting about it. So like, like, because, uh, high openness, you know, uh, explains, uh, like, like, you know, weekly predicts your inclination to go to college at all. Um, uh, even though it doesn't mean that you'll be good at it. Uh, it makes you want to go to school. Uh, and if you go to school, uh, and get a college degree that, that amps up your, your magnetic attraction to cities, because that's where you're going to, um, benefit from your, from your, from your degree. Um, but, and presumably, even if not, right? I mean, the idea that if you did grow up in a rural environment, the chances that you would pick up stakes and move to a scary diverse pluralistic, urban environment are probably much greater if you score high on openness. Yeah, absolutely. So then, and that's one of the most important aspects of the set of correlations that openness and conscientiousness have with, with other stuff. So both openness and low openness and high conscientiousness, um, relate to, um, a broad set of traits that you could just call ethnocentrism or in group bias. Um, and so, people who are lower openness, um, tend to be more ethnocentric. Their degree of, uh, homophily, the strength of their, their preferences for sameness are stronger. Um, and so, lower openness people are more put off by, uh, by difference and diversity. And so if you're lower openness, that's going to make you less interested in, uh, and maybe, um, averse to places where there are a lot of people who are unlike you. Um, and that's very, very interesting. Um, and especially since, uh, is, you know, in the context of a, uh, of someone like Donald Trump, who's doing everything he can to elicit, um, people's sense of, you know, ethnocentric solidarity. Um, so, so, so the, um, so higher openness people, as I said before, are interested in people who aren't like them. They're interested in other cultures. They're interested in other foods. So if you're higher on openness, you're just going to find the urban diversity, um, um, more attractive. Um, and if you're low in openness, you're going to find it unsettling. Um, so that's important just in and of itself. But then, secondarily, um, and this is one of the things that I found most important, most interesting is that like lower openness also just predicts your inclination to migrate at all. Yeah. Um, so higher openness people, and it makes sense when you start just thinking about the, you know, the, the how it relates to an interest in novelty and difference. Um, lower openness people are less likely to want to move and they're less likely to actually move. Uh, higher openness people are, way more likely to want to go somewhere new. Um, which is one of the reasons why higher openness people are somewhat like, I want to be careful about not making a sound like openness is great and low openness is terrible. Uh, because, because low openness people are just better friends. They stick to their group. They stick to their group, right? Like, like, you like, you, you're low openness trend as the guy who's going to show up at three in the morning, bail you out of jail. Yeah. Right. Like, like, if you, you, you're lowest openness kid is the one who's going to call you, you know, when you're old. Yeah. Before you're sure. Right. Yeah. I have two, two anecdotes. Uh, I know this is not really systematic data, but it helps make all these points of vivid to me. One was driving someone around an older person who I'm sure would score in low openness, uh, driving around my neighborhood here in LA and seeing all of these signs on the storefronts, many of which are in Spanish, some of which are in Asian languages and, uh, and they just said, you know, doesn't that bother you? And I'm like, no, the food is much better here because of all this kind of, uh, diversity we have, but it just struck me that I wouldn't even have thought that that should bother me. And on the other side of the valence, uh, side, you know, I, uh, knew a guy who had been in the army his whole life and he retired and he immediately got a job as a security guard and explaining why he, he mentioned the fact that he got to wear a uniform every day. And, uh, again, that sort of never would have occurred to me as a good thing, but I get it that it is a good thing. And it's, I kind of don't like the label openness for that reason. It's, it's sort of biases us towards instantly thinking that openness is good, but there are absolutely values. I think that I think that having different restaurants with different, uh, ethnicities is, is an unambiguous good thing, but I, but I get the idea that there are people who just want to keep things simple, uniform, uh, doing the same thing every day. So they have space to worry about other things. That's not intrinsically, uh, personal failing. No, not, not at all. Um, and, and, and that is, and I think so, so if, if my overall hypothesis is right in that, in that, over time, the higher openness people are more likely to migrate, um, and therefore urbanize, because migration is mostly urbanizing migration, and lower openness people are going to be more resistant to, or less sensitive to the incentives that drive people, uh, to, to urbanize. Over time, the less dense populations, the rural populations, um, should become lower and lower openness. Um, that, like, that, that is kind of an implication of the view. And, and, and, and as the magnetism of cities ramps up, right? Like it will tend to pick people off who are on the margin, right? Like they're, you know, each of these traits is normally distributed. Um, and so, you know, people who are on the, uh, on the, on the low tail of openness, or, you know, least likely, I mean, I'm most likely to be rooted to put down stakes to be incredibly loyal to their community, to family, to the people around them. They're not going to want to give up on that, you know, but most people are in the middle, um, you know, like my definition. And, and, you know, and as you kind of move down the bell curve as the magnetism of the, of the city, you know, ramps up, it starts picking people off, you know, further and further down the bell curve, um, and, but that leaves the average in a lot of these places in, you know, um, like higher open, like lower, open, yes. Um, and, and, and, and, and, and, and that will tend to give an increasingly, um, conservative, ethnocentric cast to a lot of these places. Um, you know, I, I wanted to mention that, that openness and consciousness predicts your, predict social and liberal, um, I'm sorry, social liberalism and social conservatism, things like abortion, same sex marriage, immigration, attitudes towards race. But it doesn't relate at all, um, to economic views. Um, that's, does it, that those don't relate in any systematic way to any of the personality stuff. Um, so, so it's just these, just these social views. Um, so if, of over time, the sorting dynamic of urbanization is leaving these places, increasingly, um, uh, low in openness, they're also getting higher in ethnocentrism. Um, and then on top of that, you have the effects of the thing that's driving people to the city of the first place, which is that that is where economic production increasingly happens. Um, so I draw heavily in the paper on, um, on work by Enrico Morretti, who's got talks about, you know, the great divergence that there is this real divergence in our economy between a handful of extremely high productivity cities and everywhere else. Um, you know, everywhere else includes a bunch of other cities, um, including like, kind of rust belt cities that are into decline. So, no, it's not that all the places that are in relative decline are, are, are, are not urban. Um, but almost all the places that are on the upswing are, are urban. And almost the entire lower density parts of the country are either stagnating economically or, or actually declining in terms of, uh, economic welfare. Um, and so when you add an increasingly low openness, high ethnocentric, white population to this economic stagnation, um, you're going to get a lot of disgruntlement. Um, yeah, it's, and, and, and those populations as well are, are, um, the, the average level of education is going down. Um, um, again, because of the overall magnetism of cities to highly skilled, highly educated people, uh, and, and that is basically the reason why that, you know, that, that's the kind of first order explanation for the great divergence that the increasing wage bonus to higher education and the concentration of all the jobs where you get that wage bonus at big cities has filtered almost the entire highly educated population out of the rest of the country. And that leaves these other places at a permanently kind of like lower level of productivity. And I, I did want to ask, uh, an economics question here. I've seen various graphs that seem pretty convincing that after the 2008 recession, uh, there was a comeback, but the comeback went very strongly to people who are doing well in the first place, like the rich people are doing fine after 2008. The middle class is doing okay. And almost none of the gains went to people who are doing badly. Is there, is there substructure there in terms of rural versus urban? You did urban poor people come back more than rural ones or vice versa? Um, I'm not sure about the, uh, the poor population specifically, but, but, but urban populations bounce back much, much quicker than, than, then, then rural populations. That is a big part of the story, um, that, that those places don't do well with these, here, here's an interesting, you know, like a little sidebar, you know, conscientiousness, as I said, is the individual trait that most predicts just success in your career. And, and conscientiousness also, um, you know, conscientiousness does make you less likely to migrate. But if you are, but it makes you more resolute in, in, in, in executing any preferences that you might, might actually have. And so if you're low, if you're the most conservative profile, if you're low openness in high conscientiousness, uh, you're gonna, you know, really stick to, stick to not going anywhere. Um, and, and, and so high, higher conscientiousness at the individual level, you know, means that you're gonna have a higher income, but hiring conscientiousness, the population level doesn't predict a higher level of productivity. Um, and, and, and I think that has to do with the fact that, that, that, that, that growth is an idea is thing. Um, and, and that it's also like has to do with flexibility. So there's a great paper, uh, uh, in, uh, about the UK, in terms of population level, um, uh, personality traits. And, and the, the higher conscientiousness places didn't bounce back from the recession as fast as the higher openness places. And that's, seems to be because higher openness people are like more flexible, they like like how are we gonna deal with this problem? The conscientiousness, high conscious, which is people are, are, are the ones who want to know what the rules are, right? But if the rules change, they struggle. And so high conscientiousness people can take advantage of opportunities, but high openness people are more likely to get the opportunities or go out and actively get them. Yeah, and, and they're also, they're gonna be the kind of people who explore the space of the possibility to see how to adapt to the new situation. Um, so, so it's, it's, it's a, it's the creative personality type. The, you know, the most creative profile is, is, is mine. As it happens, like very high openness, very low conscientiousness, the, it's associative and, and, and, and flexible. But high conscientiousness, low openness is, um, very, uh, you know, you just want to do the done thing. And if the world changes around you, it's just incredibly confusing. Um, and I think it's like super important not to be judgmental about that. It's, it's, that, that's just how, one of the things that writing this paper is done for me is it's actually made me feel more empathetic toward, um, Trump voters. Yeah. Thanks. It's to, to try to get inside what the mindset is, uh, of, you know, lower openness, higher conscientiousness people, like the changes that are culture, economy, um, population is going through are truly unsettling. If you have that kind of mindset, like this is a high openness thing, trying to get inside somebody else's head. Uh, but, but, but, but, like paradox of openness. Yeah. It's a paradox of openness. But, but, that, that's partly why higher openness people are, um, more, um, have, you know, higher racial sympathy, for example, they're more likely to be able to understand what it might mean to be a minority and have, uh, opportunities systematically denied to you in these kind of structural ways, uh, whereas low openness people just don't get it. Um, but they, they have a hard time understanding, um, uh, what other people's experience is like. Well, just, like, this, really interesting. Yeah. I mean, just to make this very clear, I think that, you know, the picture that you're painting seems to come together in a view where there's a set of people who live outside the cities, who are, you know, have been legitimately really damaged by the economy. And, um, at the same time, and maybe for related reasons are ones who are naturally prone to be a little bit more skeptical of minorities and change and foreigners and immigrants and things like that. And it comes together. And, and maybe this argument we had over why Trump won after he won was it because of economic anxiety or because of racism or nationalism, you know, these things are all different aspects of the same underlying causation. Exactly. And that's one of the things that I try to draw out that they're not really two separate explanations. There's this big macro economic fact, which, which urbanization really is. It's, it's, it's, it's, it has to do with the changing structure of the economy and the incentives that that gives people to resettle. Um, and that has these strong effects on who gets the benefits of economic growth. Um, and, and if this dynamic is filtering the population in a way that leaves lower density populations, basically more social, increasingly socially conservative, but also depriving them of the benefits of, of growth. It's not, it's not happening where they live. And they're not getting, um, uh, the full benefit of it. Um, that puts those people in a position where it becomes very easy to sell them an narrative about why things seem so bad to them. So if somebody like Trump comes along and says, things are going shit each for you, um, I'm going to make America great again, which means make America like it was when you felt comfortable or like you thought it was when you felt comfortable. Yes. Yeah, or, or at least I would have, yeah, exactly. Like, your, your, um, sort of nostalgic fantasy about the past was like, um, and the thing that's causing all these problems is all these immigrants, uh, and these, uh, you know, elites who live in cities who are selling you out to the Chinese and, uh, giving your jobs to Mexicans and so on and so forth. That, you know, the, that kind of person who is, who lives in those places is going to be very prone to find that really persuasive. Um, and then the, the additional factor that I lay onto it. So like most of this explanation is the, the overall story I'm telling is about selection effects and, and, and some selection effects that have been, I think overlooked in the way that, that urbanization has, has, has, has segregated the population in this sort of shelling-like way. Um, but there are these treatment effects, right? Like there, there's this large literature on how growth tends to be liberalizing, um, that, that the further you get from a sense of economic insecurity, basically the more tolerant and open you are to difference and change. Uh, and the, this is really, really well confirmed. Like, like, it feels to a lot of us, like, there's a kind of one way arrow to kind of moral progress that's in a liberalizing direction. Um, because economic prosperity or rising economic prosperity tends to make whole populations more culturally liberal. Um, you, you, you get a transition from, you know, Ronald Engelhart is the, is the big innovator in this area from, um, from what he calls, um, survival values to self-expression values. Um, but you don't get that in a uniform way over an entire population when growth is increasingly economically concentrated in cities. So all of the already more liberal people in cities are experiencing the benefits of growth, which tends to make those populations even more liberal, right? So, which is a good example of that is, is, is, you know, the change in, you know, just even the past few years towards transgender people and the norms around it, right? Like, so that rapid shift in norms about acceptance of transgender people, like, like, how important it is to use, uh, people's preferred pronouns to acknowledge their preferred gender identity. That, that is, that's textbook increase in self-expression values. Um, but the kind of growth that makes people, you know, have, you know, increasing self-expression values, if that's not going to these already more conservative, lower openness populations, then, then you're getting even further polarization in terms of culture and values, right? So to that population who's not experiencing the same increase in prosperity and they're already more conservative, they, they, they hear talk about, like, using somebody's preferred pronoun and they're like, what the hell is even happening? Like, like, there are two, there, like, I get emails from all of these conservative institutions and they're just all going crazy right now about like, how are you, we can't tell the difference between a man and a woman? Um, and, and, and I think that is a, is a, is a really direct effect of the joint filtering of the population, leaving the more, leaving the rural populations more conservative in terms of disposition, but also depriving them of the kind of treatment effects of growth that would make them a little bit more liberal intolerant. They're just not getting it. And so these, the urban and rural culture, moral cultures and political cultures are just growing further and further apart. And, and, and to the extent there, there's a kind of backlash, I think it's driven by those combined effects where it just seems literally crazy to conservative people, conservative white people in small towns to hear people talking about, um, uh, uh, about, we just like choose your own gender. It just seems like it just seems absolutely, it seems like a whole world's upside down. Um, but for us, so what is the, then this, the, we haven't quite yet talked about the role of education here, because I think this is like the final piece of the puzzle, right, that you talk about in the paper. Um, we, you know, we have this set of people, rural people, low on openness, things are changing all around them. They've been left behind by the economy. Those populations are, you know, people and families from those regions might have their perspectives shifted if they got more education. Is that, but I never know what the causality is. Is it just the people who are more open in the first place tend to go to college or people who go to college become a little more open? It's, it's, it's very clearly both. Um, so, yeah, so, so the, the personality stuff is, you know, it's, it's, it's not fixed. Um, the openness, say, is about, um, the heritability goes at about 60%. You know, like the, the, the, the, the, the variation that's explained by geniuses about that. But there's still that, that leaves a lot of room for, um, for change, uh, for, for differences, uh, that are, that are environmentally determined. Um, and it's very clear that getting a college degree makes you more open, um, you know, traveling when you're young makes you more open. So going to college would increase openness and does increase social liberalism. Um, it, but, you know, it's also the case that if you're already more open, you're more likely to want to go to college. And, and I think one thing that people have overlooked, um, which is clear to me, like having grown up in Iowa and living at, you know, in Iowa city, where there are a bunch of students from rural areas, people overlook, uh, especially, you know, high openness, urban people tend to, overlook the extent to which going to college is a form of migration that is uncomfortable to really rooted socially, you know, temperamentally, socially conservative types, you know, going to college means moving away from your family, it means moving away from your friends. Um, and, and there's a huge attrition rate, you know, from freshmen, not coming back, uh, for their sophomore year. Uh, and I think in some of it is just like it's, it's, it's a, it's a bad fit. Um, and if you're from a small Iowa rural town and you come to the University of Iowa, it's way more diverse than any place you've ever been. It does, it seems like a wild big city to you. Um, and, and, and, and, and if those rural populations are becoming more conservative over time, um, you know, like I think their parents are, uh, find it less attractive to send their kids as well. Like it is true that sending your kid to college is going to make them a little bit more liberal. But like, it also means sending them away from you. You don't want to do that. Like you love them. Yeah. You don't want, you don't want them to go away and you don't especially don't want them to go away to a place that's going to make them even more different from you. And that if they get a college degree, they're going to have to move even further away from you. Um, at to this really scary big city that is dangerous and full of weird languages and smells and food. Like it's just, it's unappealing. Right. Like, and, and, and, and so I think some of the right wing reaction against universities currently has to do with some of this just very deep sea to discomfort in, and, uh, and, the, you know, there's a, there's a feeling that somehow it's like left wing propaganda that is, you know, making their children different from them. But, but, you know, I think that's a, you know, a kind of rationalization and the deeper thing is also wanting to be separated from your loved ones. Yeah. And which I was going to say, you know, that's totally understandable in some way. I mean, we do live in a society where the idea that families live together in the same neighborhood over generations is more or less disappearing in most of our population, right? Yeah, absolutely. Um, and, and, and, and that's a real loss. Um, yeah, like, like, like, like, there's a real loss of rootedness. Um, these lower open-ass places tend to be higher being a social capital kinds of places. Like when people stick around, they know each other better. Um, they are tend to be more deeply invested in, you know, churches in, in, in, you know, the Lions Club and the Rotary and all these civil society institutions. Uh, those places have a, kind of like a rich, um, informal, you know, really tightly woven together social life, which is, has a lot of advantages. Um, it's a really nice way to live, um, if you fit that kind of place, right? Like it's suffocating for, um, a certain kind of person, um, but everybody doesn't have to live the same kind of life. Um, but that kind of life is becoming less and less feasible. It's becoming less economically feasible. Um, and, and, and it feels, if you're, if you live in one of those places, it feels like the world is trying to destroy everything that's important to you. Um, and, and it's worth taking that seriously. Yeah, you briefly mentioned churches, but you didn't talk about religion a lot, uh, in the paper is that, uh, I mean, it, there's this even be above urbanization, there's just the whole idea of modernization, right? And the, the, the strong attachments we have to community, to family, to churches are weakening with time and probably the increasing secularization of the country and the world is something that is both significant and very bothersome to the low openness people who are out there in the rural districts. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, like the secularization is one of those things that, um, it, like, like, it tends to go along with rising self-expression values. Um, so, so religious participation tends to fall as, um, you know, like, GDP per capita increases, you know, as people get more and more wealthy, you know, what self-expression values mean is that you, that you, that, that what tends to dominate your interest is, you know, being myself, you know, like, like, finding the thing that fits, right? Like, like, and, you know, and consumer cultures really play into that. Um, and, and that's not really what the idea of religion is, uh, like, it's, you know, like, yeah, like, so, so people who are high in self-expression values are going to be really annoyed that the Catholic church won't change its views on personal control or, or, or, or on, I'm seeing sex marriage, right? Like, like, like, you know, you're like, get with it folks. Um, but, but like, that's not what religions are for. One of the interesting things about the United States, um, is one of the reasons it, I think, maintains a higher level of religious participation than a lot of European countries is that it has this history of really entrepreneurial, um, religious, um, activity. Um, when I lived in Houston for a couple years and, uh, there's this guy, uh, what's his name? Uh, Joel Osteen. Yeah, he's a, he's a big TV pastor and, you know, he's got the old basketball stadium as his church. Like, it's 15,000 people. And I went to it a couple of times. I'm just fascinated by it. Again, another high openness thing. I like, I want to see what the low openness people do, right? Uh, uh, uh, and, and they, it, and, you know, it's barely a religion. I mean, it's, like, he said, Jesus twice. It's just this prosperity gospel stuff. Yeah. But it's, but it's all, and so it's really heavily customized to what a certain kind of person wants to hear. Um, and that keeps people coming to church, right? Like, it's, you know, it's about how if you have faith, um, and, and, you know, and, and try to look good, you know, you know, like, by a car that's nicer than you can afford. And then God will help you afford it. You know, it's come back. Yeah. Yeah. And, and, and, and so like, you know, but that keeps people going to church, right? They're, it's adaptive in a way that, you know, Catholicism isn't. But it also just rinses the actual religious content out of it. And I think that has a lot to do with, um, with evangelical support for Trump. Um, it's, it's a certain kind of person, but they're, they're, they're, the actual content of their religious convictions is, is, is, it, it, you know, evangelicalism is basically Americanism with a, with a light mom Christian gloss on it. And, and, and it doesn't really, uh, um, it's more political than it is religious. It's more about being against abortion and being, uh, in favor of American exceptionalism, then it really is about, um, you know, exemplifying the lessons of Christ in your personal life activity, right? That, that's not just, and I don't want to, you know, paint with two brad of brush. They're, they're, they're, they're, they're, man, a deeply devoted evangelicals who are, uh, who spend all their time, uh, helping people in need. Um, but there's, there's, there's just a, but there's also just a very vulgar self expressive version of it that, that isn't really about anything other than the expression of a suite of right leaning. Well, they can seem very, weird, uh, bizarre to outsiders that people whose self identity is so centered around their Christianity and religiosity are, uh, fervent supporters of Donald Trump for a whole bunch of different reasons. But, um, I mean, mate, so maybe the diagnosis is on the table. I want to sort of move on to prescriptions in a couple of ways, unless you think we've missed anything that, you know, you wanted to say about the overall picture you're painting. No, no, I think we got most of it in. Yeah, I mean, I think that, uh, there's two big things looming in my mind here. One is, you, you make a point that people like to do these maps of the United States and who voted red and who voted blue and especially if you do it the county level, the blue counties are very, very tiny. And in a sense, that's because you're just painting by acreage, right? Yes, it's absolutely true that most of the acres, most of the land area in the United States voted for Donald Trump, but most of the people voted for Hillary Clinton. They also, most of the people voted for Democratic Senate candidates, but they didn't win. Uh, and you make the extra point that a vast majority of the GDP voted for Hillary Clinton, right? There's much greater economic, um, productivity in the, in the blue regions than there are in the red ones. But furthermore, the trends are all in the direction of increasing representation for those blue areas in various reasons. So it paints a picture where the Republican Party forget about conservative versus liberal ideological designations, but as an institution, the Republican Party is taking advantage of certain not really democratic features of our Republican government, the Senate, the Supreme Court, the electoral college, but that can't go on forever, right? And, you know, are we facing at some point, a tipping point, as we started talking in the conversation about a tipping point where the Republican Party just collapses and, you know, gets 30% of the vote share and is in the wilderness for 15, 20 years. Well, we think a lot about that at the Nisgetten Center, because one of our big projects is trying to kind of restore a, a moderate element to the Republican Party, you know, the more that
