 Hello everybody and welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host Sean Carroll. And I don't want to waste your time with Banta today because we have a very special guest. We're very happy to have Winton Marcellus join us on the podcast. If you are in any sense a jazz fan, Winton Marcellus is the proverbial guy who needs no introduction. He's been acclaimed as a trumpet player of course but also as a composer, a band leader, and also an educator and an ambassador for jazz music worldwide. He's the winner of multiple Grammy Awards. He was the first jazz musician and he'd the first non-classical musician to win a Pulitzer Prize, countless honorary degrees, national awards, etc. He's recorded a huge number of albums as a leader of small ensembles, big bands, and in collaboration with a diverse group of people from Willie Nelson to Eric Clapton to traditional musicians around the world. He's also the founder and leader of Jazz at Lincoln Center, which joins things like the Metropolitan Opera and the New York Philharmonic in residence at Lincoln Center. Not only that, but he is a classical musician who both composes and plays trumpet with symphony orchestras. He won a Grammy for that too. So you get the point. Winton Marcellus is arguably the most important figure alive in jazz today and certainly enormously influential in how we think about music. He and I got to meet at a nice event called Kent Presents. This is an ideas festival in Connecticut sponsored by Ben and Donna Rosen. And we hit it off immediately. He's very curious guy. He wanted to know about physics and things like that. We have a wide-ranging, bouncy conversation. And if you don't like jazz, if you've never heard of Winton Marcellus, no problem. I would still recommend listening to this episode. This is not one of those conversations where we just sort of name drop our favorite musicians or artists from the past or from the present. Winton Marcellus is an opinionated guy. He always has been. That's one of his trademarks all along. And he gives us some of his opinions. Not just about music, but about the state of the world, the state of the country, the state of education in the United States. We talk about physics, we talk about time and quantum mechanics. This is your chance to spend an hour with a brilliant creative person with an open, fertile mind. We had a great time and I hope you will too. So let's go. Did you know Fast Growing Trees is the biggest online nursery in the US. With thousands of different plants and over 2 million happy customers. They have all the plants your yard needs. Like fruit trees, privacy trees, flowering trees, shrubs and so much more. Whatever plants you're interested in, Fast Growing Trees has you covered. Find the perfect fit for your climate and space. Fast Growing Trees makes it easy to get your dream yard. Order online and get your plants delivered directly to your door in just a few days without ever leaving home. Their alive and thrive guarantee ensures your plants arrive happy and healthy. This spring they have the best deals for your yard up to half off on select plants and other deals. And listeners to our show get 15% off their first purchase while using the code Mindscape at checkout. That's an additional 15% off at fastgrowingtrees.com using the code Mindscape at checkout. Fastgrowingtrees.com code Mindscape. Now's the perfect time to plant. Use Mindscape to save today. Offers valid for limited time, terms and conditions may apply. The End The End The End Winston Marcellus, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. All right, this is such a pleasure, Sean. Thank you. So I understand that your first paying gig was as a funk musician, is that right? That's right. That's right. This is the 1970s, this is the bell bottoms, the big hair, the whole bit. That's right. Early in that, yeah, we played an elementary school dance. An elementary school dance, all right. You recompense for this? You get paid? We had paid $100. It was five of us. So it was $20 a person. And what were you playing? We played. It was just stuff it was I want to radio at that time, but we had learned, we had learned maybe 15 songs or 20 songs or 20 songs in three minutes. It was a dance three hours. So we played the 20 songs. We were like, okay, that's it. Everybody was like, hey, we still have two more hours to go. So we just played those songs in a loop. They can still dance. We played with a loop hoping over again. So we always laugh about that, about that job. But there is something special about jazz, right? I mean, what in your mind is what makes jazz special? I think that the three fundamentals of the music, improvisation, to some type of grid. So you can improvise, but you have some restraint. Right. The swing, which means you improvise with other people. And there are things that govern how you will interact with each other. But those things, you also choose them. So if you're a heavy swinger, you choose to be in the groove and you choose to give some points over the people. If you're not, you don't. And then the blues, which is an optimism in spite of all evidence to the contrary. Aha. So explain that. And it's like in the words of a blues, I went down to the real role, put my head on the track. I went down to the real role, put my head on the track. When that train came along, I snatched my fool. He had back. So there's something in there. So the blues is sort of about living through life, right? Not giving up. Living is about an optimism is not naive. And to say more about swing in particular, because I've had talks with musician friends. I'm not a musician myself. I appreciate the music very much. But swing is, there's other genres of music that improvise. The blues is a genre all by itself, but swing is something that is unique to jazz. Physics. It's relational. Right. And it's quantifiable. It's the reconciliation of opposites. So if you look at swing as a concept, whatever it takes for you to give from the eye consciousness to the weak consciousness is swinging. Now when you embrace that in such a way that you're in a groove and you make all these little adjustments that are required to not just endure another person or to tolerate them, but you embrace them, then you swing. So when you look at it as a concept, it is a six rhythm. You want to take a 4-rhythm. 1,2,3,4,1,2,3,4... Tink, tink, tink, tink, tink, tink, tink, tink, tink, tink... Now on the micro level, where it shows up is if you start to play fast. And you go... Lalalalalalalalal… You can't go… You have to go to the little, you shuffling. So that's a two and a three also. So instead of it being tattatattata, it's tattatata, tattatata, tattatata, tattatata, tattatata, tattatata, it's difficult to kind of negotiate the feeling of that odd and even at the same time. It's the swing is the bass, which is the lowest pitch played in four, on every beat, match with the drums, this in six, which the symbol is the highest pitch. And the pitch that you can hear the most. So you have all these extremes. Sounds like the drummer has a tough job there. The drummer has a tough job, it's a president. You can just choose to just bowl everybody over, but great drummers, they'll see a great drummer as kind. They use their power very intelligently and sparingly. And it sounds like it's about, I mean, so much music is about tension in some sense, right? I mean, it's a competition between what you expect, the sort of natural, easy rhythm pattern, versus a little bit of what doesn't quite belong, it drives you forward, right? I'm interested in how you would see that, in relation to some concepts that you work on, where you have opposite things, they come together and you say, man, these two things are together, I never would have thought these things come together to. Yeah, it's all over the place. I mean, physics, science is driven by what we don't understand. We're trying to leap into the places that we don't yet understand. Science, professional scientists don't spend their time doing homework problems that the college students do. And so what is the way to make progress? It's to pinpoint two things that you both think are true, but they don't agree with each other, right? And that's where all progress comes from. So the big one right now in physics is, we have quantum mechanics, we have gravity, and they don't play well together. And their intention, right? And we're trying to figure out, it's one of them better, it's one of them more fundamental, or is it we got to start all over again? And it's sort of the source of creativity a little bit, right? And it seems to be much about creativity. Yes, about creativity at the point of impact. I was also interested in your comments about time. Because in jazz, you live in the future. You progress from the future to the past. Okay, that's what I was like. Yeah, in the future, but you're going into the past. You're moving forward into the past. You're not moving forward into the future. Now you're gonna have to break that down for me. Okay, you are in the future. Like now the future's past, okay? So we are all in the future. Good. And then we pass through the present into our cognizance of that present, which is then passed. Okay. So jazz is a mastery of a moment of presentness. So the future becomes what you think may perhaps happen with the form at a given space and time. Right? And the challenge of jazz, when you're actually playing it, is how can I deal with it with all of the entropic moments of this present and give it organization and logic and form with a group of other people who have no idea what they're gonna play until they play it? Well, that's, I wanted to ask you about this. I mean, so there's the individual improvising and there's the group. But let's just do the individual first. I think that's probably easier to wrap our brains around, right? I mean, do you go into an improvisation to a solo with a plan or is it literally right there what you're feeling? I never do that. Yeah, every person is different. I like to be present. So I'm going to be present. I like to be present. So I don't have a plan. My one plan is to take thematic material and develop it in some type of interesting way to me. So is that the chords or the melody? The chord, the chords or the playing field. It's like football field. You know what I mean? That's the arena. So you know what football field, the sidelines, the harmonies progress in a certain way and there's some alterations, but they are the harmonies. And they're laid out in time. So like you look at a clock, you lose 12 numbers and you know where you are when you look at those hands, you know, that's our harmonic form is. You know where you are by the progression of harmonies. And you also have to get back to. You know where when you get back to the top, but the top may be different, but the harmony is basically the same. But it's because chords have different root notes and they're also way to substitute chords. It's kind of like the directions to your home. You give me 50 sets of directions that incorporate different streets. In the general direction, we'll be out of different ways. You can express an equation with different numbers. We're playing on that playing field. So now we know that. Then we have to be in time. And the concept of time in jazz is probably the most kind of physics related. Because you're not in time, like one, two, three, four time, you know what we call swing time. And it's not being on time, it's being in time. And that time is like a wave because everybody is talking and pulling at it. Right. Yeah, that's how you, when you mention how important it is in physics, that's exactly right. Like so much of physics about waves and the resonance, the beating together and the interference when they're going in different directions, right? What do I'm more interested in? What does the degree of interference determine something about the wave or does a wave just continue the way it is? Yeah, it can be either way, right? So I think that physicists love to start with the simplest thing first, right? So the simplest thing is, yeah, the waves, if you have two different waves and they're coming into the same place, they do their own individual thing and then they keep going. And at that moment, they might interfere or constructively interfere, which is a sort of contradiction in terms, which means they add up together, right? So we teach our students that first and then the next thing we teach is well, what if these waves are talking to each other, right? Like what if they interact with each other? And these days, we think our best theories of the world are quantum field theories, where the world is this collection of fields pervading all of space. And what we think of as particles are vibrations in these fields, right? And if you make a new particle, that's because you, in fact, the analogy I use is, if someone's playing a piano, and there's another piano in the room, the other piano starts humming a little bit, right? That's how you create new particles in particle physics. Kind of sympathetic vibration. Exactly that, that's right. Yeah, that's exactly what jazz is like. Like a lot of times you can anticipate what somebody is gonna play. Or you can feel in a certain way. And sometimes they do the opposite, and that's okay too. Yeah, because it's really a, it's like super conversation. No wrong notes, right? Well, yeah. You know, there are actually no wrong notes. They're only awkward moments in non-resolutions and lack of confidence in a, you have to hear your way out of problems. It's kind of like you're having a conversation, somebody is, awkward moments. Even with awkward kind of, yeah. But it's fascinating when you get a lot of people improvising who really can play how they're all here and interpret the moments, because it's a successive moments of crisis. It's always a crisis. Every moment is a crisis. And when the band stops, it's a break, and only you play, then it's really a crisis for you because you have to maintain them, momentum and the identity. Can't we know that everybody else? No, they're gone. Then they come back in. So you, you know, our thing is really about mastery of time. And the mastery of time is an individual thing on one level, but in a jazz sense, and in a swing sense, it's mastery of the fluctuations of time with other people. Yeah, and that's where swing comes in. You know, you're just pushing up against the obvious regular beat, right? You have the obvious regular beat is a constant that you all know. But the swing is your, all of you all's interpretation of that constant. Right. And how you can negotiate that constant and make it feel good. And you know, sometimes these solos can get pretty long. You can go on for a long time. How, how much of it is conscious, would you say? Like, could you even remember the solilo that you played? No, you can't remember it, but it is conscious like when you speak it's conscious. Okay. Like you weren't using notes when you were talking, when you were lectured out of the day. Right. But you knew what you were talking about. And you went to the general outline of what I was going to say. But I had a plan going in, right? And the form gives us a plan. Yeah. So when I say I don't have a plan, the form gives you some type of plan. It's a, and then I tend to take things from the musicians I'm playing with. Like when they play stuff, I play things. And I think that my solos, I try to really think about construction. Okay, what do you mean by that? I mean, how am I going to give from this point by turning phrases around or how am I going to, make a cohesive and coherent statement? You're telling a story. Tell them how am I going to tell that story? Beginning, middle and end. You can follow it, right? And how can I get all these little subplots and interesting things and change the emotions of different moments and add things and... This episode of Mindscape is sponsored by BetterHelp. When it comes to relationships, we often hear about the red flags we should avoid. But what if we focus more on looking for the green flags in friends and partners? If you're not sure what green flags look like, therapy could help you identify them. Actively practice them in your relationships and embody the green flag energy yourself. Whether you're dating, married, building a friendship, or just working on yourself, it's time to form relationships that love you back. One of the great things about therapy is by looking inside yourself, you can both learn to take those warning signs seriously, but also learn to be open to new experiences and new things. To know when something might be worth pursuing. BetterHelp is a fully online service that makes therapy affordable and convenient, serving over 5 million people worldwide. You can easily switch therapists any time at no extra cost. So discover your relationship green flags with BetterHelp. Visit betterhelp.com-mindscape today to get 10% off your first month. That's BetterHelp-H-E-L-P-D.com-mindscape. A lot of us start the new year saying that we will learn a new language, but it's hard to actually commit to it. Vappel makes it easy to learn one in less time than you think. Vappel's quick 10 minute lessons handcrafted by over 200 language experts, get you to begin speaking your new language in three weeks or whatever pace you choose. And because conversing is the key to really understanding each other in new languages, Vappel is designed using practical, real world conversations. What I love about Vappel is you can either dive in deeply and truly get fluent, or you can just master some of the basics before going on a trip. So let's get more of you talking in a new language. Vappel is gifting our listeners 60% off subscriptions at babble.com-mindscape. Get up to 60% off at babble.com-mindscape. Spelled B-A-B-B-E-L.com-mindscape. That's babble.com-mindscape rules and restrictions may apply. And it is usually in this group context, right? And as impressed and overwhelmed as I am with a master improviser, I'm even more impressed that people can do it together, right? And how much of it is, I see on the bandstand, people looking at each other, like the players. How much communication is a lot? Is it planned out? Is it nearly just you sense it? No, there's so much communication. And that's what I love the most about playing. It's playing with other people. There's so much communication, like shifting beats. Are you really in your solo? Is that really the chord you want to play? Where are we? Oh, okay. Are you going to play a riff there? It's so much of it. It's like, it's so, it's in its very intense. It's like an intense, an intense emotional and mind game with other people in its all benevolent. Like, it's none of it is because the swing is a reference and it makes you, if you want to swing, it makes you have a constant that you all agree on. Yeah, okay. It's like kind of like what the constitution is supposed to be. Right. You have to agree on something. Something has to have meaning in order for us to have a meaningful dialogue. And there's to be some arbiter, something that we both are okay. Let's not otherwise, it just noise, right? It was just, let's not sell this to our kids. That's right. You know, not less, less, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And I mean, Jazz is, you mentioned in the, we just, for the podcast listeners out there, we just got finished with some remarks that Winston made here on stage. And you also mentioned the Americanness of it, right? I mean, there's something. Yes. For better, for worse, right? Mostly for better, but Jazz is part of America, and America is part of jazz. Well, I don't think for worse, the worst is a part of better. Yeah, okay. You know, you can't, it's like what you was saying, when you gave us the examples of entropy, one is nothing, then is some things, then it's, you know, have one of all one thing. Right. If everything's too simple, nothing interesting has happened. And that's the famous Shakespeare to be or not to be. Yes. That's gonna be one of those, or maybe. Right. That's right. Like, you know, and all the kind of greatest artists have that kind of dichotomous unity. They understand, that's why Shakespeare and villain is so great. Oh yeah. He understands, there's something in something noble in this villain, there's a humanity in the villain, and a kind of simplistic way of looking into the world, does not work well for democracy. And Jazz is, it came from the most maligned group, people that had been slaves, but they didn't play jazz when they were in slavery. They played jazz when they became free. And freedom is something that has, has not been guaranteed to people in the world throughout time. No. If you go throughout time, most groups of people have been dominated, or they have been beaten. It's not to be subjugated to the will of a personal group of people is not something that's only about the United States of America. Most of the greatest heroes that we celebrate, our military heroes, that defeated people, and engaged in absolute murder, concubinage and slavery. That's what they were talking about. That's what he was conquering. Yeah. And America is a hope to, the hope that we have to change, and it's difficult, and it's challenging. And we at this moment appear to not be up to that challenge, but when we actually understand what's going on in the world, and that the democracy, and even the thought that there is equality, it's not something that's guaranteed. Your side is not guaranteed to win. No. There's a lot of power. And by that, I don't mean in a fear of another nation. I mean a fear of an ideology, which says, the hell with these people, which is what has dominated the world most of the time. And it has even been dominant in our country's leadership, if not its people. But a democracy is a place where you can lose an election and give up power willingly, right? You don't think so. You're supposed to. You're supposed to. And you also, yeah, you're also supposed to agree on a set of principles. Would you say that jazz is in some sense a democratic form of music compared to others? Absolutely no question about it in every way. We could, I could take you down the constitution, and the separation of powers, and all the things that are the foundation of what we do, the ability to amend the constitution. And the constitution being a very simple frame document, this shorter than every other state constitution. And the repetitiveness of the constitution, from the federal government to the state government to the local government. But when you don't have an agreement on the humanity of other people, then you should subvert the constitution. Yeah, in some sense, I mean, this is what liberal democracy is all about. I had a podcast about liberal democracy, the idea. You don't have to agree with your fellow citizens about values necessarily. You can disagree about fundamental things. But there has to be something shared, right? There has to be something shared that you agree with, and you base everything on that. And a bunch of players up there improvising together, have to be the same way, right? And many times we are not. What is happening with our music and many times, when a person will solo all night, five people will solo forever. Monitors on the bandstand that are louder than the people who are playing all with them in it. The strongest on the bandstand dominating the bass turns the amp up to 15. And then it's very difficult to play the music. And then another thing that happens after that is slavery. And the slavery becomes, this system has too much freedom in it. Let me figure out how to repeat things over and over again, so that we do away with some of this freedom. And that's the direction we will go in. If we listen to, if we check out the way systems are slowly beginning to dominate everything. And our systems macro thinkers are very powerful. And we don't realize that when you play a system of very intelligently designed system out to the furthest extreme of its efficiency, many of these systems don't include people. It has to be something else. Just the machine. It's just the machine. And it's just, we don't need you. Then after we don't need you, we don't want to see you. And so you're saying we can think of jazz as a little bit of protest against this tendency. What it's at is best to be even in jazz, right? In any form of art, you can always denigrate into something. Right. Where it's a great man with an ego. A lot of it though. A lot of the tenants in the best of it, the recorded history of it. And jazz is also not anti the machine. It's not we are against the machine. We are against the abuse of tools. And we are, we are for the basic principles of our, we have government. And our music has a history that demonstrates that. Duke Ellington's orchestra demonstrated that. Pity Goodman's orchestra demonstrated that. Dave Rubach's ensemble, John Coltrane, art blinking the jazz. Because we have people up to people, Charles Mekas. And they were also able to express that. And did express it. So it was not something that was speculating on. Yeah, yeah. And so what, I mean, jazz has an interesting position in history in the United States. And right now, right? I mean, there's not a lot of radio stations out there that play primarily jazz. I mean, you've been as influential as anybody in not just keeping jazz alive, but keeping it vibrant and making sure that people are educated about it. And how important is that to you? It's very important for us to be educated about our country. We've stopped civics. You know, we have to understand it. That for democracy to work, we have to be rabid about education. Right. Rabid, not about propaganda. Because I'm not a kind of left-right person. I left it all of that. Because for me, it's like, it's like subterfuge. You know, it's like you and your friend start a fight in a, in a, in a store. And another one of your friends is going for the cash register. Now, all you have to do is get a black and a white friend, call each other name. Everybody's looking at it. Yeah. That's all fake. Like, it's not people, people are making money and they're exploiting the one of the biggest problems we have. And it happens in jazz as the greatest players have to sacrifice for lesser players. Like the great Art Blaky allowed me to learn on his bandstand. I wasn't bringing anything to him. He had to be willing to sacrifice for me to learn. When you get the most educated class, waging war on the uneducated class, man, you have a hard time. You're not going to get the same thing that you get with the Ku Klux Klan or somebody shouting and calling people names. You're going to get contracts. You get the subprime loan scandal. You can get all the things that you see that are systems that play out on people who can't assess their position, their position in space. I mean, were you, I probably know the answer to this, but how much of this was in your brain when you were 12 years old and first learning to play the trumpet? You know a lot of it. Yeah. I didn't know it was about playing the trumpet, but my, my, my, my daddy were very conscious because then my father's jazz musician. And you just saw anyone knows you're from New Orleans. From New Orleans? New Orleans guy. And my mother was very conscious about reading the stand on top of stuff being engaged. My father was very conscious. So I would always just be around listening to all of them talk. And I didn't understand, of course, what I understand now, but I knew that you needed to know about the country. You needed to follow things. You needed to be, and that was in a time of consciousness. You know, I was a kid through the 60s. So people were conscious. Yeah. There was something that Word was talked about, right? Talked about the pop music was conscious. Even it was just Stevie Wonder's music, Marvin Gays music was going on for just average kind of citizenness out here. It doesn't have an artist, father, or mother. They were still engaged in making things better and being a part of a larger thing. Right. We lost that momentum, of course, over time, because it's difficult to maintain that level of engagement with each other without being predatory. We celebrate predators. Well, it's natural to sort of devolve into conflict, right? Like we try to talk to each other, we try to disagree. Again, this is something that I hope the podcast helps to spread the idea we can disagree. Still be friends. Go out for the beer after, but it becomes harder and harder, especially in a very shouting age. A shouting ideological age that is not respectful of any fact. It's also true. That is right. There has to be some fact that we agree on. We're in Louisiana. Okay, that's a fact. Let's just start with that. And that's why I try to explain things in a human context. Like the musicians I knew, whether I argued with them or not, when we talk to each other, we're talking about human things, right? Not my philosophy about this style of music. It was my mama is dying or my son told me the other day, or can you believe that I always had dyslexia and I was always ashamed. You know what I mean? Absolutely. I mean, when you try to be a communicator of science, even though science is based on facts and you should all agree to them, if you really want to get things across, you have to be likeable. You have to relate it to people's interests, right? You know, people care about what matters for their lives. That's not surprising at all. But that's what you're wonderful at. Like when I first talked to you, you were very approachable. I started asking you about entanglement and will the universe just continue to expand? Yeah. And you started to give me very concrete kind of breakdowns of what something was and the way that I could understand it and you're friendly. I think it matters. You know, and honestly, to give credit where credit is due, my wife gets a lot of credit to this. I'm a scientist by training. She's a writer by training. So she's helped me in the communication skills. But so you went from this kid in a sort of household where all these ideas were talked about in a very musical household, obviously, playing all sorts of things. Now you're the director of jazz at Lincoln Center. And that's a responsibility, right? That's not, I mean, how do you think of that role? I mean, you're a musician. You play the trumpet. You're a composer, but then you're also an ambassador, right? Yeah, I'm honored to be an air role. You know, I mean, I love people. I like to talk about the music and to be a part of people's lives and to recognize other people, Jazz Lincoln Center is our basic tenets of what we do. We entertain. We educate and we advocate for jazz through performance through education and through advocacy. We try to bring people together around the music. We have a very simple kind of down home type of welcome vibration. We have no generation gap. Oh, that's true. Okay. That's what we do about that. Yeah. We stress no generation gap, no segregation and all of our music is modern. Uh-huh. We don't separate it in the kind of time periods. We believe the music does have fundamentals. We don't believe everything is horn is jazz. Yeah. But we're not against things that are not jazz. We just are in favor of jazz. And we've been blessed to work with, I mean, we've collaborated with so many musicians in different cultures and played with, uh, some of your favorites. Yeah, tell them your favorites. Man, I, you know, I could just tell you a couple of stories. One is a great master drummer from Ghana, Yakubadi. He passed away. I did a piece called Congo Square with him. It took me ten years to write this piece. I used to play in rhythm. I couldn't figure out because his style of music they play in two times at once. So I'm counting and doing all Western. There's not a kid who I taught when he was younger grew old enough. He started playing with an orchestra. His name is Carlos Enriquez and he's from the Afro Latin tradition. So he grew up playing on claves. So we're close enough like he's really like my little brother. So he was always in my, so I said, man, why is this sad? And we put it on. He started to interpret like kind of what the claves you're doing. This is where one is. This is what we need to do. He could translate for me. He could translate for me. So he translated for me. And Jakub once funny stories. He was playing a rhythm. He said, I brother, this is a royal rhythm. A royal rhythm. I said, don't sound royal to me. I'm American. We don't have royalty. And he said, that is why you will never play it correctly. Well, he led you up to that and you jumped right there. You know what I'm saying? And Kurt Mazzur was the conductor of New York Philharmonic. He had grown up in Germany during a period of the Nazis. And he asked me to write a piece for the Philharmonic. And he said, he wanted the piece to celebrate humanity and people coming together. And he told me, I never forget. He said, you have no idea of how thin the veneer is. And how he's so good. Well, he's so good. And people will cheerly the very opposite. He said, and you have to be mindful of how fragile all of this is. And when you write this music, be cognizant of the fragility and be strong in an indictment of those things that are against human beings. Here's a tip for growing your business. Get the VentureX business card from Capital One and start earning a limited double miles on every purchase. That's right. With unlimited double miles, the more your business spends, the more miles you earn. Plus, the VentureX business card has no preset spending limit. So your purchasing power can adapt to meet your business needs. The VentureX business card also includes access to over 1,000 airport lounges. Just imagine where the VentureX business card from Capital One can take your business. Capital One, what's in your wallet? Terms and conditions apply. Find out more at capitalone.com slash venture xbusiness. Well, music speaks directly to our emotions, right? And for better, that's for better for worse. So you can excite us for the good things and it can be used as propaganda for the less good things. I mean, what do you think about the state of jazz today that's not too grandiose a question? Well, I think most of the young musicians demoralize the mainly commercial music. Their interest is like the state of our country. We are consumed with rampant commercialism and materialism that is destroying our human connections. It's our front. It's embarrassing. It's just kind of open corruption. And we have to get on track. And we're a long way away. It's not because of the president. He's, of course, a shining symbol of it. But it's not because of him. It predates long before that. And I don't like when it's reduced to him because it keeps us from addressing the issue. There's deeper things going on. Much deeper than one guy. Much deeper, much deeper. And we have taught it to our kids. We've used them as a market. They're not being sold to and exploited from a very young age. They can't defend themselves. We're not defending them. And music is a large part of the exploitation. Now pornography is a fact of kids' lives. It leads them into their rituals of courtship and their development. Of course, I'm from older generations. I don't understand all of the nuances of it, the tender and everything. But I mean, no, it's not even so much a specific thing. It's just how many acts you can see. Every generation lives in a different world. Yeah, everybody says that. But it's like you're working on a heart attack, too. You have it. You tell somebody, man, you have a heart attack. They say, I haven't had one. You haven't had one. But there's going to come a point where the kind of dissent you're going to reach. There's a thought that because there's always misinformation and the conflation of fact, and there's always a kind of alarmist, the past is better. If you touched on that, too, I love one thing you said. I took my notes. I could get on my phone. But you said there are more. The gist of it is that there are fewer plausible paths than there are possible futures. Exactly. That's what you said. I love that. That's right. So the tendency is to always think the past was so glorious. And I'm not coming from there at all. I'm just saying that we, our kids are not a market. And our celebration of the market and of money is damaged our sense of the primacy of humanity. And that should be first. It should be first in our education. Left or right. It's not from the right and it's not from the left. It's from all of it. And it's starting to rot. And we got to wake up. But it's tough. You got to earn a living if you want to be a professional musician. Being a jazz musician is hard, right? You know, let it be hard. Yeah, you told the story about your father. Could you tell us that? I grew up watching my father just struggling and not make money. You know, he's always playing for three and four people, five, eight people in a room. And I just wondered over all these years, man, why do you keep doing this? And he said, somebody's got to do this. Why? You know, people need to be there. Nobody's here. The people don't want this. It's like, why? Why? It's a musical cast meaning. But to who? Nobody is in there. It means something to me. And sometimes you have to be the one to say the Constitution has meaning. I am going to be civil. And I'm not going to just let the fact that somebody's paying me some money affect my ideology. The fact that we're our somebody who's given a tax break means that we should have policies that put people unjustly in jail. And it's not just a problem of those people. We're all those people. And that kind of super consciousness, we don't have that type of leadership. Not because of the president. No, I get it. And in no way am I supporter of the president's agenda, social agenda, in no way. You can't come from my background in support using people, Mexican people, and Arabs, and Black people. You can't support that. They're coming from where I come from. But once again, I don't want to pin a national problem on a figure that is actually doing a bidding of a large part of the nation. Yeah. And one of the ways I think about this is how hard it is to be generous, right? To be generous to someone who we don't agree with. How easy it is to declare someone bad or evil because they're not on our side and how hard it is to work together with people who are against us in some ways. Oh, yeah. To get in there, like you, you was saying, to get in there with someone who has a different point of view who can help you. Sometimes you have a figure that you cannot work with, which may be the case in this instance. But for our nation, the divisiveness did attack all of us, regardless of who the president is, on an atomic level, we're responsible. And you've composed many things, and you obviously have quite a discography. And sometimes, instrumental, sometimes there's words in there. And your words are pretty unsparing. You don't mess around, right? No, I'm very direct. And I try to be as honest as I can be. As honest as I can be at the time with the information I have. And everything is not right. But it's as right as I can feel when I write a piece, I think is serious. And I don't care who doesn't like it. And I don't mind them expressing that they don't like it. That's one of the strengths of our way of life. We should all strive for that attitude. I would love to be able to do that. It's what I try to do. Yeah, we can't stop them. And do you see the younger people today? Are they, is there a jazz following out there? I don't see that much of a following with the younger people because the younger people are marketing. We're trying to sell things to them. And their largely this sexuality has been co-opted by visual images. And jazz is about music and its quality. You have to take the time. And we are not interested in teaching how younger people, how to take time and to be a part of our way of life. I do think there's room for optimism in the sense that technology, et cetera, has given people more room to be creators, to be innovators themselves. Is that too optimistic? Am I a Muslim Dixie? No, no, I think there's always a... I teach a lot of students that I always tell them, what they're going to do, I cannot see that. I give them some information that they can use and what they're going to do. But they have to do what they are going to do. And I try to... The biggest thing I see in my students is the ones who are really creative, suffer the greatest failure of optimism and of belief. It's easy for them to become cynical and just say, I'm just going to make some money. I'm just going to dump my music down. I just, I need to get a public. Like, I can't just be out here. I don't... It's hard to keep their belief strengthened so that they can be innovative as musicians, right? Because the music they're hearing, a lot of it, is like wallpaper, like it's being made by a person on a computer. And it's not like a democratic music. It's not that people are not even in this room at the same time. They're making an artifact, right? Which is a... Can be very creative. You and beings are creative in anything we do. It doesn't... It doesn't matter. For jazz musicians, it's not optimal for us because our music is very much human. You're sneaking looks over the bass player and the drummer, right? Yeah. What changes are you going to connect? It's about human beings and how are we in a rack? Not about our tools that we have developed. I mean, you play obviously a lot at Lincoln Center. You played large concerts, but there is something romantic about being in, with one or two other people up there in a tiny stage, right? Yeah, I love it, but I love in any context. Just, you know, it is, of course, when you're in a small place. I guess also for me is how I grew up. So a small place with no people in it, I'm at home. Oh, man. I get down to 230 in the morning. That's what I knew. That's jazz time as far as I can. That's what I knew. And, but it's not all you do. You've also been very successful in the classical music world. And how do you mentally sort of make that leap, or do you even see a difference between jazz and classical music? It is a difference, then, in procedure and training, in the style of music, but classical music is one of the foundations of jazz. So I also love that music. I don't play as much, but I do write pieces for orchestras. And I use the experience I had playing for many years. I love playing an orchestra playing all the great orchestral pieces. And I do feel that that is a library that is so phenomenal that we sell that library short. I always wonder, well, never forget about the power of this library. So what are some of your favorite classical pieces, man? I can't, I could start with any symphony of Hayden, any ball of Beethoven symphonies, Beethoven string quartets, all the box music is great, doesn't even matter what you listen to. Palace Strener, Pope Marcellus Mass. I just, I like the name, but as a unbelievable piece, Bartok, Concerto for Orchestra, Stravinsky, any, whatever you think you pick, Ligetti does make, I mean, you can just go on and on and on. It's fantastic, Brahms, fantastic library, Mahler Strauss. I just, I'm very thankful that I was able to develop the ability to hear that library in high school, because when I started, I couldn't hear that kind of music at all. And I thought it was only for white people. But to be able to overcome that ignorance and that prejudice and actually listen to the music, it's akin to a person who doesn't know what jazz is. Like if you can get to where you can hear John Coltrane's music, the Philonius Monk, the Wellington Count Basie. And you know it's a struggle, you have to work on it. But if you get to where you can hear it, it's so many unbelievable riches and classical music is man, you just shot the COVID. Actually, shot the COVID, seven symphony. If you can get to where you can hear that, I strongly encourage you to develop a taste for it, because these were very, very serious people who sacrificed a great deal for music and had extreme insight into the nature of many things. And there's also sort of a, I mean, especially if you're a kid, there's just a coolness barrier, right? Like when I first started listening to jazz, sure, Miles Davis, John Coltrane, Charlie Parker. And it was years later that I started listening to Duke Wellington. And I was like, where if I bit? Where, where? You're like, do it, man. OK, you know what's happening. Yeah, I was like that too. I didn't like Duke. Big band music, man like Jared Tal, all the way back. That's like your grandparents listen to that. Yeah, that's it. So we have the same experience with it. And with that kind of quality music, I feel of any tradition. It could be tango music of, of, of, of, of, of, of, of, of, I was, I was listening to it was my man. I always forget people's names. I was checking out my, my tango orchestras from the 1950s and 60s. And I was like, man, listen to this. And I was Brazilian music of more serenstals. There, there are these figures in every culture that, that, that were deeply engaged with the music of their, of their, their culture. Yeah. And they created things that, when, when we touched them, Horatio Salgán, as the person, I was like, in, in tango music. And when you, when you include them into your listening, they, they, they lift you. Yeah. And do you incorporate classical elements into your jazz, and proposing an advice versus show? Yeah. Yes. It's only, it's only natural you would use contrapono elements that come from classical music, harmonic, devices, orchestration, techniques. Why not? Would you talk about the physical universe? No, I know. It's all the waves. But would there be the kind of improvisation that you do in jazz that would sneak its way? No. Sometimes pianists, right? Yeah. When you, when you were a classical musician, an orchestra, no. But I had an idea for, for one other, the other day of a, how could you get everybody to improvise, not in a vocabulary, this jazz, like an arrhythmic vocabulary. And in a non-harmonic vocabulary, I figured out how I want to write a symphony, this all with a lot of improvisation in it. You have to feel, figure out the improvisation, not in the jazz context. Right. You can use the same forms, but you have to give the different sections because you have 70 people, you know us. Well, like I said, improvising multiple people at once. Actually, you said something earlier today that was fascinating about just, you know, two trumpet players up on stage. And the phrase you used over and over again was sharing space. And that's, that's the trick, right? Yeah. So, you know, the space is complicated, you and your wife, you and your brothers, your sister, you and yourself, you know. You make space for yourself. Now it's two of us. So, there's less and there's more at the same time. There's less flusty, but there's more. Right. Yeah. There's more variety, there's more inspiration, there's more tension, creative task crew, right? Yeah. Yeah. So much improvisation is done in the soloing context, right? I mean, how often do we get five, six, seven people literally improvising? Well, very difficult, but if you give five or six different functions, you can get it. Yep. But if five or six of them are playing in the same functional space, the same role is very hard for that to sound good, unless that's the point of it. Then it can sound great, you know, it just be, this is a texture of five or six people soloing. He also played with country artists, with rock and roll artists. I only found out last night when I was anticipating this interview that you did a whole album with Eric Clapton. Right. It was, and we were playing blues. Yeah. Well, there's a common language. There's a common language. It's, we, our language is so much more common than the language we spoke with Yaku. Right. I mean, and, and, what's about like Eric, who loves blues and is studied and played it. He said, we were going to do King Oliver's band, orchestration, with blues songs. So with some of the basis of rock and roll is blues. Rock and roll started as shuffles. The Count Basis Orchestra would play, which became played by Louis Jordan's band. And then it went on to be that. Later it became segregated in America and it stood for white. But that had nothing to do with the music. I remember you know, so I was growing up 70s and 80s just a little bit after you and you know, living color, of course. And I was a huge fan and I was like shocked to learn that here was a rock and roll hard rock band. They were all African American and people objected to that. They're like, what are these African Americans doing playing rock and roll? And I was like, what, where did you come from? Isn't that? Where at all originated? Yeah. You know, I mean, I don't even, I don't even, I don't even, so many different kind of people. I used to have a friend who would say people say this. He said, there's a lot of people. There's a lot of people. People say things. Yeah, they do. Yeah, I remember, for a read I think. Yeah, for a reader's guitarist for the color. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. New York in the 80s. That's right. Exactly. And now you waited into hot water recently, right? Talking about hip hop. It's not hot water to me. It's good to like the hot water. But so what are your feelings about hip hop for those of you? I was not speaking of hip hop as a feel. I was talking about specifically the use of certain words that I don't like. To be mainstream words. Yeah. I first started saying that in 1987, now it's 2018. So the public has made this decision. They like that. They want that. Let's not forget the menstrual show lasted for 100 years. If you count 1840 to the end of Amos and Andy. There is a taste in our country for that. I don't share that taste. So if it's, if it gets me in hot water because I say I don't share it and you want to truncate what I'm saying to be a blanket indictment of hip hop and make it seem irrational, it's nothing you can do about that. I'm grown. You got to say what you think. I'm a grown man. And I believe that those words are destructive. And they have been destructive because they've been out here for 30 years. They're not, they didn't just get out here. The nation has chosen. They like that. Okay. I have to live with that. But I don't have to like it. So you think it's a coarsening? I think what you think. Yeah. Well, I don't think something. I want to do is look at it. We don't want to be attacked. But we all think something. So you're, there is socially conscious hip hop. There's poetry in hip hop. But I'm not talking about that kind. Right? Yeah, I'm not talking about that kind. Yeah, exactly. And I'm not talking about it itself in a blanket. In any type of blanket kind of crazy, unintelligent way. Whatever it is, this unintelligent, it does not account for the fact that there are many different kinds of a thing. I'm not talking about that. I'm talking about what is in the mainstream from a linguistic standpoint. And I'm not even coming on it musically, which I'm qualified to, but I'm not. That's not what I speak about. You're not going to qualify? I'm not going to come in right now. I'm not going to come in about it. No, because it doesn't matter. There's a direction that all of our music is going in of a kind of way of being produced and a way of being treated as a product. And to segregate hip hop from everything else is unfair. That's a very good point. It doesn't, hip hop doesn't create the universe around it. Right. It's the other way around. No, so, but what I speak about is very specifically about certain languages that I did not like when it was first around. Sure. Then I was young. So sometimes I see young person, well, you're just an old guy who was like, I was saying this before you were born. Right. And once again, the nation has clearly spoken. It likes that. But I knew it liked it. When if my mama told me something when she realized when it stumbled into all of that I'd talk about the words I say I don't like. People, bitches and all that. My mother said, it's going to get unlimited resources now. Yeah, I mean, I feel I like hip hop when it's good. And of course, whether it's good is up to me, right? Is it for anybody? Is it for everybody? But there, you know, some of the classic albums from the some of the early ones, like I can't listen to. It's harsh, right? And it's kind of a shame. It's up to each person. And once again, what we think about it has no impact on who likes it. We're not judges. Like we don't we don't have the opportunity or the ability to pass a sentence on it and keep people from making their records or this is a democracy. Well, we can make them think. Maybe. Yeah. But I've been talking about it for years. I don't think anybody thought about people are making money with it. And it's a national pastime. It's not just something to do with black people. Oh, yeah. No, not at all. It's like a tremendous national taste for this type of imagery. Yeah. And not Justin Hippah, obviously. Right. Not just in Hippah. I'm not a fan of that. Not saying I don't think it should exist. I don't think it should be a mainstream. Right. So, so I'm even qualifying it more. If you want to go somewhere and get stuff, we always had stuff that was like that. Kendrick Lamar, just won the Pulitzer Prize in music. You were the first, is that right? You were the first winner of the Pulitzer Prize in music. Just not classical at all. I think so. Yeah, yeah, that was a great thing. And you know, I don't know a lot about that world. To me, it's probably similar to the Nobel Prize in the sense that there's a lot of bad things about people chasing prizes and things like that. The prize doesn't always go to the best person, but maybe it can help bring some attention to some good work. Yeah, I don't know the prizes. But I don't know. Prizes are as serious as the rigor in which people who hand out the prizes have about them. I think it's good for people to win prizes and to celebrate other people and show up in shows with Tuxedos on because it's fun. I totally agree. And it doesn't mean anything larger than that. I don't really look at it. I remember when I won two Grammys, my father and mother came out to Los Angeles and many other people who should have won could play better than me. So after the grandmas, I was in a room with my father and my father looked at me and said, well, how do Grammys? He didn't eat it. He's not a guy who's Hollywood kind of pop central. He doesn't care about any of that. So he looked at me before I went out in the street to part. He said, yeah, you want two Grammys, man. I'm glad you won. You know, it's been one that's been losing. And he seriously looked at me and said, I hope you don't think that this means you can play. Okay. I was 21. I understood exactly what he meant. But I think the whole point of winning a Grammy is to impress your parents. But he went by, I mean, I knew my father would not be impressed by this world. And he also was not dousing me. He wasn't trying to. He would just say, man, you know, this stuff is not really about, it's fun, but it's not about nothing. Like, you need to learn how to play, son. You play okay, but you're not the best, anything. And in his way, you'd have to know him. In no way was it like a negative or a dousing. I laughed. I thought, man, I know better than this. You know, we go out and party and have a good time. So I've got to win these awards. So I think I congratulate people when they win awards and we keep it moving. Is it going to be another award next year? And it is not, I don't look at them one way or not look at them. I'm not critical or non-critical. What are your goals for your own music in the future? To become better, better musician, right? To become better at dealing with the orchestra, combine more forms and do more things that are interesting than innovative with jazz music and putting it to become a better solo is be more sophisticated in my understanding of different forms around the world. And I would just be more dedicated and humbler about my development. These are good goals for everybody. But I'll say also, you know, we're here at this conference with, you know, there's people talking about politics and science and everything and you are one of the people up there in stage. But you are also one of the people in the audience, right? You are listening. Yeah, so your mind is growing as well as your heart beat. Well, I love your presentation and I love a lot of the presentation. I took a lot of notes. I go back and study, read books, people said. It's a luxury to be able to sit up in here. Unbelievably brilliant people talk, you know, everybody is dedicated. They think of all the dedication you've had and your journey and another thing you learned as a jazz musician is, you know, creativity is all over the world. My father's always say, man, it's many creative, great people who don't wear signs saying, I'm creative, I'm great, I'm smart and learn how to put your radar up and you can find it. And listen and believe me, I'm on it. I'm on this podcast we are. I'm putting it on in the morning. I'm checking you out. No, I'm not just saying it because I'm on it. I mean that I'm going to go to love being educated about the things that you talk about with the guest you have on and I've thoroughly enjoyed myself, everything from new developing cities to autism, to the Me Too movement to what you were talking about with Julie was talking about. I mean, you know, it's all, it's all, all, all, all, all, all, all, all, all, all, all. All of the, all the, all the, all the signs that you have on it. Did you have any, or have you had any special interest in science in general, or is it just a, you always love science when I was growing up. Yeah. I love the sciences. I love biology. I always did pretty good as a student in a chemistry and, and, yeah, I love the sciences. You know, I told you I read the Dancing Rule, Lee Masters years ago. And I am interested, I need to, to be educated. There's an infinite number of things that we all need to learn, right? We don't, that's, we're not going to run out of interesting things to learn about. But we were having this interesting conversation the other night about entanglement, quantum mechanics, right? Maybe there's a connection with jazz. In, well, in fact, I mean, it's a, it's almost a cliche. I don't know if you know stuff in Alexander. Have you, do you know that name? He is a physics professor at Dartmouth who wrote a book called The Jazz of Physics. He wrote a book. Yeah, yeah. The jazz of physics. I haven't read that book yet, but yeah. He is a saxophone player. Yeah, I know him. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And, I mean, part of me, like, you know, we're trained, it's just like you're trained to be a critic of music. We're trained in science to be skeptical, right? So we make some grandiose claims. So the claim would be that, you know, there is at least an analogy between how we already talk about waves and waves bumping into each other. Clearly, that's part of music, rhythm, and so forth, tone, and pitch. But there's also randomness, right? There's probability, and but it's not a mess, right? There's probability and quantum mechanics. Things don't exist until you observe them. Bring them into existence. And maybe there is an analogy that's useful there between that unconscious solo that you're doing that until you played the note, it wasn't there. Like, you didn't write it out at that time. Well, all that, all the, I think that repetition is a way that we control entropy. We have to repeat things. I was talking to the artist and he was making me laugh. He said, I see the world new every day, and I create new things every day. I said, well, I equate that with being on the run. You stop and spell the roses. You know that? We all have things we're going to do. We touch those. Like, we're going to, that's part of being in a kind of system. But if you're running, you're not doing a lot of things that are to say. It's true. And I think that we even mentioned before, the balance between something different and something that fits in. That's right. That's what you're looking for. And that goes into what I said about entropy in the sense that we start with a universe that's simple. We end with a universe that's simple. Entropy is going up on the way, but it's in the middle where entropy is middle and complex structures are there and you don't know what's going to happen. It's not so simple. That's the extra fun. In YouTube, you're trying to order them in a way that you can order them to understand whatever you can understand. Yeah, we try to understand it by bit. Right. And what jazz gives you the opportunity to understand slices of reality, not just from your perspective. Now, you understand it so much. I call it the speed of instinct. Like how fast is instinct? Man, it's fast. That's fast. That's fast. That's speed. And you're playing on the edge always of instinct because it's always a present moment, present moment, present moment, present moment. And you're trying to come in that press like riding a wave. Right. And you're just going on that wave. And there's other people. The presence of other people make you all have, it's like a multi, it's like a hydra. And you're perceiving them. And you're perceiving the form. And you're perceiving the audience. And they're perceiving you. And it's all going on, going on, going on, going on. Boom. Then you can listen to it and assess it when you're playing it, you can. Right. I mean, do you ever just trans out? You're just like playing, you don't even notice what's going on? I'm always like that. I'm only listening. Like I'm listening so intensely and trying to just, it's like you're just looking at something in the space. Like, this is a glass of it told me. He has a little arm from, called me once at four o'clock in the morning. I'll say, are you up? I said, of course, man. Of course. He said, man, I remember I went to the ophthalmologist and he said, when you want to play low, look low, when you're playing middle register, when you want to play high, look up high. And it dizzyed told me, man, I started doing, I said, wow, I asked Lewis Armstrong one time. I said, pops, why are you always looking up high? What are you looking for? He said, pops told him, I don't know brother, but I always find it. He's looking for some high notes. He's looking into the, hey, he's looking up there, where is stuff? Sometimes I tease the musician, we on the band, and I'll see them look at that. And I know what they're looking at. And I'll say, look at it. You know, look at it. Focus on that. Because when you look at it, you look at it at a point in space, you know, look at it, but you're trying to just hear and perceive everything that's going on and order it. And figure, where do I fit into this? And it's such unbelievably exciting thing when it's done well. And it's, you know, I wrote a book about time and the nature of time and how clocks tell time and everything. And our bodies are full of clocks, right? Our bodies are full of things that do the same thing in a rhythm over and over again. Whether it's our heartbeat or our breathing or our nerves bouncing back and forth. And I think that really good music, whether it's jazz or classical or whatever, it sort of, it feeds into that and draws from it, right? It's like the rhythms inside us come out in some interesting way. I would love to see, I would love to, I'm going to get the book, but is it, do you talk a little bit about all the different clocks that are in the body? I mean, if I looked at it, would it give me an understanding of what they are? No, but I have friends who know that stuff, right? Yeah, I'm just a physicist, but you know, the body is far too complicated for me. But it goes into, you know, some things can be taught and some things are just kind of India. I don't want to say they're, you know, inherited, but they come from places we don't understand. It's instinctual. Yeah, it's instinctual. It's a thing. Like with the DJ as we call it a thing. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, got that thing. I remember that I sometimes for the podcast interview neuroscientists. Did anyone ever try to like put you in a brain scanner while you're playing? No, improvising. Somebody was talking about doing it with a band. Yeah. But we didn't do it. I would love to do it. Well, David Puppel, who's a, I'll hook you up if you want to do it. I would love to do it. So because his thing is, there's different ways of looking inside the head to see what your brain is doing. Now, I mean, this is stuff that we've developed over the last couple of decades, right? So you don't need to do surgery to peek into the brain. You can do an MRI, which will show you where in the brain things are happening, but it's very slow. So if you're, even if you're just talking, forget about improvising, forget about playing fast, you don't know when it's happening. But what you can also do, what's happening in the brain, right? Are these chemicals zooming around and they make the little magnetic fields that pop outside your head and they can measure those right away. And I would love to see that would it be like for a band really playing and improvising. I would love my students to do it. And I told you I want you to talk to my students. They would love it. I got great students at Juilliard. I would love to do that. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And you know, I think it's coming because brain computer interfaces. I think this is a common theme for me, but I think that, you know, one of the things is going to change the future is our ability to forget about our fingers. Just go right from the brain to the machine. Tell them the path and go back and forth. And it might be very, very slow and it might, you know, be 100 years from now. So that's okay. I'm a physicist if it's 100 years, nothing, right? But I think that, yeah, well, it'll be interesting to see how we learn about music, learn about what it means. Some people less musical. Like I can't sing a note, but I, you know, I love listening to other people and say, it's great. So, Woodton Marshall. Thank you so much for this fantastic conversation. Man, it's such a pleasure. I have so much respect and it's an honor and pleasure. We can keep the journey going. Yes, sir. That's what we both do. All right. Thanks, man. Yes, sir. Thank you.