Hello everyone, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host Sean Carroll, and today, special treat, our guest is also Sean Carroll. But not because it's a solo episode, not because I'm the only one talking. We have another Sean Carroll here today on the podcast. This is Sean B. Carroll, and on his to goodness, another person with the same name as me, different middle initial, who is a world famous biologist, who would have thought. There's a lot of Sean Carroll's out there as it turns out. I first heard of the other Sean Carroll. When I was a graduate student, I was walking down the road in Harvard Square, and I stopped at the out of town news, newsdance. I saw that I think it was Time Magazine had a story about like the 30 scientists under 30 years old or something like that. We're going to change the world. And so, of course, as a joke, I opened it up, looking for myself. Now I knew perfectly well. I was not on that list. You don't get on those lists without being told, but also in no sense that I deserved to be on that list as a graduate student. But to my surprise, there I found my name, and I realized that oh my goodness, there's another person with my name. But the podcast is not going to be a whole bunch of jokes about us having the same name. Sean Carroll, the biologist, is actually a leading figure in the field of Evo Divo. The idea that evolution is coupled with development of organisms. You might remember from high school biology, the idea that your DNA encodes information. That is carried over to RNA in the transcription process, and then the RNA goes off and makes proteins that do functional things in your body. That's a true story, but it's very far away from being the entire story. Much of your DNA does not code for proteins at all, but it nevertheless serves a purpose in turning on and off other DNA strands that actually do cause proteins to be formed. And this makes perfect sense. The DNA in a skin cell in your body is the same DNA as in a blood cell or a brain neuron, but of course they develop in very different ways. This has important ramifications for evolution. In fact, interestingly, it's not just the DNA that can evolve in some sense. The chemical environment that a fetus grows up in in the womb can affect how its genes are expressed and that can even be passed on to subsequent generations. Maybe not that far, maybe it doesn't last forever. It's a contentious area. We talked a little bit about this with Karl Zimmer on the podcast a while ago, but in fact, we're not going to mostly talk about that with the other Sean Carroll today. What we're going to talk about is musings on the bigger picture of evolution that his cutting edge work with studying fruit flies and other aspects of the Evo-Divo story have led him to really think about what evolution is, how it works, and in particular, the long-running debate about to what extent evolution is an algorithm that picks out the best adaptations for whatever situation genomic population finds itself in, versus the role of random chance. What Sean wants to do is to emphasize the role of random chance. Both adaptation and randomness are very important, but they have different aspects that are important in different ways at different times for different kinds of things. This led him to not only think about randomness in the course of evolution, but randomness from other things that impact on the course of evolution like when an asteroid hits the earth. That actually has a very important impact on evolution, even though it has nothing to do with mutations in our DNA or anything like that. That's the story. We're going to dive into today. We're going to talk about chance and randomness and unpredictable events and the huge role they play, both on the evolution of life on the large scale and even on individual lives here on Earth. So while I have you here, let me remind you that we have a webpage for the podcast preposterousuniverse.com slash podcast. I recently wrote a blog post. There's a separate blog on my website, so preposterousuniverse.com slash blog. I wrote a blog post about what I look for when people suggest potential podcast guests. I'm not limiting myself to guests who only have the same name as me or anything like that. So I actually love getting suggestions. I rarely take them just because there's a limit. I get way more suggestions than I could possibly take, but I do take them sometimes. I've gotten very, very good guests out of people who I would never would have heard of, but someone suggested them. And a lot of people suggest people who I would never pick for one reason or another. And they're, you know, you can read about what those reasons are in the blog post. So check that out, preposterousuniverse.com slash blog. If you want to drop some suggestions, who knows? I might actually pick somebody. In fact, as I'm recording this, which is a few days before the episode actually airs, it's actually published. Ian Robinson on Twitter suggested that I interview Sean B. Carroll. So Ian, you're going to think that I did this because you suggested him, but in fact, that we recorded the actual interview a couple of weeks ago. Anyway, Sean B. Carroll is not only a leading scientist. He's an amazingly good communicator and writer. As you will learn very quickly in the course of this interview, I encourage you to check out his books. And with that, let's go. Sean B. Carroll, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. Sean, thanks for having me. I'm very glad that we're having this chance to talk. We've known about each other for a very long time. But as I always tell people, you're the one with the beard that makes you the evil twin by the rules of science fiction university. Well, and I always say you're the one that understands the cosmos. So you're better at math. How about that? I think that you're better at experiments. You have a lab, right? You get your hands dirty. Yes, I do. Well, I get other people's hands dirty. But I've dirtied my hands over the years. That is true. Yeah, we age into a part of our lives where we get other people's hands dirty. But let me, I mean, you've written a book, tell people what the title of the book is so they can rush out to read it or even read it by it right now as they're listening. Yeah, sure. It's an all sorts of formats, if whether you like to read or listen. So it's called a series of fortunate events, chance and the making of the planet, life and you. That's pretty good. But you come at it as an evolutionary biologist who got interested in the role of chance and what it plays. So I definitely want to get into that. But your first book or at least your first trade book, I don't know if you have, I think you have textbooks and things like that, right? Do you have a textbook? Right. Yeah. So your first trade book was endless forms, most beautiful, which is about the extremely hot and sexy topic these days of Evo Devo, evolutionary developmental biology. So what was the theme of that book? Well, that was really my first sort of mature passion in science that as I became an independent scientist and thought about what I wanted to do, I was really driven by curiosity and love for animal form. I like butterflies and snakes, leopards and all that, which I think a lot of biologists do. And I always wanted to know the house and wise, how did all this diversity evolve? The path to that was long for both science and for me personally, because we had to first sort of crack the science of how any animal form is built. And that's the arena of developmental biology. And then of course, of doing that, it started making discoveries that surprised us as much as anybody else. And that led to this term called, this field called Evo Devo, it's really trying to understand the evolution of form through the lens of the making of animal body. So in particular, I think that there are implications in a sentence like that that are perfectly clear for you, but maybe not for the audience. I mean, there's a story to be told about what genes matter and what they do, right? That is a little bit of a shift from the traditional paradigm. Yeah, so think about it this way. So the making of an individual form is that process of going from egg to adult and that's development. To get different kinds of looking adults, you know, they'll imagine the entire array of the animal kingdom, changes have to happen in that process. So we want to understand what kinds of changes happen in that process of building animals that give us different types. To do that, we had to get into that inner machinery, which is really the genes that are involved in building bodies and body parts. And that was really the heyday starting in the 1980s of developmental biology where we started cracking sort of the mysteries of how the animals sort out, you know, what's going to be the front end, what's going to be the back end, what's going to be the top, the bottom, right, left. And it all started with identifying what we call this genetic toolkit for development, a relatively small number of genes that are involved in building bodies. Yeah, I mean, it's a fascinating idea because I think that probably where most of us are fooled by not knowing a lot of biology and maybe knowing a lot about or at least thinking about, you know, blueprints or something like this. So we have the idea that, you know, somewhere in our DNA, there's just a little road map for all the different parts of our bodies. And you just have a one to one correspondence there, but the reality turns out to be a little bit more nuanced. It's both simpler and more complicated at the same time. So let me try to unpack that. The simpler part, the great and thrilling discovery, and I was really close to it. So it was, I can really tell you it was thrilling. The expectation in, say, the early 1980s, before we had a glimpse of any of these genes, was that really like the building of, you know, a human and the building of an octopus or an insect had nothing to do with each other, that things were so different. Right. And that was really kind of the anatomist view that, you know, let's look at the, you know, the structure of these creatures in G, they look so different. But what was amazing, and this all came out of studying the fruit fly, which has been sort of the great workmen of geneticists for decades, was that when the first genes were identified in fruit flies that built fruit fly bodies, we quickly discovered those very same genes are in us and in virtually every other animal in the kingdom. And they're used in very similar ways, and they're even organized in similar ways in the DNA. And nobody, nobody expected that. I've never met anyone who claimed they expected that. And so that's the simpler part, that there's a common toolkit. Then it sort of phrased the next question, well, if everybody's got all this in common, how do you make differences? And that's what I really spent a lot of my research time on was working from a common toolkit, how do you build different kinds of animals? Yeah. So you're saying that, I mean, basically there are some genes that make legs and among other things, and like how you control what, how those genes turn on and off is depends whether you get an insect leg or a human leg. That's right. And where you turn it on and off also depends whether you get six legs as an insect or eight legs as in a spider or a hundred legs as in a millipede. So we quickly sort of got into the machinery that was really making the key differences in the major differences in the way animals are built. And so that happens just so much faster than anyone expected, because everyone thought we were going to have to work out sort of the recipe for a fly and a recipe for a mouse and a recipe for a worm, slowly but surely, and separately from each other. But really we kind of discovered a passport to the whole kingdom. Yeah. And it's amazing to me because it's not only that different, very different species now have this toolkit of gene, but they've been around, I want to say almost forever, but at least for a very, very long time in developmental history, evolutionary history. That's absolutely true. Yeah. So at least a half billion years for these genes to be shared among such different animal types as sea urchins and butterflies and humans, birds. They've been around a half billion years. So pretty much everything we see in the animal fossil record sort of documents, the various ways these things have been repurposed and sort of tinkered with to shape this incredible variety of life that we love. Well, yeah. I mean, I'm going to encourage the audience also to buy that book and those forms most beautiful that you wrote to hear about the devos side of things. But let's dig into the evolutionary side of things. I mean, what are the implications of this discovery for how we think about natural selection or how species evolved? Well, the biggest implication I think of evo-devo is I'm going to get into mechanism for a second because I've told you there's this common toolkit and kind of the analogy to carpentry or whatever is somewhat intentional in that just as a carpenter can fashion very different things out of the same materials. These genes can fashion very different forms out of pretty much the same set of materials. How does it do it? And to think about that, you've got to start picturing kind of imagining DNA and DNA the way it's organized, you know, our chromosomes are made up of DNA and genes are encoded in segments of DNA. And when you think about DNA, you kind of, and you think about genes, if you could sort of take a quick snapshot of, you know, your DNA or my DNA, those genes would stand out like islands and sort of a sea of, well, we might say junk, things that are not genes, things that don't encode things that do work in the body. So genes that encode proteins and proteins are the things that do the work in the body, that's a relatively small part of our DNA. There's another part of our DNA been much harder to see, much harder to figure out where it is. And that's the DNA that's used like switches for turning genes on and off in time and space. And understanding those switches became central to understanding the evolutionary puzzle you just described, because to build one body, you have to orchestrate the turning on and off of genes in time and space and sort of a very elaborate choreography. To build different kinds of bodies, you have to tinker with those switches. You have to tinker with where they're turned on, how many places they're turned on and how, and when and how they're turned off. And so getting at those switches, which was experimentally more difficult, but evolutionarily they're very rewarding. That's one of the big insights of Evo Devo is to understand that while the genes are very similar between animals, the things that they encode that make these proteins that do the work are very similar among animals, nearly identical between chimpanzees and humans. But how they're used is different and those differences are wired into the switches that are littered throughout our DNA. And so that's a huge mechanistic insight. And I think in a pretty profound biological insight that you can make lots of different things from a common toolkit, but the action, the evolutionary action is outside of those genes in the parts of DNA that regulate how they're used. So maybe to put this in context a little bit, you know, Darwin comes along with the theory of evolution by natural selection, but he didn't know about genes much less DNA. And then we figured out that there were genes and Mendel and others, although there's a history of who paid attention to who. And then we figured out there was DNA and the code for proteins, etc. So I take it, you're going to correct me if I'm crazy here, that there was this picture that the things that were being selected on by the forces of natural selection were these genes that were coding for protein. And maybe the Evo Devo story changes that a little bit because the genes that switch on the other genes are equally or more important. Yeah, and it's the switches themselves. So I think that's a true history. And I think part of the way science grows is you well document is that sometimes things are just not within our reach, let alone our grasp. And things were outside of Darwin's reach and things were outside the reach of early 20th century biologists. And really, until we could clone DNA, until we could look at individual genes and say, okay, here's a gene. And in the case of the fruit fly, the genes that launched 1,000 postdocs are these genes that when mutated, for example, transform the antennae of the fruit fly into legs or give the flies a second set of wings. And when you see these striking appearances and you say, how can you do that? And it's a single, you've altered a single gene. It makes, it's just too damn curious. You're just like, I got to figure out what's going on. And I was one of those postdocs when I learned about these mutations that could change body parts like that, I said, well, what the heck kind of gene is under there? And that, when we dug into those things, and it had the tools, finally, by the late 70s, early 80s, to analyze the DNA that was the genes themselves, as opposed to just studying genes, sort of what's called kind of beanbag genetics of just studying formal genetics by crossing one fly to another. That's when we really could get at these questions. And when we did, the science flourished in an amazing way. The New Yorker magazine asked Mark Zuckerberg how he gets his news. He said the one news source he definitely follows is TechMeme. For three years and nearly 800 episodes, the TechMeme Ride Home has been Silicon Valley's favorite Tech News podcast. The TechMeme Ride Home is a daily podcast only 15 to 20 minutes long, and every day by 5 p.m. Eastern, it's all the latest tech news. But it's more than just headlines. You could get a robot to read your headlines. The TechMeme Ride Home is all the context around the latest news of the day. It's all the top stories, the top posts, and tweets, and conversations about those stories, as well as behind-the-scenes analysis. The TechMeme Ride Home is like TLDR too long didn't read as a service. The folks at TechMeme are online all day reading everything so they can catch you up. So listen to the one podcast anyone who's anyone in Silicon Valley listens to every day. Watch your podcast app now for Ride Home and subscribe to the TechMeme Ride Home podcast. So how does this all fit in with the idea of levels of selection? I mean, Richard Dawkins famously popularized the phrase the selfish gene. And I'm not sure if I have the right conception of this, but what I took that to mean is that in some sense, I mean there's the selfishness of it, okay, but we can argue about that. But I think that a lot of people think that what gets selected are sort of traits, right? Like, oh, you want your neck to be longer, so you evolve it longer neck. But there's not just a bunch of switches or dials inside the organism that says length of neck and things like that, right? There are genes. And you might have genes do or do not do what you want, and a gene that does what you want might also have other effects. So how did that change our picture of selection and adaptation? Yeah, let me get to selection and adaptation in a second. But first, it had to change our picture of exactly how anatomy was encoded. In other words, how did you, what was the relationship between physical anatomy and genetics? And you might have thought, for example, that maybe we had a gene for building our pinky and a different gene for building our thumb. And maybe a different gene for making our toes, right? Well, we started to learn through developmental biology that actually the same genes were involved in building every digit, you know, every toe. And in fact, they might be involved in building other parts of the skeleton. So you didn't have anatomy that said, you know, that there was sort of like a three-dimensional map of the body that correlated, you know, sort of beautifully onto the DNA. What you had was these sort of circuits that were used again and again in different times throughout the building of the body to do very similar operations. Then you'd have to say, well, how does this evolve? Because here's the trick. The trick is if you damage one of these genes, the actual sort of protein coding part of the gene, because it has so many jobs, it's catastrophic. Right. You know, it's what we would call a birth defect. In fact, the animal might not be viable at all. So how do you tinker with the genetic information in a way that's viable, in fact, even novel and doesn't have this cost, this dramatic cost? And this is the other really important discovery of this regulatory DNA. These switches, is that these switches act independently each other. And so you actually have fine-tuned control of sort of, you know, for how long a given gene is active while you're building a certain digit, as opposed to really kind of crude control of just whether that gene, you know, existed all or not. So we first had a change in thinking about sort of, you know, where would sort of be the hot spots of evolution in DNA. So the genes, the actual protein coding parts of these genes, are very stable and can be evolutionarily, you know, conserved for hundreds of millions of years. But the switches are very tinkerable, ultra-bull in the course of evolutionary time. So back to your question about selection and adaptation. It means that not a huge change in sort of our classical thought that there's variation. So if you're thinking about evolving a longer neck or a longer finger, whatever it might be, that there's variation in a population because there's genetic variation that gives you slightly different outputs of, say, digit length or neck length. And really it's external circumstances. It's the environment that creatures live in that generally determine whether or not, you know, a longer neck or a shorter neck is more favored or a longer digit or shorter digit is favored. So we're right that selection occurs really at the level of traits because those traits really determine performance in nature. But you're also the real basis of evolution is changes in DNA, which are, you know, down at the molecular level. And those changes, which we'll get to, you know, those things originally arise without any consideration of consequences, right? They're arising at random. And so really nature is filtering, which mutations can make it or not. So I don't think evodivos really overturned our fundamental thinking about selection and adaptation. I think it's just made us think much more precisely about where evolution is taking place at the genetic level and how that relates to traits. I mean, maybe this is a good place since I have you here. That's broadener scope a little bit, not just to books you've written, but to this broader question about how to think about evolution, right? I mean, there have certainly been claims that we should say that at this point in the history of the development of biology, we're no longer Darwinian natural selection people. We have a new synthesis. I guess the new synthesis already happened. What do we call it now? What is the attempt to say that we've moved beyond the traditional Darwinian paradigm? The extended synthesis? Yeah, I think it's also our mechanistic understanding. I think that some of my, there's different words floating out there. I'm most sympathetic to what my, some of my colleagues say sort of the functional synthesis. I think we had formal descriptions for maybe the first half of the 20th century of what species are and sort of understanding how species get made, but until we could crack the genetic code, until we could look under the hood at how traits evolve, we had a fairly let's just say only a 10,000-foot view of evolution. So I think it's more about the richness and depth of our under-us understanding rather than conceptually have really really thrown much out that we had before. I don't think so. Okay, so I mean, there is, I know because I've interacted with people that emotions get very heated when we say, are we just improving upon the existing paradigm of natural selection or do we truly have a different conception now that we know a lot more about the multitude of things that go into these kinds of consideration? Well, I think there's some uncontroversial things there. For example, Darwin never imagined things like symbiosis or let alone endosymbiosis so that we know that some huge things in evolution, like chloroplasts and plants and mitochondria and us evolved by the merger of different creatures. That's a very non-dark, wany and thing, but it's now well established. So we've certainly found phenomena that were not in the Darwinian playbook, but we can celebrate those things. I mean, Darwin did not have to be a clairvoyant to all things that would ever be discovered in nature. Now, in terms of people getting heated, I think, let me, this, someone goes towards the theme of the current book, but let me tell you something that I think is fair to say historically. Darwin's baby really was natural selection. He had to come up with a way to sort of explain what kind of process could be it work that would shape the diversity of the world. He came up with this analogy to breeding, to domestication, or what we call artificial selection, that it was brilliant. It's how he started the origin of species. He explained using pigeon breeds that really what breeders do with birds or cattle or dogs or whatever is very similar to what nature does, albeit more slowly and unen, you know, without, you know, an intelligence, so that people could get the idea that things can change. And, you know, that was the first thing that he had overcome. The thinking at the time was that species were immutable, that they were divine creations but from God and created as they, in their current form, an unchanging. So he had a pretty difficult paradigm. He had a dislodged first. He had to get people used to the idea that things could change naturally. And so natural selection really was his brainchild and Alfred Wallace came up with the very same idea. And that was a huge step forward. He didn't know he explained that there would be differences in a population and that natural selection would, you know, favor some over others, but he didn't understand the basis of that variation. If he did, we might have a little different Darwinian theory, a little bit different picture. So my personal point of view, Sean, is that natural selection has dominated a lot of the discussion and thinking about evolution. To the point almost where natural selection sometimes is almost synonymous with evolution. And this I'm going to say is missing a big piece of the picture because the big piece of the picture, both mechanistically and philosophically, is the role of chance in generating that variation. It wasn't of interest to a lot of people for a long time because there was no way to get at it. If you couldn't see into the mechanisms of genes, well, you just kind of took it as a given. And so natural selection was much more interesting and natural selection was sort of this dominant idea. But really, the idea that, you know, order comes from randomness and randomness is chance mutation. This is a huge idea. Not something Darwin could have given us. He pointed at chance a bit in his writings. He had some good instincts about it like he had with many things. I mean, I'll, you know, my awe and, you know, regard for Darwin will never be diminished. It's just amazing what his intellectual contributions are. But he just couldn't get there. It was before the time we could get at it. But I would say, I mean, you've had Daniel Dennett on the show and, you know, Dennett really talked about, for example, natural selection and evolution is this acid, this universal acid that could dissolve through so many things, speaking philosophically. And I'd actually, if Dennett, if Daniel was here today, I'd say, I think you got to think about chance because chance is both mechanistically so important. And it's also philosophically so important as to why people get so upset about evolution is because chance chances the engine that gives us all this variation. And, you know, without that engine, you don't have evolution at all. And yet it's fundamentally a random mechanism. So yeah, no, I think I'll let you pick through that and decide where you want to go with it. This is great because this is one of the reasons why I want to get things very, very clearly on the table is I had Stuart Bartlett on the podcast a few weeks ago and he is an origin of life researcher. And he mentioned offhandedly that a certain process, you know, didn't seem to fit, you know, the traditional Darwinian way of thinking. And, you know, I asked him to explain what he meant by that. But actually, after we were done recording, he said, you know what? People are going to get confused by that. We should just delete it. Because, you know, I think that there's a viewpoint out there that the upset, the alternatives are Darwin or God, right? And I think that what people don't appreciate is that within the scientific, naturalistic, biological way of doing thing, there's a whole bunch of subtlety about, you know, how evolution broadly construed actually works. And like you just said, Darwin got a lot of it and he got a lot of it right and he got some major insights. But of course, we keep adding extra stuff that Darwin didn't know about. Absolutely. And, you know, we should all rejoice in that. I mean, you know, the science is still growing or else, you know, the last few generations of evolutionary biologists didn't need to exist. But you know, it's been, if anything, you know, my good fortune has been to be living through a new golden era of evolutionary biology because our access to the genetic code, our access to being able to precisely map the relationship between genetic change and changes and traits has made it so powerful to interrogate all sorts of questions in evolutionary biology. So of course, I hope we're discovering some new and worthwhile things. But why don't find us discarding much? I think this is a growth in expansion narrative and not, you know, replacing something. And if anything, you know, when I, when I want to elevate the role of chance, when we think about the evolutionary mechanism, I'm really just saying historically, natural selection has been the dominant narrative. It doesn't mean natural selection is important. Of course, it's important. But don't overlook chance mutation because that's the fuel, right? Yeah. That makes the whole evolutionary process run. And when you have a chance process and we can see just how chancy that process is now, you understand that there's nothing in charge. A point that I make in the book was we now understand we can capture some of these mutational events now, you know, in a way that, you know, thanks to, you know, great biophysics work, we can capture sort of the moment of spontaneous mutation and realizing it, you're, when we, when you understand, for example, that one of the bases of, of mutation is a subtle chemical shift, just the movement of a proton in a base, which happens as a fundamental matter of physics, you realize that mutation is a feature, not a bug from DNA. Oh, yeah. Mutation is, it's something, it's due to the intrinsic characteristics of the chemicals that make up DNA. It's inescapable. But now we understand that, you know, really down to the level that I think would satisfy a physicist. And so we're only getting richer and deeper. I don't think we're getting, you know, far afield from the Darwinian concept. Yeah. No, I like that way of putting it. I mean, we haven't overturned much of what Darwin said if anything. We have, we've, we've broadened and enrichened the number of things that are going on, which like you say, what else should we expect? This is how science works, right? We discover new things. Einstein didn't have the last word on, on gravity after all. Yeah. And you, you had Neil Schubert on earlier in the year. And Neil's a very good buddy of mine. And, and, and his new book, Some Assembly Required. I get, I get a commission on Neil's book too. Thank you. You know, he makes the great point that's emerged from paleontology. This has been a heyday for paleontology as well. And, oh, I mean, Darwin would just be salivating if he could sit around with a hundred paleontologists, because this was, you know, he really had geology in his bones and he was so thrilled by fossils. And when he wrote the origin of species, he proposed that there should be intermediate forms connecting sort of one form to another, but there were none existent in 1859 that we could point to. And these days, you know, the fossil record is so much richer. But what have we learned from the fossil record? Neil will tell you that, you know, it's, it's, it's a natural thought, for example, that, you know, when you see feathers on birds, you, you think they evolve for flight. But no, the paleontologists can tell us, nope, they evolve for something else first in the dinosaur lineage, not for flight. And if you look sort of, by so many innovations, lungs, you'd think, oh, that's for breathing on land. Nope. Yeah. Fish invented them for buoyancy in the water, you know? And, and this is the joy of being a biologist, which is you have these notions, which are totally understandable. I think very human notions. But then you have to put them to the test and the more dated you can get, the more evidence you can get. It's, it's actually when you overthrow some of your sort of convenient notions that you feel like you've really learned something. And paleontologists are learning that almost everything that we see as a novelty has some precursor that it wasn't first for whatever we think it was, you know, evolved for. And, you know, and as a molecular geneticist, I can tell you there's all sorts of, you know, beautiful stories in our DNA about, you know, how this process works. And so, you know, that's, that's the joy of it, as I said, I, I think there's lots of revelations to happen because we still, I think, think we're looking at only part of the iceberg. Yeah. So let's get into the role of chance, which you, which you properly are emphasizing here. I mean, you mentioned Dan, Dan, and he also likes to say that we should think of evolution as an algorithm. And I know what he means. And it's true in a sense, but I think that a lot of people in their minds, they can plate algorithm with deterministic algorithm. And you can have algorithms that involve random numbers as well. And that's a crucial role in evolution. That's what you're sort of emphasized. Absolutely. And I think that, you know, chance, it's just, there was, so I, I want to acknowledge, I mean, there was a really influential book by a person who had a huge influence on me. I never met him. Jacques Manot in 1970 called Chance in Necessity. And this rocked the philosophical world. I mean, this was the best seller in France. I think second only to love story at the time that this was France after all. But I mean, it did well in England and Germany and to a degree. He was still highly covered here in the United States. And Manot, coming some sort of French tradition and hit one of his friends when he, as he was in scholar, was the writer Albert Camus and they shared, I think, some pretty deep conversations. Manot felt that biology was uncovering some new truths, some new facts that had not yet sort of registered in the philosophical realm. And so this is 1970 and he wrote Chance in Necessity and really pointed out that this chance-based mechanism in DNA had profound implications for how we think about ourselves. So you know, it got some traction. You know, Manot passed away six years later. I think, you know, the idea of Chance is very prominent in Dawkins writings like the Blind Watchmaker, which is a brilliant book. But I still feel it's kind of slipped out of common discussions about evolution. And now that we can really see that chance mechanism and sort of catch it in the act, what a missed opportunity. So I sort of wanted to lean in and bring sort of our new understanding of Chance, you know, up to date in 2020. Not just at the deep molecular level, but including the geological and planetary level, because we've been startled to discover all sorts of things that have changed the direction of life on Earth, probably most familiar to the audiences. It's the asteroid impact 66 million years ago and we realized that accidents have had a huge role in what's happened on this planet. If you're a business that needs to hire people, you know how difficult it can be to not only find the right people, but sorting through everyone to hire the right people. Indeed.com is the number one job site in the world, because indeed gets you the best people fast. Unlike other sites, indeed gets you full control and payment flexibility over your hiring. You only pay for who you need, what you need. You can pause your account at any time, and there are no long term contracts. Plus indeed provides powerful tools to make your search that much easier, like sponsored jobs, which are shown to be three and a half times more likely to result in a hire. With 73% of online job seekers visiting Indeed each month, Indeed is going to get you the important hire you need just like they have for over 3 million businesses. Right now, Indeed is offering our listeners a free $75 credit to boost your job post, which means more quality candidates will see it fast. Try Indeed out with a free $75 credit at Indeed.com slash Minescape. This is their best offer available anywhere. So go right now to Indeed.com slash Minescape, Terms and Conditions apply, of course, offer valid through December 31. You mentioned Jacques Monot and also Algaricamou, and it would be a mistake not to mention that you wrote a kind of joint biography of them. It's a wonderful story of this biologist and existentialist philosopher finding sympathy in each other's ideas. Yeah, I got to tell you Sean, that was one of the greatest adventures of my life. You know, because it, okay, yes, it took me to Paris frequently, but I met incredible people and what drew me to their story, there was some, Manot was an incredible biologist and all sorts of people I interviewed who knew him well. It's one of the few people I've ever heard anyone talk about as being a bona fide genius. And at the same time, he was incredibly, as they said in France, you know, Angagé in his time. So, as a member of the French Resistance, he had some very harrowing experiences during World War II, as did Camou. That was clearly a bond between the two men when they met after the war. So the book is, you know, it's about their adventures, both sort of physical in the real world, because they both dealt with what was going on in society at the time, whether it was defeating the Nazis or exposing Stalinism for what it was or human rights or reproductive rights, whatever it might be, they were fully involved. And so I think that made for me an exciting story to tell, but, you know, intellectually, they were clearly on the same wavelength. And Camou had influenced Manot a great deal with his early works like The Myth of Cicifus. But in turn, when Camou met Manot and Manot had these insights into the workings of life, I think that was very exciting for Camou. So that book, and as I said, the people I met in telling that story was, you know, it was a heck of a ride. So you can't see me smiling at the moment, but every time I think of my experience of putting that book together, I was absolutely on one of the most exciting. And when I mean by thrilling, it was every time a new nugget emerged, whether that was in a letter from an archive or an anecdote or a new interview of somebody I got to meet who knew one of the other. You know, it was just for me, a kid from Toledo, never imagined I'd be talking to people who had those life experiences. Well, it's so much fun to, as a sort of senior researcher, let's put it that way, do a very different kind of research, right? You know, just not, you're not in the lab, in this case, you're not solving equations, you're doing kind of historical biographical work. And it's just a thrill to, you know, get that a different part of your brain being tickled a little bit, right? Yeah, the rush is very similar. I've tried to explain this sometimes to folks because when people found out, when I was writing the book, and I said, I'm writing this book about Jacques Beno and Albert Camo, you know, I mean, I'm running a lab, I had some other duties. And you know, you do get the look of, you know, he's gone off the deep end, and you won't hear from him again many times. But you know, viscerally, the thrill is very similar to a great result in the lab. The storytelling is very similar. You're trying to knit together a narrative and nothing tells you about holes, you know, in a scientific story or holes in a real world story. As when you try to tell it and realize, oh my gosh, I can't connect these two dots. Yeah. And so for me, the process of researching that book is very much like working on a scientific problem. And every time I met a gap, I had to figure out, well, is there any way I could, you know, figure out what, what, what had happened in this time or, you know, who could tell me or where would the documents be? And when you find those things, when you find the missing links in the historical record, I think it's the same thrill of paleontologists gets when they see a fossil for the first time. And it's a very interesting connection because the existentialist, you know, absolutely wanted to emphasize the lack of any overarching purpose or teleology or reason for us to be here. So you can see why that would resonate with a biologist who emphasized the role of Chan in the development of life. And also the existentialists wanted to say, you know, we can make choices, right? Like we have some autonomy that lets us guide our lives. How did that fit in or did it fit in with a manoeuvres point of view? Absolutely. And I think the experience of the war had a huge impact. Although Camus best sort of formulated his outlook by about 1942 and published it in the middle of the war and had to race south from Paris with a manuscript in the trunk of his car, I think especially coming out of the Second World War, which of course, for France was, you know, the second traumatic experience really in a generation that all these, you know, Naziism and Stalinism and fascism in all this, that, you know, all the European isms, let's just say that we're going on or Eurasian isms, that these were all empty, right? That they were empty promises of some kind of utopia and the same with religion that that was a promise of a better afterlife, right? Not this life, something better was coming later. And I think for people who had been through the trauma of World War II, Camus was so refreshing because he was basically saying, you know, this is the life we've got and, you know, now how do you make the most of it? And I know for lots of scientists that really resonated, Camus was very much, you know, well, you know, he was read by everybody, but he was very much embraced by a number of scientists and that's because he was going to throwing off all this sort of political mythology or religious mythology and just saying, hey, this is the one life we've got now, now how do you deal with that? And you know, this is some of the things you got into in your book, The Big Picture. Right. You know, if you have a naturalist view of the world, then you have to confront that this is it. So how do we live with each other and how do we, you know, how do we use our time best? And I think this is, you know, this is the question that the journey in life is all about. Well, in a world where accidents happen and chance plays a large role, I mean, maybe you can say more about what Menos actual contribution was there because I guess my naive version of evolution was that even as early as Darwin, we thought that the changes from generation to generation had a random component. Was that always there? Did that only come in later? That came in later. I mean, you can find sort of forensically Darwin is towing with the idea of chance at a few times in his work, not just origin of species, but later because people had to say, yeah, okay, Chuck, where does this variation come from? And you know, you had to kind of shrug your shoulders. And since, of course, he was getting resistance for other reasons. Everything he couldn't explain was seen as a weakness, right? Sure. So it's, you have to kind of extract it there. And I think it took a while and it took sort of the rediscovery of genetics. And then it really took understanding, you know, from geneticists of the early 20th century that, you know, the mutations arose at random. They could see that if, you know, if they were looking for a wide eyed fly among thousands of flies, they didn't know which one was going to be born with white eyes. It seemed to pop up at random. And so really, we had to get, we had to kind of discover the randomness of mutation, the random assortment of chromosomes, all that sort of the basic rules of genetics, you know, through more thorough science in the first part of the 20th century. But then when you look at the genetic code, which wasn't, you know, was not discovered until the early 60s, and you realize there's a universal genetic code in every organism. And now you can map how a change in one, you know, one base in DNA changes this protein, which changes this trait. Now we're, now you're looking at, you know, the fundamental root, the fundamental basis of evolution or the way menopause, you know, the root of all innovation and the biosphere. Yeah. And that, I think it just took a while. I think we needed to have DNA, we needed to have a genetic code to say these things with much force. And then I think we needed other things like evodivo to say them with even greater force in terms of understanding thoroughly the connections between random change at the atomic level and change at a organismal level and change at a population level. So now I think we have that sort of seamless continuity throughout all those, you know, all those scales in life. And you know, we say a word like random, it doesn't mean there's no structure there at all, right? Like we throw it a six-sided die. Even though it's a random number, the chance that the number one comes up versus numbers two through six is only one-sixth. And so when you say that there are mutations in DNA that are random, like how well do we understand the probability distribution of what's going to happen at every step in these kinds of process? It's still a really active field. I think that when we talk about random and we can say more, and I think we can back it up more, let's put it that way, that random means in a couple of ways. I think it's really important, and as you're drilling down here, that we do get a little more disciplined about our use of the word. But it means if you look across DNA, mutations are going to occur and there's an unpredictable nature of that. So I don't know in any individual sperm or any individual egg where the mutations are going to be, but there's going to be 20 in a human egg or sperm. There's going to be 20 or 30 new mutations that weren't in mom or dad. They're going to occur, you know, spread throughout three billion base pairs of DNA. But let me just pause to say that because I didn't actually catch that number before from I must have skipped over in your book. So every new baby comes with over a dozen new brand new mutations. Is that what we're saying? That's right. So each of us is born with changes in our DNA that differ, that are different from our parents at the level of about, well, probably we're carrying about 40 or 50 mutations that weren't there in mom or dad. And we got probably a few more of those from dad than we did from mom. But yeah, there's new mutations in every generation. And this is because when you copy DNA every time you copy DNA, there's going to be mutations that are going to happen. Just, you know, it's a three billion base pairs of DNA to copy. There are typos. And those typos are really just the fundamental matter, fundamental matter of the physics that I was talking about. So this is going to go on, you know, all the time. The distribution of those mutations throughout the DNA is, and I'm just going to use that, that first approximation argument is ran. They're unpredictable. They're spread throughout. If you have a large enough sample, you can see that lots and lots of different places are collecting mutations. It doesn't mean that every base has exactly the same probability of changing. But to a first approximation, the distribution of those mutations are random. And here's the real important thing. The mutations occur without any, let's just call it, consideration of their consequences. Some of those mutations may be deadly. Some of those mutations may be meaningless. They're going to occur no matter what. It's that process of selection in life is going to sort out what those, the fate of those mutations. So those mutations arise regardless of their potential impact on the organism. That has to get sorted out in that individual's life or in their offspring's life, et cetera. So that's one level of randomness. There's lots of other randomness in that which chromosomes you inherit from your mom or dad involves a random sorting process. And here's a number that's in the book. So if let's you and I play a little game, especially since we both have the name Sean Carroll, this might be a fun one to play. What were the chances? So each of our moms and our dad, 23 chromosomes contributed through this sperm. Our moms, 23 chromosomes contributed through the egg. So you and I each have 46 chromosomes. But now let's think of our siblings. How many genetically unique siblings, Sean, could you and I each have from the same set of parents? Yeah, it's a big number because I know how exponentials work. But I think that what would probably I don't know is in a strand of human DNA, probably many of the genes or just or many of the base pairs are just exactly identical in every bit of human DNA and some others vary. So that one I don't know. Yeah. Well, I'll, well, let's first talk about those combinations. So it's over 70 trillion from one couple. So this means the genetic net is being shuffled a lot in nature and in humanity, right? Yeah. And then secondly, yeah, not every gene is going to have a variant, as you look through DNA. But over time, there's a lot of variation that's there. You and I differ by about one base in every, well, our Irish ancestry might make us a little more closely related. But it differ about one base out of a thousand. And in three billion, that's three million bases that differ between you and I and between any two unrelated individuals in the population. So there's a lot of variation out there and that all has occurred and it continues to occur every generation with the occurrence of new mutation. So the randomness part of this is that there's no intention here. There's no filter mutations happen at random and basically life sorts them out. In 30, 20 or 30 mutations out of three billion base pairs actually sounds like a small number. But I remember talking with David Baltimore recently, Neoviruses can use RNA or combinations of RNA and DNA to carry their genetic information and they will, you take much more rapidly, right? So in some sense, is it too much to think that that 20 or 30 per generation is optimized? Like that we have the chemistry that gives us enough robustness to carry off, to send down genetic information through the generations, but also enough looseness that we can mutate and find new happy features? Yeah, I think that's a good way to think about it. There's a concept in genetics called the genetic load and mutational load and the idea is if we had a very high mutation rate, you would have too many deleterious mutations per generation and you'd obviously have a real problem in terms of getting to the next generation. There are two few mutations and of course nothing changes at all and your adaptability is very constrained. The mutation rate is selectable so in viruses that often carry their own machinery for replicating, something like HIV, the human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS, that mutation rate is about 10,000 times higher than what you and I are talking. And this is the selection at work there is that this is what helps that virus evade the immune system and this is why there's no AIDS vaccine 40 years later is because the virus is mutating so much that really the virus in an individual human is pretty different after a month or two than the virus that person was originally infected. Yeah. So there's a lot of evolution taking place at the individual virus level. And that's, so if you figure maybe four or five orders of magnitude difference across genetic things, I won't call them living things because viruses are not living per se. But yeah, so there's even variation in the mutation rate and you can think that that has been tuned by selection in terms of balancing sort of the mutational load with adaptability. And I need to ask this. Is it true that we can think of these mutations as honest to goodness quantum mechanical fluctuations? I think it's the right way to think about it. You're talking the, if you want to do chemistry for a second and it's explained in the book, bases come in taught emers. So these are chemically slightly different forms. In this case, these the bases, which I'll just shorthand say, A, G, A, C, G, and T, which are adding inside a Z and going on and going into I mean these bases, the hydrogen on the larger ring goes through transitions that are, you know, it's really just the movement of a proton on that ring. And thus it's now been measured that that sort of shape shift can it occurs at a frequency about one one one one one thousandth of a second. So a given base might be in the come what we call the common keto form about 99.9% of the time, but 0.1% of the time it's in the enol form. And if that is the form it's in when the copying machinery passes by the wrong base can be inserted and now you've got a mutation. Now there's ways because also that base will flip back. There's then ways for the cellular machinery to recognize that mismatch and excise it. So there's proofing mechanisms that improve the fidelity of copying DNA by several orders of magnitude. So there are correction mechanisms we have, but nonetheless a small percentage slip through. But you're absolutely right. This is like this is a quantum mechanical phenomenon and I think one of the scientists I remember using the term a quantum flip that might be a word that a biologist or biophysicist use is a is a quantum flip and it's an inherent nature of the of the bases that that endowed DNA with its with its properties. Well a famous thought experiment in biology is if we could play the tape backwards right if we could start back with whatever initial conditions life had and let them go how similar would it be. And now it seems that I'm going to say that if you believe in the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics there will be a different world where every different set of mutations came true and somewhere out there all the different possibilities have been tried. Well it's a great thought experiment. I think you and a sampling of different biologists they'll probably lean to one way or the other. There are some folks that see the tape as replaying more accurately you know more you know replaying itself more accurate more I want to try to say maybe with more fidelity repeating itself maybe evolution repeating itself more and others seeing less so I probably tend towards the less so partly because I also think you have to deal with all the external sort of physical circumstances of the world and that you know tectonics and asteroid impacts and all sorts of other things have you know have have wreak havoc on the on the process of the evolution of life and so yeah I think that thought experiment for me is you'd get a different world and I don't know if we could dinosaurs and humans you know that many times. Yeah no I mean I think that there's a interplay going on here between the randomness of the generation of the mutations and then they're selected for right this is what Darwin actually emphasized the fact so I guess there are biologists you know every card carrying modern biologists will admit that there's randomness in the mutation but I guess some would argue that when those mutations come out as organism some will inevitably thrive and some will not and that's why we will see more or less similar behavior if we did run the tape backward again. Yeah look this and that's the phenomenon of convergence and you might say you know this this argument was made especially famous by Stephen J. Gould in his book Wonderful Life and countered by Simon Simon Conway Morris in Life's Crucible to paleontologists and you know I think the truth is is fun to explain not the truth I can't say the truth both poles are fun to explore because there's no doubt what evolution repeats itself and when we find very similar circumstances you know if you find animals living say in a in a dark habitat in caves no doubt you will see the same independent mutation selected for again and again if you find things living in deep water you'll find some of the same things selected for again and again so there are external circumstances external conditions that will essentially create the same selective regime and you can think that if you have a large enough population of whatever you want you know fish mice whatever you want to think about if you have large population you will basically this random mutation mechanism will sample most of the possible mutations you know in the DNA of that organism and so it may happen upon the same solution repeatedly and we this has been well documented by sort of simple to study organisms like viruses but even out there they said you know mice in the deserts of the American Southwest living on you know lava outcrops they repeatedly do the same sort of evolutionary tricks bacteria living in our guts exposed to antibiotics keep coming up with the same mutations so we can see evolution repeat itself but you just have to kind of drill down a little bit to say well if I've really presented very similar circumstances to a highly to a large population of individual with a pretty significant pool of mutations to draw from you'll you will draw the same lucky card repeatedly but when you start way back you know a billion or two billion years ago when life is unicellular and you say okay I'm just gonna run this whole thing again there are so many factors that enter the course of life that it's difficult for me to think that that you're going to get T-rex and the antiracals out of that again and again yeah that that does make sense to me but I think also and you have alluded to this but let's let's highlight it a little bit you know most mutations in the world like that we live in now where species are fairly mature and have found their niches and so forth most mutations are going to be bad right like we we've kind of optimized to some extent and the chances of getting a really good mutation that we hadn't already tried are relatively small but at a time like 66 million years ago when asteroid just hit and wiped out a lot there were a whole bunch of unoccupied niches and you know the chance to let your experimentation run wild was much greater well I think intuitively that's again that's a very interesting question and a very interesting arena to explore now let me take the first part where you said you know we're things sort of species mature and in stable habitats where most mutations be deleterious well actually most mutations aren't deleterious anyway because they just land in parts of DNA that don't matter but if you land in a part of the DNA that matters what you're I think intuitively right about is and this is probably best illustrated by things like enzymes so enzymes that do the work in the body that convert one chemical to a different chemical form a lot of these enzymes have been around for hundreds of millions sometimes more than you know a billion years they do show properties of being optimized so that it's very hard to make like a more efficient enzyme to say detoxify alcohol okay because organisms have had a long time to play with that substance and they've probably happened upon the best solution that's too bad now if an organism finds itself in a high alcohol environment what it does is instead of evolving an enzyme that is more proficient at converting that alcohol it makes more of that enzyme and it makes more of that enzyme through mutations that enable it to make more of that enzyme so there's still adaptive mutations to be had but qualitatively they're a little different they're not so much about changing the properties of a very ancient enzyme they're about changing how much you make in a given circumstance so I think you're intuitively right there in terms of sort of things being well tuned on the other hand and there was the second part of your question which I've now forgotten because I had to give my alcohol story I know I I've you made me sad to think that there's not some mutation waiting out there to be discovered that will make us able to drink a lot more good wine and scotch but that's okay you know we have to live with the constraints of laws of physics but the other point was we have these accidents of history that I've nothing to do with biology like the asteroid hitting the earth that sort of reset a lot of the environments and then maybe the experimentation has a little bit more room to play in great yeah thanks sorry yeah I think that's also a very constructive way to think about things and that when new opportunities present themselves and certainly after the asteroid impact with three quarters of plant and animal species killed off you know the ocean was a very different habitat post asteroid the land was a very different place you know competitions different and you think about sort of for lack of a better word organisms establishing a beachhead well in that competition there might be a lot more room for variants and for things that might have had a really tough time in a more in a well populated you know forest or in a more densely populated ocean so the regime the competitive regime changes a real straightforward example and I'd love this story this was just published last year um the asteroid story is it's a gift that keeps on giving as well I would say Sean because um while we probably all heard the outlines of it um and and relived in one way cinematic or otherwise that asteroid impact um what happened after that has been harder for paleontologists to get at and that's just has to do with few exposures on the surface of the earth of that critical say first million years after the asteroid impact particularly exposures on land but scientists at the Denver Museum of Science and Nature uh Tyler Lee Sinanian Miller struck paleontological goal just outside of Denver um a few years ago and it was published in science last year and actually we made it into the film into a film called The Rise of the Mammals when they discovered a treasure trove of remarkably preserved extraordinarily well preserved mammals spanning that first million years of recovery on earth and what you see among those mammals are that mammals got much bigger very quickly than they ever did before in earth's history so mammals were had been around for probably a hundred million years coexisting alongside dinosaurs but dinosaurs were the you know they were the big they were the big land animals on the planet while dinosaurs are killed off they're very vulnerable to the collapse of the food chain some small mammals survive which probably were not more than a pound or two in body size and then they take off and within a few hundred thousand years you're seeing a 40 or 50 fold increase in maximum body size among the mammals so quite clearly take away the big you know uh I would say I'm not going to say the bullies that's putting characteristics to dinosaurs I don't really want to put on them but that dominant animal that was really keeping mammals in a much smaller niche take away those dinosaurs and the mammals exploded and so there was no room there were no place for those mutations that would make mammal bodies bigger during the dinosaur era but take away the dinosaurs and now those mutations allowed us allowed mammals to explore all sorts of bottom forms so I think we have good understanding that you know a big disruption like that ecological opportunity um I one of my favorite paleontologists there are many but Andy Nolte at Harvard has framed it something along the lines of sort of when when when you know genetic potential meets ecological opportunity and these big upheavals on the surface of the earth present ecological opportunity and then all that genetic potential um can flower and that's that's what I think we see with the rise of the mammals I think that's what we see in the Cambrian explosion which is following another mass extinction the the very famous Cambrian explosion probably the easiest explanation for it is the opening of ecological opportunity. You know I often talk about entropy and friction and dissipation and these are concepts that are important not only for cosmology or for living organisms but also for small businesses. How do you like that segue there? Pretty good huh? Aslow is a new way of doing banking online for small businesses that removes all the friction. Aslow offers free business checking accounts with invoicing, bill pay, money transfers, no minimum balances and no fees. Unlike other banking options as low as painless there's no ridiculous phone system that feels designed to waste your time. With Aslow you just go to a zlu.com and apply in as little as 10 minutes there's no waiting to use the account with Aslow's free instant funding feature you can deposit up to a thousand dollars and access it instantly. So sign up right now with no minimum deposit at aslow.com slash mindscape and get a free copy of Aslow's small business starter guide spelled azllo.com slash mindscape sign up with a free small business starter guide no minimum deposit aslow.com slash mindscape. And so this it does you know when you sort of think of it in those terms the asteroid impact being a very obvious one you know the roll of chance comes to the fore right not just the mutations in our genes but like the fact that our environment is changing in unpredictable ways the other point you make in the book is that even with an individual lifetime there are things happening in our bodies that are a little bit random and unpredictable that end up playing a huge role in the lives we leave. Yeah this is this is the unfortunate series of events you're referring to cancer for example. For example yeah I mean I presume that a whole bunch of aging and other disease kind of things have similar features but cancer is the obvious one the big one. Cancer is the obvious one because you know it shows up on the clinic and then we study it and we really understand cancer is a genetic disease. So yeah so that that process of random mutation which it's which is the source of you know all that beauty and diversity and complexity in the biosphere and all of human diversity you know which we celebrate well but it is a fact of life that when we copy DNA mistakes get made and some of those mistakes if they land in certain places in the genome in certain genes can alter the properties of those cells or if those cells acquire a growth advantage relative to their neighbors and particularly if more mutations hit that might either enhance that growth advantage or shield those cells for example from the immune system well then now you have the beginnings of cancer. So in the book I'm just trying to make people to appreciate that you know this phenomenon of random mutation impacts lots of things you know I think there's some things that are more joyful and I think I say when I get into the cancer chapter you know oh boy I'm not sure everybody was going to be too enthusiastic about reading this but you know it's going to affect the very you know all of us it's going to affect our families and individually it's going to probably affect you know half of us at some point in our life so understanding that cancer is a genetic phenomenon brought on by random mutations but that we can do something about the probability of those mutations so cigarette smoke contains mutagens so we can decrease our chances of mutations that hit our lung cells by either not smoking and not inhaling secondhand smoke or I'm going to go golfing later this afternoon and as a lightly pigmented Irishman I have to put on my sunscreen or I'm gambling with the mutations in my skin cells so you know that knowledge of cancer being a genetic phenomenon is also power and you know in the last 20 years we've developed a lot of countermeasures to to deal with the mutations that arise in our in our body in the course of our lifetime but I did you know we come into this world in accident and many of us are going to exit you know due to one of these accidents well I think it's part of facing up to the random nature of life and there's a there's a truism that human beings are not very good at conceptualizing randomness I did a whole podcast with Maria Connecova about poker and you know living in conditions of uncertainty but one of my favorite examples I think I've mentioned this in the podcast before but it's my podcast known it's going to stop me from mentioning it again is when you talk about life expectancy there's a million different websites you can go on to and calculate your life expectancy and they always give you a number right like you'll probably live to be 90 and I think that people conceptualize that is I'm going to probably live to 90 and then die but I did find one website that actually also and I've lost it now it it kills me because I can't find it again but it actually took the probability to right so rather than just saying your expected value is 90 you know it knew what the tails were and it would randomly generate a number from that distribution you can click the button again and again and I think we don't appreciate how broad that distribution is like I got plenty of times when I was dying before the age of 60 and plenty of times when I lived to be over a hundred and that knowing that you're going to live to a brow 90 on average is interesting but much less relevant than the fact that you could die within years that's absolutely possible it absolutely and this you know this this should be the realm of psychology and I think we can all benefit from the insights of psychologists because of course we're playing all sorts of games with ourselves to you know deny that right there's a lot of cognitive dissonance around death and and we're and we're also everyone struggling to figure out well how do we use the time we have you know in that unknown amount of time one of my dear friends from childhood died young in his 40s and I sort of feared in the religious service you know what do you say about somebody who dies young you know and everyone's crushed right everyone's absolutely crushed sure and the minister talked about life being a gift nice but a gift of of you know unknown quantity unknown unknowable what quantity you get so think about how you're going to spend it and I I found that to be a very securely friendly um and and and you know thoughtful and um you know you've dealt you dealt with this in in your writings you know can move dealt with this so many people have dealt with this yet I think you know what you're getting at is that we have lots of games we play with ourselves to sort of deny our own death and to just put it out of our minds it's sort of understandable but and if you and and then you you can imagine all the move you know how many movie plots have there been about people knowing they're going to die the next day right where if they don't do this they're going to die at a certain time where an asteroid is coming and we only have for much time etc and how people behave but we've got to figure out what to do when we don't know how much time we've got left yes and you know we all look for some wisdom anywhere we can you know into that I by the way and I mentioned this in the book um I looked at comedians that's that's where I get my that's where I get my psychology and philosophy from so well I mean I think that you you you very um effectively convey this idea in the book and this is one of the reasons why it's a great book worth reading is they're not only do biology and so forth but you're not afraid to talk about the ramifications of these ideas for how we live our lives and how we think about our lives and you know they're among the things that the human brain is not good at among probability being one of them but another one is just accepting that some things happened without a reason right that uh we always trying to say well oh if this happened why did that happen and I'm going to find the reason and we're gonna fix it or whatever and uh you know I think I forget who it was it might have been Stephen Colbert considering your idea that it's comedians who are the wisest here but he says whenever anyone tells him everything happens for a reason he pushes them down the stairs and then he says I bet you can understand the reason why that just happened but a lot of things don't and it's very hard to craft a vision of life that accepts that things happen without explicit right I well there it is Sean I think there it is which is why we have you know so much of the mythology that we have it's understandable I mean it people are trying to think you know why why would we think about the afterlife well it's a very pleasant and comfortable you know comforting thought and and why you can create so much story around all that it's very hard to difficult very difficult to deal with you know the finite nature of life I mean life is great um but Ricky Jervet and I quote it in the book you know he just says look this is a holiday we get we we didn't exist for you know 14 and a half billion years and now we exist and we get 80 or 90 years if we're lucky yeah um you just make the most of it now there might be a and then you gotta think about okay what does make the most of it mean but at least it's I think it's healthy psychologically I think it's also really constructive in terms of how you choose to spend your days is to say look you know accept that this is it and I think that kind of puts a premium on your time I also think it makes you put a premium on other people's lives in their time there's actually some compassion and empathy that comes for that it might surprise people who are you know believers who would think that you know religiosity is important that's that's you know essential to a sort of a moral life but no I I think when you realize it everybody else also is constrained to one life that it might make you a more empathic and compassionate human being it's it's it's possible it is it is and I don't claim to have fully figured out myself do you have you heard about the discourse in philosophy circles around moral luck the idea of moral luckiness no I don't know this I mean they point out it's fun it is fun because you know in the real world you know you you have a few too many drinks and you hop in your car and you try to drive home right and that's against the law and you can be pulled over and punished for that but if you happen to run over someone as you pass through a red light because you were drunk driving just by chance the punishment is enormously greater than if you just drove home while inebriated even though your actions were the same the punishment is not because it depends on completely random things and so how do we deal with that and you might say well okay just give the same punishment to everyone who does exactly the same things but that's it's that's hard to do it's certainly not what we actually do in life like coming to terms with this is is even harder in real life than it sounds at first glance I think yeah no but I I think these are these are really exciting discussions to have and in some ways they're you know they're unfortunately probably had a too narrow a circle right that I think if we were not so dominated by religious ideas and I don't mean to I don't mean to dis religion I grew up and I was I was educated thank goodness I was educated for example in a in a Catholic high school that if that had not existed I don't think we'd be having that conversation today but I do think that to dominate the idea that there is you know a supernatural supreme being overlooking each of our lives you know that sort of inhibits exploration of other ideas that that might actually be really constructive for how we we live our lives and so you know there's I just hope that you know as generations pass that there's just more exploration of moral luck and you know the meaning of life without an afterlife well to borrow a phrase you are preaching to the converted when you say that but I mean maybe maybe to close up here I think it's been a great conversation and you know we at least reminded people about the important or the fact that there's a lot about what's going to happen in our lives that is not either purposeful or predictable but chemo if we can conjure him up here might have said that you know we can bring some meaning to our lives by taking actions so you do that among other things besides being a biologist and a writer you produce movies and I just want to give you a chance to explain to the audience out here why in the world when you clearly have enough on your plate you've decided to become a movie producer stories so same reason for writing books same reason for you and I having this conversation in or we're telling stories but film is such a powerful vehicle for stories and especially for science film sort of taking people on an adventure and immersing them in experience that they might not otherwise have and and I'm also I had some interesting early experiences with filmmakers and I was really intrigued by their craft because I've seen filmmakers you know concoct you know scenes out of their imagination that you know I just couldn't possibly imagine you know how they did that and so you know I'm comfortable well not comfortable but let's just put it this way I you know I try to write stories on paper when I've seen them translated to film there's just other dimensions that open up and also film you know it travels very well around the world and of course many of us seek out stories in film form so you know the brass tax troop for two writers like you and I is that a hundred or a thousand times more people will see the film version then read our books so there was a little bit of pragmatism but it's also the excitement of telling stories in other forms and when it goes well that it's also a very collaborative craft and you know the combination of visual imagery and music and all this can be you know just such a powerful memorable experience and so I've had the opportunity through the position I have now as the head of a documentary studio inside a philanthropy you know to work with lots of filmmakers and to support the work of lots of filmmakers and I think science stories you know we we need more of them out there in the world and it was another big motivation is that is to help science with its place in our culture by telling more science stories and trying to reach some audiences would not otherwise you know tune in for a story about science yeah I mean tell me what do you think but to me if you can find an activity that on the one hand is just a lot of fun to do but on the other hand also provide some good for the world then you know find a way to get involved with that and that sounds like what you've done yeah it's thanks Sean it's not that different honestly then like teaching I mean it's it's certainly not as it's not you know as pedantic as teaching it's just you're sharing stories with the world in a form like you know science has to compete with every other form of story in our world right and people voluntarily and you know and choose to listen or pay attention or not so science has to realize that we live in a you know we're a storytelling animal in a storytelling world we have to tell our stories and we have to move people you know I think the the biggest you know sort of shortcoming I find among scientists is that we you know we think that if people only knew what we knew you know only knew what was going on in our heads the world would be fine you know and maybe that's true but you got to motivate people to want to know a little bit more about what we know and you and you have to bring it in a form that is engaging and inspiring and emotional you know we're very much you know sort of cerebral beings a scientist but but you know we are we're an emotional species and I think it's that combination of storytelling and visuals and music and things like that that kind of roused that and be a much more intense experience for people than dare I say reading a book pressing companies up and of course when it comes to reading the books but oh yeah absolutely of course but books are I'll tell you this as a having made a lot of films books are a great place to start because writers have often fleshed out a lot of story threads that are great places to for filmmakers to to pick up so it's a it's a necessary process it's also books are generally a lot more a lot deeper and broader than films are films have to sort of keep up their pace and cannot wander into some of the dimensions that a book can so they're they're different media they they they each serve their important purposes but I am I am acknowledging that film might just be a little more popular it's possible that it does I'm gonna know but there's a there's an important role for a complex ecosystem of ways of communicating and one thing I've discovered is that having the ability to listen to someone's voice provides people a connection with them they wouldn't otherwise have which is why it's so great to have people like you here on the podcast so Sean Carroll thanks very much for appearing on the mindscape podcast thanks John it's a lot of fun
