Transcription for youtube_lqDa7M270Qo_audio.mp3: Hello, everyone. Welcome to this special bonus edition of the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host, Sean Carroll. So what's going on here? I do this with a little bit of trepidation. I have to admit. But what you'll hear if you have the courage or bizarre desire to actually listen to the following four hours worth of audio podcast is an interview of me rather than me interviewing anyone else. David Zierler of the Americans to the physics is the interviewer and it's an oral history. So this is basically my personal biography going from when I was a kid in school through college, through graduate school, through being a professor, the whole bit, okay? This is because the American Institute of Physics, which is a wonderful organization, has a wonderful program on oral histories where they interview famous accomplished physicists and then this is raw data for future historians who want to understand what was going on. And physics at different points in time. So we're talking like Richard Viamen, Stephen Weinberg, Vera Ruben, Marie Gelman, this kind of person. And they've also interviewed me. Now I'm not the only person who is not one in Nobel Prize or whatever to be interviewed. They're trying to cast a wider net and get as much raw data as you can, right? Why not? But I'm well aware that my own accomplishments in physics do not measure up to those of the big names who have been participating in this project. And honestly, I'm not quite sure why anyone would want to listen to the following four hours. With all respect to David who did a fantastic job and his very enthusiastic and very well informed, he's a very good oral historian. But my life is only so interesting. And there's way more details about my life than I usually talk about in the next four hours. A lot about not getting tenure at the University of Chicago. A lot about what it was like in high school and college and becoming an atheist and things like that. So stuff that again in all honesty, I'm a little bit uncomfortable talking about in public. But there's a, you know, if you're interested in it, there it is. Okay. My fondest hope would be if we could inspire somebody who was potentially going to become a physicist to realize that you could make a tremendous number of mistakes. Like I did and still kind of be a semi successful physicist in the end of it. I should also note that the audio quality isn't quite up to the standard we usually have here on landscape because we weren't planning on releasing this as a podcast. That's an idea that happened after the fact. Usually you're just looking for enough audio quality to do a transcript. And so by the way, so the audio quality here isn't that great, but there are tremendous transcripts. If you go to the AIP site, you can spend many, many fascinating hours reading the audio interviews, the oral history interviews with all sorts of people, big names and less big names and just fascinating stories to be told. So no need to listen to this. If you're a regular mind scape listener, but it's not quite your cup of tea, that's perfectly understandable. If you want to hear it is, there's aerial complaining in the background. She doesn't know why we're doing this. But for the rest of us, let's go. Okay, this is David Zeeler oral historian for the American Institute of Physics. It is January 4th 2021. I am so happy to be here with Dr. Sean and Carol. Sean, thank you so much for joining me today. Well, thanks very much for having me. Well, this is so exciting for me because you are one of the best interviewers out there. And so it's a unique opportunity for me to interview one of those best interviewers. So I'm really quite excited about this. It's way easier to be on this side of answering questions rather than asking them to be honest. So no preparation. All right, so to get started, would you please tell me your current titles and institutional affiliations and I put an S on both of them. And I might add also that besides your brick and mortar affiliations, you might also add your digital affiliations, which are absolutely institutional in quality and nature as well. Thanks very much. Yeah, I am a research professor of physics at Caltech where I have been for since 2006. I'm also an external professor at the Santa Fe Institute. I've just been for a couple years and literally I've not visited there since I became an external professor because we have a pandemic that got it in the way. Or maybe I visited there, but this was an unofficially and you know online. I have my website preposterous universe.com, which collects my various writings and things like that. And I'm the host of a podcast called Mindscape where I talk to a bunch of people, physicists as well as other people, as long as it's about interesting ideas. I'm happy to talk about it. Now the academic titles, what does research professor entail to the larger audience out there that might not be aware of the different natures of titles within a university department? It's actually a very rare title. So even within university departments, people might not understand it. And also my individual trajectory is very crooked and unusual in its own right. So there's path dependence and how I got there. But research professor is a faculty member, someone at the status of a professor, but someone who is not on the teaching faculty. So I don't have any obligations to teach students. And you know, to be perfectly honest, it's a teensy bit less prestigious than being on the teaching faculty. So it's like less prestige, but I get this benefit that I have all my time to myself. And part of that is why I spend so much time on things like podcasts and book writing. It's, you know, the time that I would spend if I were a regular faculty member on teaching, right, which is a huge amount of time. But otherwise, you know, the obligations are the same. I have graduate students. I can teach courses when I want to. I apply for grants, I write papers. It's just like being a professor. And you take external professor at the Santa Fe Institute to its extreme level, having never actually visited. Is that a common title for professors at the Santa Fe Institute? Well, I have visited just not since I got the title. So yes, it is actually a very common title for Santa Fe of other people. Santa Fe Institute is this unique place. It's a research institute in Santa Fe that is devoted to the study of complexity in all its forms. And that's a physics, but also biology, economics, society, computers, complex systems appear all over the place. And one of the things that the Santa Fe Institute tries to do is to be very, very tiny in terms of permanent faculty on site. There aren't that many people who sort of have as their primary job professor at the Santa Fe Institute. There's a few, but it's a small number. There's a large number of people who are affiliated one way or the other. And I think probably the most common is mine, which is the external professorship. You don't get paid for doing it. In fact, you basically lose money because you have to go visit Santa Fe occasionally and you can mostly get reimbursed, but I'm terrible about getting reimbursed. But the idea is that given the interdisciplinary nature of the institute, they can benefit and they do benefit from having not just people from different areas, but people from different areas with some sort of official connection to the institute. So I will help out with organizing workshops, choosing who the postdocs are, things like that. I wonder, Sean, given the way that the pandemic has upended so many assumptions about higher education, given how nimble Santa Fe is with regard to its core faculty and the number of people affiliated, but who are not there. I wonder if you see in some ways the Santa Fe model as a future alternative to the entire higher education model in the United States. You know, in a sense, I hope not. I think that Santa Fe should be the exception rather than the rule. There should be more places like it more than there are, but it's no replacement for universities. So I will never think that there's any replacement for having a professor at the front of the room and some students and they talking to each other in person and they can interact and you know office hours and whatever it is. I think that the vast majority of benefit that students get from their university education is from interacting with other students. And so I mean, maybe, you know, conditions down the line will force us into some terrible situation, but I would be very, very sad if that were the case. Having said that, I mean, you bring up one of my other pet crazy ideas, which is I would like there to be universities, at least some, again, maybe not the majority of them, but universities without departments. I think the departments, the physics department, the English department, whatever, they serve an obvious purpose in universities, but they are also they also obvious disadvantages, you know, someone like me, for example, who is very much a physicist, but also is interested in philosophy. And I would like to sort of be more active, even than I am in philosophy at the official level writing papers and things like that, but I'm classified as a physicist, that's what I am and I see this over and over again where we, you know, I want to committee to hire someone new in the physicist, want to hire a biophysicist and all these people apply and over and over again, the physicists say, what is it physics. And I'm sure the same thing happens if you're an economic historian and you know, do you go to the economics department or the history department or a biochemist right. And so I'm a big believer in the disciplines, but it would be at least fun to experiment with the idea of a university that just hired really good people, let every student sort of carve out a path of study, let every faculty member carve out a disciplinary niche in whatever way they thought was best at the time. I wonder if in some ways you're truly old fashioned in the way that what we would call scientists today in the 17th and 18th century, they called natural philosophers. Yeah, and but you know, I need to sort of emphasize the most important thing and then my little twist on it. The modern world academically broadly, but also science in particular physics in particular is very, very specialized. Okay, that's not by itself bad. You can make progress digging deeply into some specialized subfield. It makes perfect sense that most people are specialists within academia, but there's also again, very obvious benefits to having some people who are not specialists who are more generalists who are more interdisciplinary. And the problem is not that everyone is a specialist. The problem is that because universities are self-sustaining. People who get hired are picked by the people who are already faculty members there. If everyone is a specialist, they hire more specialists, right? You know, they promote the idea of being a specialist and they just don't know what to do with the idea that you might not be a specialist. So you have to even though the specialists should always be the majority, we non specialists need to make an effort to push back to be included more than we are. Sean, before we begin developing the life narrative, your career and personal background trajectory, I want to ask a very present-tist question. So from the outside looking in, you're on record saying that your natural environment for working at theoretical physics is a pen and a pad. And your career as a podcaster, your comfort zone in the digital medium from the outside looking in, I've been thinking, is there somebody who was better positioned than you to weather the past 10 months of social distancing, right? So I wonder in what ways can you confirm that outside assumption, but also in reflecting on the past near year, what has been difficult that you might not have expected from all of this solitary work? No, you're completely correct. Actually, your suspicion is on point. And in fact, my wife, Jennifer, will let who is a science writer and culture writer for the website, ours, Technica, she works from home too. And so, you know, between the two of us, and we got a couple of cats a couple years ago, right? The degradations that we've had to face due to the pandemic are much less onerous for us than they are for most people. Having said that, there's still really annoying. You know, you do travel a lot, right? As a, as a scientist, and you know, you give talks and things like that, go to conferences, interact with people, you know, I'm very, very collaborative and the kind of science that I do. So that's hard, but also just getting out and seeing your friends and going to the movies has been hard. Now, I did when the quarantine pandemic lockdown started, I did think to myself that, you know, there are a bunch of people trying to be good citizens, thinking themselves, you know, what can I do for the world to make it a better place? A lot of people in science sort of moved their research focus over to something pandemic or virus related. Now, I'm self aware enough to know that I have nothing to add to the discourse on combating the pandemic. That's not what I do for a living. But I do do educational things pedagogical things. So I took it upon myself to do this YouTube series called the biggest ideas in the universe where it ended up being 48 videos on average an hour long. But I went literally two days before everything closed down. I went to the camera store and I bought a green screen and, you know, some tripods and whatever. And I went online and learned how to make YouTube videos and they were very bad at first. The production quality was very bad. You know, the green screen didn't work very well. So you can see me on the one hand as the videos go on. The image gets better and sharper and the sound gets better. My hair gets worse because right there's no haircuts. So I had to cut my own hair. But so on the one hand, I got that done and it was very popular hundreds of thousands of views for each of the videos on the other hand. I feel like I kind of blew it in terms of man, that was really an opportunity to get some work done to get my actual job done because, you know, like I said, like you said, it's pencil and paper and I could do it. And in fact, rather than having a career year in terms of getting publications done, it was a relatively slow year. And finally, finally, catching up now to the work that I'm supposed to be doing rather than choosing to do to make the pandemic burden a little bit lighter on people. And I'm curious in your career, your relatively newer career as an interviewer. You know, for me, I'm a historian. I've been interviewing scientists for almost 20 years now. And in our world and the world of oral history, we experience something of an existential crisis last February and March because for us, it was so deeply ingrained that doing oral history meant getting in a car, getting on a plane with your video audio recording equipment and going to do it in person. That it was really, it was a quite difficult transition to embrace and accept video conferencing as an acceptable means. I wonder for you that might not have had that scholarly baggage. If it was easier for you to just sort of jump right in and say, you know, zoom is the way to do it. And perhaps you'll continue to do this even after the vaccine is completed and the pandemic is over. You know, I'm still a little new at being a podcaster. Like it's two and a half years. I've been doing it. And just like with the videos, my style and my presentation has been improving. I hope over time, certainly my sound quality has been improving. But I did, but I did learn something. You know, I was absolutely of the strong feeling that you get a better interview when you're in person. And I think that's true in terms of the context of the interview, because like you can see someone, you can interrupt them, right? Like you know when someone wants to ask a question, you can see their facial expressions and things like that. There's no delay on the line. But honestly, for me as the interviewer number one, it's enormously more work to do interview in person. Either I'm traveling and lugging around equipment or I need to drive somewhere or whatever. But also, even though in principle, the sound quality should be better because I bring my own microphones. I don't have any control over the environment. And you know, unlike oral histories that for the podcast, the audio quality noise level things like that are hugely important. Because people are listening with headphones for an hour at a time, right? And often you can get as good or better sound quality remotely. And so these days, obviously all of my podcast interviews have been remote, but I'm thinking most of them are just going to continue to be that way going forward. And it's an expense for me because as an effort to get the sound quality good, I give every guest a free microphone because I don't want them to use their built in laptop microphones. So I send them a microphone, cost me money, but it's a goodwill gesture to them and they appreciate it. And it's all worth it in the end. Given how productive you've been over these past 10 months, when we look to the future, what are the things that are most important to you that you want to return to in terms of normality? Even if you can do remote interviews, even if it's been a boon to work by yourself for work in solitude as a theoretical physicist, what are you missing in all of your endeavors that you want to get back to? Well, I mean, I think it's no question because I am in the early stages, early to middle stages of writing a trade book, which will be the most interdisciplinary book I've ever written. The tenetive title is The Physics of Democracy, where I will be mixing ideas from physics, statistical physics and complex systems and things like that with political theory and political practice and social choice theory and economics and a whole bunch of things. And I'm very, very close to like phoning up my publisher and saying, can be delayed because a huge part of my plan was to hang out with people who think about these things all the time. And it's one thing to do an hour long interview and I can do that. But in Santa Fe is going to play a big role here because they're very interested in complex systems and this is an example of it. They don't frame it in exactly those terms, but when I emailed David Crackauer, president of SFI and said, I'm starting this book project. Do you have any pointers to work that's already been done? And he says, yes, everything the Santa Fe Institute has ever done in counts. So yeah, I think that you know, it can't be overemphasized the extent to which the hard detailed work of theoretical physics is done with pencil and paper and equations and pictures, little drawings and so forth. But the ideas come from hanging out with people, right. And in fact, Jeffrey West, who is a former particle physicist who's now at the Santa Fe Institute, has studied this phenomenon quantitatively and he points out that innovation, no matter how you measure it, whether it's in publications or patents or brilliant ideas, Nobel prizes, it scales more than linearly with population density. In other words, of course, as the population goes up, there's more ideas, but it goes up faster than number of people go up. And it's because you're interacting with more people, right. You're being exposed to new ideas and very often, you don't even know where those ideas come from. You can't remember the conversation that sparked them. So again, I'm going to zoom, etc. podcasts are great. You need to go and hang out with people, especially in the more interdisciplinary fields. So the salon as an enlightenment ideal is very much relevant to you. Very, very much. Yes, that's right. In fact, you know, this is the other. On the flip side of that, the biggest motivation I had for starting my podcast was when I wrote a previous book called The Big Picture, which was also quite interdisciplinary. And I had to talk to philosophers, neuroscientists, origin of life researchers, computer scientists, people like that. I had a license to do that, right. Like I was like, I was a credentialed physicist, but I was also writing a book so I could call up Jack Showstack, Nobel Prize winning biologist who works on the origin of life. And I said, you know, I'm writing a book and I come talk to you for an hour in your lab. And he's like, sure. And then when the book went away, I didn't have the license to do that anymore. All these cool people I couldn't talk to anymore. So now that I have a podcast, I get to talk to more cool, very broad people that I ever did before. I'm curious if your more recent interests and politics are directly a reflection of what we've seen in science and public policy with regard to the pandemic. In other words, you have for a long time, you know, been quite happy to throw your hat in the ring with regard to science and religion and things like that. And science itself gets this no nothingness from all kinds of places in society. I wonder if that's had a particular intellectual impact on you. So I think to first approximation, no, it has not because the thing that has not changed about me is what I'm really fired up by are the fundamental big ideas, not the policy implementations of them. And I think that's a very important thing to do. And I think that's a very important thing to do. And I think that's a very important thing to do. And I think that's a very important thing to do. And I think that's a very important thing to do. It's all trying to generate new ideas and make arguments, right? It's not just, I mean, the biggest ideas in the universe video series is the exception to this because there I'm really talking about well established things I purposely stayed away from more speculative things. But in the books I write in the podcasts I do in the blog or whatever, I'm not just explaining things or even primarily explaining things. I'm trying to develop new ideas and understand them. So my interest in the physics of democracy is really because democracy is our complex systems. And I was struck by this strange imbalance between economics and politics like econo physics is a big field. There's multiple textbooks that is, of course, as you can take. Whereas political physics doesn't exist. Why is that right? Why don't people think that way? So it's really the ideas that have always driven me and frankly the pandemic is an annoyance to the way rather than nudging me in that direction. But undoubtedly Sean, a byproduct of all of your outreach work is to demonstrate that scientists are people that there isn't necessarily an agenda that mistakes are made and that all of this stuff for which conspiracies are made of, right? Your work goes a long way in demonstrating that there's just, there's nothing to those ideas. So that's true. That's why I said to first approximation, you know, to second approximation, I care a lot about the public image of science. I care a lot about the substance of the scientific ideas being accurately portrayed. And you know, I've learned in a sort of negative way from a lot of counter examples about how to badly sell the ideas that science has by just hectoring people and be writing them and telling them they're irrational and that doesn't work. So if you actually take a scientific attitude toward the promotion of science, you can study what kinds of things work, right? What kinds of approaches are most effective? And I'm not an expert in that honestly. I'm not really study the literature carefully, but I've read some of it and maybe you hinted at this a little bit in the way you asked the question, but I do think that the one obvious thing that someone can do is just be a good example. Right? Rather than telling other people they're stupid, be likable, be friendly, be open-minded. And by the way, all these are hard. I don't always succeed. Like it's not just a platitude. You know, it's much easier, especially online, to be snarky and condescending than it is to be open-minded. And also, by the way, some people don't deserve open-mindedness. Some people are just crackpots and drawing the line. So, what I'm trying to do is ask questions and willing to learn and therefore worth talking to versus who is just set in their ways and not worth reaching out to. These are all very, very hard questions, much harder than fundamental physics or complex systems. Sean, let's take it all the way back to the beginning. I'd like to start first with your parents. Tell me a little bit about them and where they're from. Roughly speaking, I come from a long line of steel workers. My parents got divorced very early when I was six. So, my father was the first person in his family to go to college. And he became a salesman. He didn't, certainly nothing academic in his background. But then he sort of left the picture of my mom raised me and she never went to college. So, I went to a large public school. My mom was tickled. She loved the fact that I was good at science and wanted to do it. She never ever discouraged me from doing it. But she had no way of knowing what it meant to encourage me either. What college to go to, what to study, or anything like that. And even the teachers in my high school who were great in many ways couldn't really help me with that. A lot of the reasons why my path has been sort of zigzaggy and back and forth is because I guess the two reasons are number one. I didn't have great sources of advice. And number two, I wasn't very good at taking the advice when I got it. Did you connect with your father later in life? No, not really. It never really bothered me that much. Honestly, I know that many people, this is a big deal. But my attitude was my mom raised me and I love her very much. And that's all I really need. And you didn't have really any other father figures in your life. Not especially. No, I mean, my mom got remarried. And so I had a stepfather, but that didn't go very well as it often doesn't. And then they got redeveloped and so forth. So, you know, I, I, and maybe that I don't know how it reflected in how I developed, but I learned from books more than from talking to people. You know, I never even had, I had some great teachers along the way, but I wouldn't say like I was inspired to do science or anything like that by my teachers. My favorite teachers were English teachers, to be honest. But I love science because I hung out at the public library and read a lot of books about black holes and quarks and the big bang. And I just said, you know, whatever this entails, because I had no idea at the time, this is what I want to do. Like if I can earn a living doing this, that's what I want to do. And so that was 10 years old. I don't recommend anyone listening that you choose your life's path when you're 10 years old, because what do you know? But it's worked pretty well for me. And what neighborhood did you grow up in? The, when I was very young, we were in Levittown, Pennsylvania. So it was literally like I said, long line of steel workers. And there's a famous Levittown in Long Island. But there are other Levittowns, including one outside Philadelphia, which is where I grew up. And then we moved to Yardley, not that far away, suburban Philadelphia, roughly speaking, because there's a big steel mill, Fairless works. And, or there was, I think it's gone by now. The world has changed a lot. My mom worked as a secretary for US deal. My grandfather was a salesman, et cetera. I think both grandparents go both grandfathers work for US deal. Were your family sensibilities working class or more middle class, would you say? I'm not quite sure I can tell the difference, but working class is probably more accurate. I guess, you know, my family was conservative politically. So they weren't, you know, joining the union or anything like that. The unions were anathema. So my stepfather had gone to college and he was an occupational therapist. So he made a little bit more money. So I think economically, during the period of time when my mom had remarried, we were probably middle class. Was the church a part of your upbringing at all? When I was very young, we went to church every Sunday. And then when my grandmother, my mother's mother passed away when I was about 10, we stopped going. It was clearly for her benefit that we were going. And as far as I was concerned, the best part was we went to the International House of Bankakes after church every Sunday. But, you know, I do think that my religious experiences, such as they were, were always fairly mild. I was never repulsed by the church nor attracted to it in any dramatic way. So there are no, not to put you on the psychologist couch, but there are no experiences in early in life that sparked an interest in you to, you know, take this stand as a scientist in your debates on religion. No, quite the opposite. In fact, so here is this sort of embarrassing but true story, which I guess this is the venue to tell these things in. I went to church, like I said, and I wasn't believer, such as it was when I was young. And I just drifted away very, very gradually. I never was a strong atheist or outspoken or anything like that. And then I went to college at Villanova University in a different suburb of Pennsylvania, a Philadelphia, which is a Catholic school. It was not a very strict Catholic school, like you didn't have to be Catholic, but over 90% of the students were, I think. And, you know, you took religion classes and I took religion classes and actually enjoyed them immensely. But it was, but the thing that flipped the switch in my head was listening to music. In particular, there was a song by Emerson Lake in Palmer called the Only Way, which was very avowally atheist. Right? And it was my first exposure to the idea that you could not only be atheist, but be happy with it, like be proud of it rather than be sort of like slightly embarrassed by it. Right? So you could actually admit it. And just if people said, you know, what are your religious beliefs? You say, oh, I'm an atheist. Right? But I think, like I said before, these are ideas that get put into your mind very gradually by many, many little things. And who knows what the different influences were, but that was the moment that crystallized it when I finally got to say that I was an atheist. So it wasn't until I went to Catholic University that I became an elsebook in atheist. Sean, if mathematical and scientific ability has a genetic component to it, I'm not asserting one way or the other. But if it does, is there anyone in your family that you can look to and say, this is maybe where I get some of this from? Not especially. No. I mean, I do think that my parents were smart cookies. But, you know, again, not in any sense intellectual or anything like that. Certainly no one, no one academic in my family. Let's just say that. And as a 10 year old, I mean, do you have any, was there any formative moment where it's a big world out there for a 10 year old? How do you land on theoretical physics and cosmology and things like that in the library? What spark that interest in you? You know, I wish I knew what I knew this interview was coming up. And I thought about it. People asked me that a million times. I honestly don't know. I got books. I liked reading. Okay. That was always true. And probably there was a first, I mean, certainly by logical considerations. There was a first science book that I got a first physics book, right? But I don't remember what it was. Because for a lot of non scientists, it's hard to tell the difference between, you know, particle physics and astronomy. I got a lot of books on astronomy. I look a lot of books about the planets and space travel and things like that. Because grandparents and aunts and uncles knew that I like that stuff, right? And I enjoyed that. But it wasn't my passion. It was really, you know, the black holes and the quarks that really got me going. But I don't know what started it. You know, I did people always asked did science fiction have anything to do with it? And I was a fan of science fiction, but not like a super fan. And also I think that my science fiction fandom came after my original interest in physics rather than before. So I honestly just can't tell you what the spark was. Did you have a strong curriculum in math and science in high school? No, no. It was fine. You know, our senior year in high school, there was a calculus class. So that was the, it was I think a very, very typical large public school system kind of curriculum where there were different tracks. So I was on the advanced track and so forth. It wasn't even officially an AP class. So there wasn't any, you know, I'd take calculus again when I got to college with Villanova. It's clear enough. It's close to home that tuition was right. You got a full scholarship there, of course. But I wanted to come back to the question about class working class middle class was something like a like a like a Princeton or a Harvard. Was that even on your radar as an 18 year old? Was that something that you are a guidance counselor or your mom thought was even worth considering at that time? So actually this is completely unrelated. But let me say something else before I forget because it's in the general area of high school and classes and things like that. By far the most intellectually formative experience of my high school years was being on the forensics team. Forensics in the sense of speech and debate. You know, I like I like the idea of debate. And we had a wonderful teacher at Kelly who would won the national championship or coach national championship debate teams before. And it was funny because you know, now I have given a lot of talks in my life. I have gotten good at it. Right. This is, you know, what I do. But when I started out on the speech and debate team and like they literally every single time I would give a talk, I would get the same comments like the substance of what you're saying is really good. But you're so bad at delivering it. You know, you're so boring and so still to it and so stiff. So, but I did overcome that and I think that I would not necessarily overcome it if I hadn't gone through it. I forced myself by being on that team and trying to get better at it. And of course it just helps you in thinking and logic, right. And I think I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm not saying I'm I was extremely hampered by not being immersed in an environment, we're going to Harvard or Princeton was a possibility Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, we did briefly flirt with the idea that I could skip agriaate when I was in high school or that I could even go to a local private school, the Lawrence village academy in New Jersey. Yeah. understood whether it would be important or not, et cetera. And that includes me. I'm not discounting me. There was no internet back then. It was hard to figure out what the options were. Certainly, I would have loved to go to Harvard, but I didn't even apply. We just knew we couldn't afford it. Roughly speaking, my mom and my stepfather told me, we have zero money to pay for you to go to college. And we were in that donut hole where they made enough to not get substantial financial aid, but not enough to be able to pay for you to go to college. And things are much worse now, by the way. So enormously, again, I can't complain compared to what things are like now, but that narrowed down my options quite a bit. And then Villanova, which was one of the few places that had merit scholarships. So like the Ivy Leagues have a big, or at least had, at the time, I don't really know now, but they had a big policy of only giving need-based need. It would be completely blind to you. You don't get a scholarship just because you're smart. And there were two sort of big national universities that I knew that were exceptions to that, which were the University of Chicago and Rice University. And Rice offered me a full tuition scholarship and Chicago offered me a partial scholarship. But Villanova offered me full tuition that was closer, so the cost of living would be less. And so Villanova was basically chosen for me purely on economic reasons. And this is not anything really about me, but it's sort of a mention of sympathy to anyone out there who is in a similar situation. The benefits you get from being around people who have all this implicit knowledge are truly incalculable, which I know because I wasn't around them. Even as late as my junior or senior year as undergraduates in college, when I knew, and everyone knew, that I wanted to go to graduate school and be a professor in whatever, no one had told me that graduate students in physics got their tuition paid for, by stipends or research assistantships or whatever. So I was still sort of judging where I could possibly go on the basis of what the tuition numbers were, even though really those are completely irrelevant and no one told me. Eventually, I found out. So eventually, I figured it out. And honestly, I didn't even really appreciate that going to Villanova would be any different than going to Harvard. I would have gone to Harvard if I could have at the time, but I think it was a big difference. I think now, as wonderful as Villanova was, and I can rapsodize about what a great experience I had there, but it's nothing like going to a major top notch university, again, just because of the other students who are around you. I had great professors at Villanova, but most of the students weren't that into the life of the mind. Some of them weren't. I made some very good friends there, but it's the exception rather than the rule. And when I went to graduate school at Harvard, it was just, of course, it was graduate school, but I could tell that the undergraduate environment was entirely different, and not necessarily because they were all bookish. Harvard is not the most bookish place in the world. It's the place where you go if you're the offspring of the Sultan of Brunai or something like that, right? Powerful people fall over the place, go there. But still, the intellectual life and atmosphere is just entirely different than at a place like Villanova or like Pennsbury High School, where I went to high school. Sean, I'm so glad you raised the formative experience of your forensics team because this is an unanswerable question, but it is very useful, thematically, as we continue the narrative. And that's the extent to which you're embraced of being a public intellectual and talking with people throughout all kinds of disciplines and getting on the debate stage and presenting and doing all of these things. The nature versus nurture question there is would that have been your path no matter what academic track you took? In other words, let's say you went to law school and you would now have a podcast and alternate or a multiverse innovation or something like that. And I remember who was I talking to. I was Mark Trodden who was telling me a story about you. And I asked him in graduate school, was Sean Carroll, was that the Sean Carroll that we know today? Was that the same person? And he said, absolutely. That was absolutely the same. But he didn't know me in high school. He said, there you go. It's a different me. It's funny that you mentioned law school. Law school was probably my second choice at the time. I mean, knowing what I know now, I would have thought about philosophy or even theoretical computer science or something like that. But at the time, law seemed like this wonderful combination of logic and human interest, which I thought was fascinating. But yeah, the actual question you ask is a hard one. Because I'm not sure. I've only lived my life once. Who knows? I did always have an interest in, I don't want to use the word outreach, because that sort of has formal connotations. But in reaching out, in talking to people, in sort of sharing what I learned. And that's why I joined the debate in speech team, talking in front of a group of people, teaching in some sense. I taught a couple of courses when I was at, not courses, but guest lectures when I was in high school. My teachers let me do like a guest lecture. And again, uniformly, I was horrible. Like, I can't, literally, my math teacher let me teach a little 10 minute thing on how to, we were, I'm sorry, not math teacher. I was taking Fortran. We've learned Fortran, the programming language back then. And there are numerical variables and character variables. So I was very good at Fortran, and he asked me to do a little exposition to the class about character variables. And I remember, on the one hand, I did it, and I sat down thinking, but that was really bad. I didn't do very well. And my teacher, who is a wonderful guy, he thinks about it a second and goes, did you ever think about how really hard it is to teach people things? And which is probably not the nicest thing you could have said at the time, but completely accurate. And I think that Susan Cain wrote this wonderful book on introverts that really caught on and really clarified a lot of things for people. And absolutely for me, I am an introvert. I am not someone who gains energy by interacting with other people. It is incredibly draining for me to do it. And all of the ability I have to give talks or anything like that has come from working at it. Not a sort of inborn natural effortless kind of thing. And I can do it. And it is fun. I enjoy it in the moment. And then I got to go to sleep afterwards or at least be left alone. Like just leave me alone. The idea of going out to dinner with a bunch of people after giving a talk is, I do it because I have to do it. But it's not something I really look forward to. But yes, but with all those caveats in mind, I think so. I think that as much as I love the ideas themselves, talking about the ideas, sharing them, getting feedback, learning from other people, these are all crucially important parts of the process to me. So probably yes, I would still have a podcast even if I'd gone to law school. So there's no imaginable scenario. Like you said before, your career track has zigged and zigged in all kinds of unexpected ways. But there's probably no scenario where you would have pursued an academic career where you were doing really important, really good, really fundamental work, but work that was generally not known to 99.99% of the population out there. I don't think so. It's hard for me to imagine that I would do that. I have enormous respect for the people who do that. When people talk about the need for science outreach or for education and things like that, I think that there is absolutely a responsibility to do outreach, to get the message out, especially if the kind of work you do has no immediate economic or technological impact, right? Like we can't justify theoretical cosmology on the basis that it's going to cure diseases. It's only being done for the sake of discovery. So we need to share those discoveries with people. But I think of that responsibility is located in the field, not on individuals. I think there's some people who, I don't want to be, have them out there talking to people and they don't want to be out there talking to people. And that's fine. I love people who are just so passionate about their little specialty. That's all they want to do. And they get so deep into it that no one else can follow them and they do their best to explain. And it's just wonderful. And I love it. But it's not me. I really do appreciate the interactiveness that jumping back and forth. I have a short attention span. This is something that is by task to sort of try to be good in a field which really does require a long attention span. Someone who doesn't really have that. So on that note, just in terms, as a matter of bandwidth, do you ever feel a pull or are you ever frustrated given all of your activities and responsibilities that you're not doing more in the academic specialty where you're most at home? Because, I mean, let's face it, quantum mechanics, gravitation, cosmology, these are fields that need a lot of help. There's still fundamental questions. Do you ever feel maybe I should just put all of that aside and really focus hard on some of the big questions that are out there? Or do you feel like you have the best of both worlds that you can do that and all of the other things and neither suffer? No, I think this is actually an excellent question and I have gone back and forth on it. And since the answer is not clear, I decide to do what is the most fun. So I could completely convince myself that in fact, and this is actually more true now than it maybe was 20 years ago for my own research, that I benefit intellectually in my research from talking to a lot of different people, doing a lot of different kinds of things. That's less true if what you're doing is trying to derive a new model for dark matter or for inflation. But what you're trying to do is more foundational work, trying to understand the emergence of space time or the dynamics of complex systems or things like that, then there are absolutely ways in which this broader focus has helped me. Now, can I promise you that the benefit is worth the cost and I wouldn't actually be better off just sitting down and spending all of my time thinking about that one thing? No, I cannot in good conscience do that. And furthermore, anyone who's really done physics with any degree of success knows that sometimes, you're just so into it, you don't want to think about anything else, right? When you're falling asleep, and you're taking a shower, when you're feeding the cat, you're really thinking about physics. And then I'm happy to admit that someone says, oh, you have to do a podcast interview. You know, I'm like, ah, I'm gonna do this now, I got work as he is going well. But then there are other times when you're stuck, and you can't even imagine, like looking at the equations on your sheet of paper and then, okay, oh, I get to talk about ancient Roman history on the podcast today, thanks. Well, Sean, you can take solace in the fact that many of your colleagues who work in these same areas, their world class, and you can be sure that they're working on these problems. Yeah, you know, again, I'm a big believer in diverse ecosystems, a big believer that there's no right way to be a physicist. Some people are, and you know, not just that there are different approaches, but that they're not just, they should be allowed out of principle, but in different historical circumstances, progress has been made from very different approaches. So to say, well, here's the approach, and this is what we should do, is that's the only mistake I think you can make. And in fact, I would argue, as I sort of argued a little bit before, that as successful as the model of specialization and disciplinary attachment has been, and it should continue to be the dominant model, it should be 80%, not 95% of what we do. Right. Right. Let's get back to Villanova. I'm curious, is there a straight line between being a 10-year-old and making a B-line to the physics and astronomy departments? Was that the game plan from day one for you? I think so. You know, the thing that I was not able to become clear on for a while was the difference between physics and astrophysics. Yeah. I'm surprised you've gotten this far into the conversation without me mentioning, I have no degrees in physics. Both my undergraduate and graduate degrees are an astronomy, and both for weird historical reasons. My stepfather's boss's husband was a professor in the astronomy department in Villanova, and the astronomy department was just better than the physics department at that time. It was very small. There were literally two people in my graduating class in the astronomy department. Everyone got to do research from their first year in college, right? And so that's a wonderful environment with all of your friends are there. You know all the faculty, everyone hangs out, and you're doing research, which very few of the physics faculty were doing. And I didn't think that it would matter whether I was an astronomy major or a physics major, to be honest. And in some extent it didn't, like I took almost all the physics classes. There was one course I was supposed to take to also get a physics degree. I got a minor in physics, but if I had taken a course called nuclear physics lab, then I would have gotten a physics bachelor's degree also. And this chair of the physics department begged me to take this course because he knew I was gonna go to a good graduate school, and then he could count me as an alumnus, right? But I was like, no, I don't want to take nuclear physics lab. That's just not my thing. But the only graduate schools I applied to were in physics, because by then I figured out that what I really wanted to do was physics, but I didn't get in. And so I, I, I sweet talked, well I got in some places, but not others. I did not get in at Harvard, and I sweet talked my way into the astronomy department at Harvard, and again, I convinced myself that it wouldn't really matter that much. And again, I was wrong, you know, again, because I underestimated this importance of just hanging out with like-minded people, you know? Like I took all the courses, and I had one very good friend, Ted Pine, who was also in the astronomy department, also interested in all the same things I was. So he was an enormous help to me, but it's not like there's 20 other people who are doing the same kind of thing, and you hang out and have lunch and go to parties and talk about Feynman diagrams. That just didn't happen. Sean, I wonder if you, if you stumbled upon one of the great deals in the astronomy and physics divide, and that is as an astronomy student, you naturally had to take all kinds of physics classes, but physics majors didn't necessarily have to take all kinds of astronomy classes. It's true, but you know, I did have to take astronomy classes, and I've forgotten almost all of it. So I'm not sure that it was the best use of my time, you know, look, the astronomy department at Harvard was a wonderful magical place, which is absolutely top-notch. And you know, literally my office mate, while I was in graduate school won the Nobel Prize for discovering the accelerating universe, not while he was in graduate school, but later. So I can't complain once again, can't complain about the intellectual environment that that represented, but, and you know, I still did, I was not very good at, sorry, let me back up yet again. By the time I got to graduate school, I finally caught on that, you know, taking classes for a grade was completely irrelevant. What matter was learning the material. So I audited way more classes. And in particular math classes, I said in all these classes on group theory and differential geometry and topology and things like that. Again, stuff that's not been that useful to me, but I just loved it so much. And as well as philosophy and literature classes at Harvard. So, you know, I did my best to take advantage of those circumstances. And I guess the final thing is that the teaching at that time in the physics department at Harvard, not the best in the world. There were some classes that were awesome, but there were some required classes that were just like pulling teeth to take. And guess what? I was an astronomy major, so I didn't have to take them. So that was a benefit. I'm not sure if it was a very planned benefit, but I did benefit that way. Sean, I wonder, maybe it's more of a generational question, but because so many cosmologists enter the field via particle physics, I wonder if you saw any advantages of coming in it through astronomy. Are there any advantages through a classical education and astronomy that have been advantageous for your career in cosmology? I think that there, if I, so I'm not sure there's a net advantage or disadvantage, but there were advantages, okay? I think that's the right way to put it. The two advantages I can think of are number one, at that time, it's a very specific time, late 80s, early 90s. Specific in the sense that both particle physics and astronomy were in a lot, right? It was not the exciting go-go days that you might have some both before and after. So it was difficult to know what to work on and things like that. And in particular, the physics department at Harvard had not been converted to the idea that cosmology was interesting, okay? I remember having a talk with Howard George, I didn't believe either the solar neutrino problem or big bang nucleosynthesis. And I was like, okay, you don't have to believe this solar neutrino problem, but you absolutely have to believe big bang nucleosynthesis. In retrospect, he should have believed both of them. But the astronomy department, again, there were no faculty members doing early universe cosmology at Harvard, either physics or astronomy and other bad planning on my part. But there were postdocs. The faculty members who were at Harvard, the theorist, George Field, Bill Press and others, would, they were smart and broad enough to know that some of the best work was being done in this field. So they should hire postdocs working on that stuff. And so I got to talk to a lot of wonderful people who are now faculty members at different places, Fred Adams, Katie Freese, Larry Woodrow, Terry Walker, a bunch of people who are really, really very helpful to me and learning things. I love historicizing the term cosmology and when it became something that was respectable to study. And you get different answers from different people. At Steve Weinberg tells me something very different from Michael Turner, who tells me something very different from Paul Steinhardt, who tells me something very different from Alan Gooth. So for you and your career, when did cosmology become something where you can proudly say, this is what I do? This is real physics. This is something that's respectable. I'm not sure I ever doubted it. I don't think that that was a conversion experience that I needed to have. Because it came before you, you mean? Well, or I just didn't care. Yeah. I guess I was already used to not worrying too much. I mean, maybe I think probably took this too far, not worrying too much about what other people thought of my intellectual interests. As long as I thought it was interesting, that counted for me. Of course, Harvard Astronomy at the time was the home of the CFA Redshift Survey, Margaret Geller and John Hookrah. On the observational side, it was the birth of large scale galaxy surveys, Bob Kirschner and his supernova studies were also a big deal. So the idea of doing observational cosmology was absolutely there and just obvious at the time. So as far as that was concerned, that ship had sailed, everyone knew that that was real. Now, there are a couple of things to add to that. One is, it was completely unclear whether we would ever make any progress in observational cosmology. People had learned things, but it was very slow. I remember Margaret Geller, who did the CFA Redshift Survey, when the idea of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey came along, and it was going to do a million galaxies instead of a few thousand. Her response was, why would you do that? Like, we've done a few thousand. What else you could have learned from a few million, right? And we learned a lot, is the answer, as it turns out, and Margaret is a brilliant person, so that just it's not a comment on her, but just how hard it is to extrapolate that. The other anecdote along those lines is, with my office mate, Brian Schmidt, who will later win the Nobel Prize, there's this parameter in cosmology called Omega, the total energy density of the universe compared to the critical density. And just like the Hubble constant, we had tried to measure this for decades, right? With maybe improvement, maybe not. It wasn't really clear. And so as the naive theorist, I said, well, it's okay, we'll get it. We'll get there eventually. We'll figure it out, we'll measure it. And Brian, who was a working class observational astronomer, he's like, no, we won't, you don't understand how many difficulties, how many systematic errors, statistical errors, all these observational selection biases, it's just really, really hard. So we made a bet. We made a bet not on what the value of Omega would be, but on whether or not we would know the value of Omega 20 years later. And we bet a little bottled port, because that's all we could afford is poor graduate students. And then of course, Brian and his team helped measure the value of Omega by discovering the accelerating universe. So he won the Nobel Prize, but I won that little bottle of port. Okay, I just want to say, I know what that left out of the historic record. And I think the final thing to say, since I do get to be a little bit personal here, is, even though I was doing cosmology and I was in an astronomy department, still in my mind, I was a theoretical physicist. And you know, it was really like quantum gravity or particle physics or field theory that were most interesting to me. And I wanted to do it all. And so that included the early universe cosmology, but I didn't think of myself as being defined as a cosmologist even at that time. And it wasn't until like my first year as a post-doc at MIT, when I went to a summer school, and again, meeting people, talking to them, it was a summer school, it was in Italy, people were sitting around with little apparent thieves or whatever, late at night. And you know, people were asking different questions, what do you do? And someone asked some question, I think it might have been about Big Bang nucleosynthesis. And I answered it, I was like, oh no, here's why it works. And I explained it. And one of my fellow post-docs, afterward, came up to me and said, that was really impressive. And I never occurred to me that it was impressive. And I realized that, okay, you know, you do need to be something, you can't be everything. And maybe what I was was a cosmologist. So it wasn't until my first year as a post-doc that I would have classified myself in that way. So I'm to go back to the question in high school about whether or not a Harvard or a Princeton was on your radar. I'm curious, as a junior or a senior at Villanova, given that economically and even geographically, you were not so far away from where you were as a high schooler. What had changed where now a place like a Harvard would have seemed within reach? Because they pay for your tuition. That's all it is. I never, like, I would have gladly gone to some distant university. Like I'd never had as a high priority staying here, lower Bucks County, Pennsylvania. Okay, in fact, I did have this idea that experiencing new things getting away was important, right? And just so happened, I could afford going to Villanova and it was just easy and painless, so I did it. But when you go to graduate school, you don't need money in physics or astronomy, right? And in fact, I got a National Science Foundation Fellowship. So even places that might have said, well, we don't have enough money to give you a research assistantship. They didn't need that because NSF was paying my salary. And in fact, the university or the department gets money from the NSF for bringing me on. So then I could just go wherever I want. Then it was just purely about what was the best intellectual fit. And again, I purely intellectual fit criteria. I chose badly because I didn't know any better. So, you know, I went to an astronomy department because the physics department didn't let me in. And other physics departments that I applied to elsewhere would have been happy to have me, but I didn't go there. And, you know, who knows? It all worked out okay, but this sort of background of floating in visible knowledge is really, really important and was never there for me. How did you develop your relationship with George Field? Well, Harvard, the astronomy department, which was part and parcel of the Harvard Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. So the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and the Harvard College Observatory joined together in the 1970s to form this big institution, which I still think might be the largest collection of astronomy PhDs in the United States anyway. So they were like all these PhD astronomers all over the place at Harvard and the astronomy department. So they could be, you know, rich with handing out duties to their PhD astronomers to watch over students, which is a wonderful thing that a lot of people at other departments didn't get. And so every person who came, graduate student, was assigned an advisor, a faculty member, to just sort of guide them through their early years. And by the way, I could tell you stories at Cal Tech about how we didn't do that when disaster was truly wrong. It helped me really impress upon me the need for departments to be proactive in taking care of their students. So George was randomly assigned to me. I was a theorist, that was clear. And there weren't that many theorists at Harvard, honestly. I'm trying to remember when I got there on the senior faculty, there was George and there was Bill Press. And honestly, not sure there was anyone else. I'm trying to think, which is just ridiculous for the largest number. There were a few, you know, sort of research professor level people, George Rybike was there and a couple other people. And they soon, after they're hired, Ramesh Narayan and eventually Abilob and people like that. But still, way under theorized, really, for the whole operation, if you consider it. So it was a coin flip and George was assigned to me. And if I'd mean to his office and said, what do you want to do, we start talking. And it was great. And he, we hit it off immediately. And, you know, I didn't, I was unburdened by knowing how impressive he was. Let's put it that way. I had never heard of him before when I told Ed Geinen, my undergraduate advisor that I had George Field as an advisor. I was like, you got lucky. And now I know it. Sean, another topic I love to historicize, where it was important, where it was trendy, is string theory. Where was string theory? And how much was it on your radar when you were thinking about graduate school and the kinds of things you might pursue for thesis research? It was 100% on my radar. And we can give thanks to the New York Times magazine. There's a famous story, the New York Times magazine, in the mid 80s. It might have been by Casey Cole, I'm not sure. But it was a story about string theory, and the search for theory of everything. And largely, Ed Witten was the star of the show. And that's why I wanted to go to Princeton. That was my first choice. So becoming a string theorist was absolutely a live possibility in my mind. Even back then, there was part of me that said, like, okay, you only have so many eggs, do you want to put them all in the same basket? I like being a string theorist seemed to be a yes or no proposition. Either you bit the bullet and you did that, or you didn't. And I was a little bit reluctant to do that, but it did definitely seem like the most promising way to go. When I went to Harvard, there were almost zero string theorists there. There was Kermore and Bafa had been recently hired as a young assistant professor. Now, of course, he's a very famous guy, big name, respectable, naming the field. But at the time, being assistant professor at Harvard is just like being a red shirt on Star Trek, right? Like, you're not going to get tenure. They chew you up and spit you out. So you didn't even know as an undergrad, as a reflective graduate student, whether he was someone you would want to pick as an advisor, because who knows how long you'd be there, right? But anyway, I never really seriously tried to change advisors from having George Field as my advisor. I could have tried to work with someone in the physics department like Kermun or Sydney Coleman would have been the two obvious choices. But instead, in my very typical way, I wrote a bunch of papers with a bunch of different people, including a lot of people at MIT, Alan Booth and Eddie Fari, Bill Press and George Field at Harvard, and also other students at Harvard, rather than just picking one respectable physicist advisor and sticking with them. So string theory was definitely an option, and I could easily have done it. It circumstances had been different, but I never really regretted not doing it. What was George Field's style like as a mentor? In other words, did he essentially hand you a problem to work on for your thesis research, were you more collaborative? Or was he basically allowing you to do whatever you wanted on your own? More of the latter, couple things between collaborative and letting me do whatever I wanted on my own. Like I said, I wrote many papers that George was not a co-author on. We wrote a lot of papers together. Never did he hand me a problem and walk away. That's the opposite. When we were collaborating, it was me doing my best to keep up with George. And he was a very senior guide, he had already retired from being the director of the Center for Astrophysics. So you could have forgiven him for kicking back a little bit. But George's idea of a good time is to crank out 30 pages of handwritten equations on some theory that we're thinking about. So that's what he- What was he working on when you first met him? He was in the midst of this sort of searching period himself. I think that's one of the reasons why we hit it off. He was trying to learn more about the early universe. When he, like I said, we had hired great post-docs there. So Terry Walker was one of them who's now a professor at Ohio State. And George and Terry team taught a course on early universe cosmology using the new book by Colp and Turner that had just come out because Terry was Rocky Cobb's graduate student at Chicago. And George didn't know the stuff. He had to learn it. He would learn it the night before, then teach it the next day. And so he was just learning a whole bunch of things and sort of fishing around. But he does have a very long lasting interest in magnetic fields. So probably his most important work was on the interest of the interstellar and intergalactic medium. He knew all the molecular physics and things like that that I would never know. But the closest to his wheelhouse and mine were cosmological magnetic fields. So we wrote a little bit about that. And he was always interested in that, the dynamo, the pyramid battery, the inverse cascade, magnetic velocity, plasma effects, all of these things that are kind of hard for my pure little theoretical physicist hard to really wrap my mind around. What was your thesis research on? Of all the things that you were working on, what topic did you settle on? Well, as in many theoretical physics thesis, I just stapled together all the papers I had written. So the title was, if I remember correctly, cosmological consequences of topological and geometric phenomena in field theories. So like I said, I really love topology. I took courses with Roel Bot at Harvard. It was one of the world's great topologists. And Sidney Coleman, the physics department had done a lot of interesting work on topology and gauge theories. And I was in Sidney's office all the time. He was a blessing helping me out. So I wrote some papers on, I even wrote one math paper calculating some homotopy groups of quotient spaces, because they were interesting for topological defect purposes. So that was with other graduate students. Ted Pine and I wrote a couple papers, one of the microwave backgrounds, like one of these papers, we found an effect that was far too small to ever be observed. So we wrote about it. But of course, in 10 years later, they were observing it, we didn't know. And so that paper got a lot of citations later on. And then I wrote the papers with George and also with Alan and Eddie at MIT. And the whole thing was all stapled together, and that was my thesis. Either then or retrospectively, do you see any through lines that connected all of these different papers in terms of the broader questions you were most interested in? No, not really. Other than being interesting at the time theoretical physics questions. So if I want to be self-critical, that was a mistake. No, I mean, I think it's fine to do different things, work in different areas, learn different things. I continued to do that when I got to MIT. I wrote about supergravity and two-dimensional Euclidean gravity and torsion and a whole bunch of other different things. But they never, no, they did not tie together in some grand theme. And I think that was a mistake. I think that it's important to do different things, but for a purpose. And I think one thing I just didn't learn in graduate school, despite all the great advice and examples around me, was the importance of not just doing things because you can do them. When you first get to graduate school, when I first get to graduate school, I didn't have quantum field theory as an undergraduate. Like a lot of kids do when they go to bigger universities for undergrad. So I was behind already. And when I wrote my first couple papers, just the idea that I could write a paper was amazing to me. And just happy to be there. Happy to be breathing the air, see my name in the physical review, just made me smile. And I kept finding interesting questions that I sort of had the technological capability of answering. So I did that. And it really wasn't honestly until my second postdoc in Santa Barbara, that I finally learned that it's just as important to do these things for a reason, for a point. It's not just you can do them, you can get the publication. And that individual idea is interesting. But it has to build to something greater than the individual paper itself. On the point of not having quantum field theory as an undergraduate, I wonder among your cohort, if you felt sort of that you stuck out, like a more working class kid who went to Villanova, that was very much not the profile of your fellow graduate students. I think I did not really feel that. Honestly, graduate school is a different thing. Like the graduate schools, graduate departments and physics, or astronomy, or whatever, are actually much more similar to each other than undergraduate departments are, because they bring people from all these all the undergraduate departments. So I really do think that in some sense, the amount by which a human being is formed and shaped is as a human being, not as a scientist, is greater when they're an undergraduate and when they're a graduate. Like you go from high school, you're in a college. It's your first exposure to a whole bunch of new things. You get to pick and choose, some have a big effect on you, some you can put aside. And you enter graduate school as more or less a fully formed person and you learn to do science. So my other graduate school colleagues, Brian had gone to the University of Arizona, Yandell Antonio. It was another friend of mine, went to, I think, Heiferford. There we had people from England who had gone to Oxford. And we had people who had gone to Princeton and to Harvard also. But honestly, no, I don't think that was ever a big thing. The much bigger thing was, did you know quantum field theory? That's a huge thing, right? That was always holding me back that I didn't know quantum field theory. And no one gave you advice that along the lines of a thesis research project is really your academic calling card. It's the path to achieving tenure. Having all of these interests is a wonderful thing. But it's not necessarily most efficacious or pursuing a traditional academic track. No one told you that or they did and you rebelled against it. Yeah, you know, honestly, maybe they did. But I did always kind of have a slightly, I'll be fine attitude. I want to say, I know it all attitude because I don't necessarily think I knew it all. But I did think that I knew what was best for myself. And again, I was wrong over and over again. This was not a good attitude to have. But I thought I would do fine. Like I did, you know, when it came time to choose postdocs, when I was a grad student, because, like I said, both particle physics and cosmology were in sort of fallow times, there were no hot topics that you had to be an expert in to get a postdoc. So I got really, really strong letters of recommendation. I've written a bunch of interesting papers. So I was a hot property on the job market. And I ended up going to MIT, which was just down the river and working with people who I already knew. And I think that was a mistake. As much as I love those people, I should have gone somewhere else and really shocked my system a little bit. It would have been better for you. So you were already working with Alan Gooth as a graduate student. Yeah, what happened was there was a system whereby if you were a Harvard student, you could take classes from MIT, get credit for them, no problem. So many of my best classes, why is a graduate student, I took at MIT. I learned general relativity from Nick Warner, which later grew into the book that I wrote. I took the early universe from Allen. I took a particle physics class from Eddie Farrie. And it was actually, again, to his great credit, Eddie Farrie, who taught me this particle physics class. And he just noticed I was asking good questions and asked me who I was. He didn't know me from the MIT physics department. I explained. And he said, he had read this paper that he thought was interesting by Richard Gott on time machines, close time like curves in gravity. Would I be interested in working on it with him? And I said, yeah, sure. And we worked on it for a while. And we got stuck. And we needed to ask Allen for help. So that's how I started working with Allen Allen. And Eddie, of course, had been collaborators for a long time before that. Who was on your thesis committee? Who possibly could have represented all of these different papers that you had put together? I had the best thesis committee ever. So my thesis committee was George Field. Bill Press, who I wrote a long article, a review article, in the Cosmospital Constant with. We never wrote any research papers together. But that was a very influential paper. It was fun to work with Bill. Sydney Coleman, who I mentioned, who was office, I was in all the time. It was certainly my closest contact with the Harvard Physics Department. And then both Allen Gooth and Eddie Farrie from MIT, Trunbled Up, there was a rule in the Harvard Astronomy Department. Someone not from Harvard had to be on your committee. So made it easy and asked both Allen and Eddie. So between the five of these people, enormous brain power. Yeah. Also, they were all really busy and tired. And the other thing, just to go back to this point that students were spoiled in the Harvard Astronomy Department, your thesis committee didn't just need to defend your thesis. They met every six months while you were a graduate student. After you had passed your second year exam, right? Now, in reality, maybe once every six months meant once a year. But at least three times before my thesis defense, my committee had met. And blessed their hearts for coming all the way to someone's office, even from the physics department to the astronomy department, was a 15-minute walk. And so they knew everything that I had done. They'd read my papers. They had helped me with them. They were acknowledged and they were co-authors in everything. And I knew that. So when it came time for my defense, I literally came in. We were still using transparencies back in those days, overhead projector, transparencies. My thesis defense talk was two transparencies. And one of them was a joke. One of them was a Xerox copy of my quantum field theory final exam that Sydney Coleman had graded and really give me a hard time on. Because I got the dimensional analysis wrong, like the simplest thing in the world. So I made the point that he should judge me not on my absolute amount of knowledge, but by how far I have come since the day I felt you'd want to field theory. And then the other transparency was literally, I had five or six papers in my thesis. And I picked out one figure from every paper. And I put them in one piece of paper, Xerox did, made a slide out of that, put it on the projector and said, are there any questions? That was my talk. And Bill Press, bless his heart, asked questions. And Sydney Coleman blesses answered all the questions. And Bill was like, no, but it's his exam, right? He's supposed to answer the questions. And Sydney was like, why are we here? We know he's going to pass. And so I was done in 20 minutes. The whole thing was the shortest thesis defense ever. I'm always amazed by physics and astronomy defenses because it seems like the committee never asks the kinds of questions like, what do you see as your broader contributions to the field? Because the ultimate trajectory from a thesis defense is a faculty appointment, right? So it's not just that you have your specialty, but it's what niche are you going to fill in that faculty that hires you? Did you get any question like that? Were you thinking along those lines at all as a graduate student? The person who was most, who most tried to give me that advice was Bill Press, actually, who probably I'd, the only one of those people I didn't write a paper was actually I didn't write a paper with Sydney either. But Sydney and Eddie and Alan and George, like, and this is why I got along with them because they were very pure in their love for doing science. As long as they were thinking about something and writing some equations and writing papers and discovering new cool things about the universe, they were happy. And they all had succeeded to an enormous extent because they were all really, really brilliant and had made great contributions, right? And Bill was the only one who was like a little bit of a strategist in terms of academia. And he was the one who set me up on interviews for postdocs and told me like, OK, you need to get your hands dirty a little bit and do this and do that. And I didn't listen to him as much as I should have. He's adjacent as well. So he has lots of experience and policy and strategizing and things like that. And again, in my philosophy of pluralism here, there should be both kinds. It's not a good or a bad kind. I mean, you really, really need scientists or scholars who care enough about academia to help organize it and help it work and start centers and institutes and blaze new trails for departments. And I do have feelings about different people who have been chosen as directors of institutes and department chairs. Some of them are leaders and visionaries and some of them are kind of caretakers. And both are OK. There are different slots, depending on the needs of the institution at the time. But I think that a lot of time the committee's choosing the people don't take this into consideration as much as they should. Sean, when you got to MIT intellectually or even administratively, was this just, I mean, I'm hearing such a tale of exuberance as a graduate. There was so much good stuff to work on. You didn't say no to any of it. You put it all together. Was MIT as a postdoc there? Was that just an opportunity to do another paper and another paper and another paper? Or structurally, did you do work in a different way as a result of not being an ethesis-oriented graduate program? It was mostly, almost exclusively, the former, another paper, another paper, another paper. Again, I had great people at MIT, Dan Friedman, who was one of the inventors of supergravity, took me under his wing. When I got there, we wrote a couple of papers together, really, really great guy. But mostly, so I started a tendency that is continued to this day, where I mostly worked with people who were either postdocs or students themselves. So Wadi Taylor, who is now an MIT professor, Miguel Ortiz, Mark Traden, like these are people we're at my level. That's almost all the people who I collaborated with when I was a postdoc at MIT. So I still didn't quite learn that lesson that you should be building to some greater thing. The one exception, it took me a long time, very, very slow, to catch on to things. There was one formative experience, which was a couple of times, while I was there, I sat in on Ed Burtinger's group meetings. So Ed is a cosmologist, and remember, so this is the early mid-'90s, right? I was a postdoc at MIT from 93 to 96. And we discovered the, oh, that's the other cosmology story I wanted to tell. But we discovered in 1992 with the Kobe satellite, the anti-Sotropies in the cosmic microwave background, and suddenly cosmology came to life. But only if you're working on the cosmic microwave background, which I was not. But still, it was very, very exciting times. And parenthetically, like a couple of years later, they discovered duality and field theory and string theory, and that field came to life. And I wasn't working on that either if you get the theme here. But the anecdote was, because when you asked about becoming a cosmologist, the first time, one of the first times I felt like I was on the inside in physics at all, was, again, from Bill Press, I heard the rumor that Kobe had discovered the anti-Sotropies in the microwave background, and it was a secret. You're not supposed to tell anybody, but of course, everyone was telling everybody. And I got to tell Sydney Coleman and a few of the other faculty members at the Harvard Physics Department, I got to reveal that we discovered the anti-Sotropies in the microwave background. And so they looked at me with new respect then, because I had some insider knowledge because of that. But anyway, so Ed had these group meetings, where everyone was learning about how to calculate anti-Sotropies in the microwave background. It's almost hard to remember how hard it was, because you had these giant computer codes that took a long time to run. It would take hours to get one plot. And people were very unclear about what you could learn from the microwave background and what you couldn't. Everyone knew it was going to be exciting, but it was all brand new and shiny. And Ed would have these group meetings. And people like Chungpe Ma and Yero Seljok were there. And Bovnej Jane was there. All these people were now faculty members at prestigious universities. And they were all graduate students at the time. And Ed would say, like, all right, you do this. You do that. It was clear that there was an army that was marching toward a goal, right? And they did it. They succeeded beyond anyone's wildest expectations. I think that group of MIT was won. And then Joe Silk had a similar group at Berkeley at the same time. And people like Wayne, who came out of that, Martin White. And so that was my first glimpse at purposeive long-term strategizing within theoretical physics. I didn't really know that could be a thing, but I was very, very impressed by it. I was like, I can't do that, but it's very impressive. But OK, that was a glimpse of what it could be possible. Were you on the job market at this point, or you knew you wanted to pursue a second postdoc? Well, that's interesting. When I applied for my first postdocs, I guess that was a hot property. And actually, Joe Silk at Berkeley, when I turned down Berkeley, he said, we're going to have an assistant professor ship coming up soon. You should apply. And I didn't, because I thought, well, I wasn't ready yet. And what happened was between the beginning of my first postdoc and the end of my first postdoc, in cosmology, all the good theorists were working on the cosmic microwave background. And in particle physics, all the good theorists were working on dualities in one form, or other, a string theory, or whatever. And I wasn't working on either one of those. So I was a hot property then, and I was nobody when I applied for my second postdoc. I did also apply the same time for faculty jobs. And I got an offer from the University of Virginia. And I decided to turn them down. Mostly for, you know, I thought I could do better. I didn't really want to live there. I thought maybe I had not maxed out my potential as a job market candidate. So it was a tough decision, but I made it. And also, I got on a bunch of other short lists. I was on a short list at University of Chicago, and Caltech, and a bunch of places. And so I thought, well, OK, I was on a couple of short lists. Now, next year, I'll get a job, right? And I didn't. So I did eventually get a postdoc. I got two postdoc offers. One Cambridge and one at Santa Barbara. And I went to Santa Barbara. The ITP, as was then known, is two for theoretical physics. Now the KITP. And honestly, I only got that because Jim Hartle was temporarily the director. And I think that I would never get hired by the KITP now, because they're much more into the specialties now. And Jim was very interdisciplinary in that sense. So he liked me. Did Jim know you by reputation? Or did you work with him prior to you getting to work? By reputation only, yeah. He had never, I think I talked on the phone with him when he offered me the job. But before then, I don't think I'd met him by then. We might have met at a cosmology conference. I'm not sure. We certainly never worked together. But yeah, so my three years at Santa Barbara, every single year, I thought, all right, I was just going to faculty job this year. And my employability plummeted. I didn't even get any short lists the next year. And I got on one and then got rejected the year after that. And so it was, yeah, because I was not doing what people were interested in. It's remarkable how trendiness can infect science. Well, the answer is yes, absolutely. I mean, you didn't ask a question, but yes, you are correct. It is remarkable. But I want to remove a little bit of the negative connotation from that. It's not just trendiness. Certain questions are actually kind of exciting, right? Like if you just discovered the antisotrophies in the cosmic microwave background, and you have a choice between two post-doc candidates. And one of them works on models of barriogenesis, which have been worked on for the last 20 years with some improvement, but not noticeable improvement. And someone else works on brand new ways of calculating antisotrophies in the microwave background, which seems more exciting to you. I think it is perfectly rational in that sense. Again, I think that there should be more institutional support for broader things, not to just hop on the one bandwagon. But when science is exciting, it's very natural to go in that direction. Perhaps to get back to an earlier comment about some of the things that are problematic about academic faculty positions. As you say, yes, sometimes there is a positive benefit to trends. But on the other hand, when you're establishing yourself for an academic career, that's a career that if all goes well, we'll last many, many decades, where trends come and go. And so what might seem very important on one year, five years down the line, 10 years down the line, wherever you are on the 10-year clock, that might not be very important then. So how did you square that circle? What kinds of advice did you get when you were on the wrong side of these trends about having that broader perspective that is necessary for a long-term academic career? Well, I'm not sure they ever did get advice. I think I figured it out myself eventually. Or again, I got advice and then ignored it and eventually figured it out myself. I did eventually. We'll get into the point where I got lucky in the universe started accelerating in that save my academic career. But I think that it's often hard for professors to appreciate the difference between hiring a postdoc and hiring a faculty member. Yeah. And for hiring a postdoc, it does make perfect sense to me. They're gonna be there for a few years. They're gonna be doing research. Let's pick people who are doing exciting research, right? And there's also, of course, it's a perfectly legitimate criterion to say, let's pick smart people who will do something interesting, even if we don't know what it is. But it's less important for a postdoc hire. Whereas for a faculty hire, it's completely the opposite. I have zero interest in whether someone is doing a hot topic thing for a faculty hire, like exactly like you said. Hopefully this person's gonna be here for 30 or 40 years, right? We want to pick the most talented people who will find the most interesting things to work on, whether or not that's what they're doing right now. I had a very, another very formative experience when I was finally a junior faculty member and I was awarded a Packard Fellowship, which was this wonderful thing where you get like half a million dollars to spend over five years on whatever you want. Like literally, we're giving it to you because we think we're good. We don't care what you do with it, okay? And they asked, you know, at the end of the five year term, they asked all the Packard Fellows to come to the meeting and give little talks on what they did. And again and again, you would hear people say, well, here's the thing I did as a graduate student that got me hired as a faculty member. But then I got my Packard Fellowship and I could finally do the thing that I really wanted to do. And now I'm gonna win the Nobel Prize for doing that, right? I absolutely am convinced that one of the biggest problems with modern academic science, especially on the theoretical side, is making it hard for people to change their research direction. Like all the incentives are to do the same exact thing. Getting money, getting resources at the university, getting collaborations or whatever, we make it so hard. And I think that's exactly counterproductive. And it doesn't work well from your approach of being exuberant and wanting to just pursue the fun stuff to work on. It's also self-serving for me to say that. Yes, I think that people like me should have a much easier time. That's really the lesson I wanna get across here. Sean, what work did you do at the ITP? Who did you work with? What were the most interesting topics at that time? So again, I just worked with other postdocs. I worked a lot with Mark Trott. And that was when Mark and I had our most, actually I think that was when Mark and I first started working together, even though we overlapped at MIT. We didn't really work together that much. We started a really productive collaboration when I was a postdoc at ITP in Santa Barbara, even though he was at the time, I forget where he was located, but he was not nearby. Not only did I not collaborate with any of the faculty at Santa Barbara, I didn't even collaborate with any of the postdocs in Santa Barbara. Like I just worked with my friends elsewhere on different things. And it was great. Mark and I continued collaborating when we both became faculty members and we re-wrote some very influential papers while we were doing that. So but it did finally dawn on me that I was still writing quirky things about topological defects and magnetic fields and different weird things about dark matter or inflation or whatever. And so I did finally catch on, I'm like, okay, I need to write things that other people think are interesting, not just me. And I looked around and I'm like, nothing that I'm an expert in is something the rest of the world thinks is interesting. Really, what am I gonna do? And so happily, this was, I was a postdoc at Santa Barbara from 96 to 99. And it was in 1998 that we discovered the acceleration of the universe, right? The two groups, Saul Permotor's team and Brian Schmidt-Narrant, Adam Reese's team discovered the accelerating universe. And should I explain what that is or do we assume that people know what it means? Please, please do. Okay. So like I said, we were for a long time in this observational astronomy, trying to understand how much stuff there is in the universe, right? How much matter there is. And the obvious thing to do is to go out and count it. Like, all right, here's the galaxy, weigh it, put on a scale. It's not quite exactly that, but watch how fast it's spinning, use Newton's laws, figure out how much mass there is, do the same thing for a cluster of galaxies, do the same thing for large scale structure and how it evolves. Look at the dynamics of the universe, figure out how much matter there must be in there. And compare that to what you would guess the amount of matter should be. And what you would guess is, the universe is expanding and how fast it's expanding is related to that amount of density of the universe in a very particular way. There's one correct amount of density that makes the geometry of space be flat like you clit, you clit said, right, back in the prehistory. If it's less matter than that, then space has a negative curvature. If it's more than it has a positive curvature. And people that known for a long time, Alan Gooth is one of the people who really emphasized this point, that only being flat is sort of a fixed point. If you're positively curved, you become more and more positively curved and eventually you recalapse. You're negatively curved, you become more and more negatively curved, the universe empties out. So the fact that we're anywhere near flat, which we are, right, you clit's laws work pretty well, that hints that maybe the universe is flat. Because otherwise it should have deviated a long, long time ago from being flat. So then you can go and measure the mass density of the universe and compare that with what is called the critical density, what you need to make the universe flat. And I will confess my, the error of my ways, when I was a grad student and a postdoc, I believed the certain theoretical naturalness argument that said clearly the universe is going to be flat. There's also the argument from inflationary cosmology with Alan, which Alan pioneered back in 1981, which predicted that the universe would be flat. But even without that, it was still the most natural value to have. But the astronomers went out and measured the matter density of the universe. And they always found it was about, you know, 0.25 or 0.3 of what you needed. And this wasn't, this didn't shut up the theorists. The theorist said, well, you just haven't looked hard enough, right? You're looking under the lamppost as a, as you look, it was true that as you looked at larger and larger scales in the universe, you saw more and more matter, not just on an absolute scale, but also relative to what you needed to see. And so there were these plots that people made of, as you look at larger and larger objects, the implied amount of matter density in the universe comes closer and closer to the critical density. But by the mid-90s, people had caught onto that and realized it didn't keep continuing. Netta Bacall in particular, made a plot that turned over. Like she's like, okay, this omega that you're measuring, the ratio of the matter density in the universe to the critical density, which you want to be one. Here it is going up, as I look from, you know, a galaxy to a cluster to a large scale structure, it goes up and it goes up to 0.3 and it kind of stays at 0.3, even as I look at larger and larger things. And the theorists were like just beginning to become a little uncomfortable by this. And one of the measures of that discomfort is that people like Andre Lindey and Neil Torrock and others wrote papers saying, even inflation can predict an open universe, a negatively curved universe, because they saw the writing on the wall, they saw that we were not getting to the critical density. And so, but it's hard to do that measurement because for reasons that Brian anticipated, it's like a messy thing, like measure all the matter in the universe, that's a tough thing to do. The one way you could imagine doing it before the microwave background came along was you could measure the amount by which the expansion rate of the universe changes over time. So it's one thing, if you're Hubble in 1920s, you can find the universe is expanding. Now you want to say, well, how fast is it expanding now compared to what it used to be? And that gives you another handle on the total matter density. It doesn't need to be confined to a region, right? You're really looking out to the universe as a whole. So if you can do it, it is a great thing. And these two groups did it, and we can do a whole multi-hour thing on the politics of these two groups and the whole thing we won't go there. But the point is I was friends with all of them. Brian was the leader of one group, but he was my old office mate. Adam Reese was in the office below hours, and he wrote the paper where they actually announced the result. Saul Prohmeter, who was the leader of the other group, he and I had talked in very early days because I was the co-author with Bill Press on this review article. And so I was in on the ground floor in terms of what the observational people were doing. I was also in on the ground floor theoretically, because I ridden this paper with Bill Press that had gotten attention, and that the paper was on what we call the cosmological constant, which is this idea that empty space itself can have energy, and push the universe apart. And the old idea from Einstein, and both Bill and I will happily tell you, when we were writing the paper, which was published in 1992, we were sure that the cosmological constant was zero. We just didn't know how you would measure it at the time. So we talked about different possibilities. And so I'm doing a little bit out of chronological order, I guess, because the point is that Brian and Saul and Adam and all their friends discovered that the universe is not decelerating. The idea was all of them had the same idea that the amount of matter in the universe acts as a break on the expansion rate of the universe. So you can think of throwing a ball up into the air, and it goes up, but it goes up ever more slowly, right? Because the Earth's gravitational pull is pulling it down. Likewise, the galaxies in the universe are expanding away from each other, but they should be, if matter is the dominant form of energy in the universe, slowing down, because they're all pulling on each other through the mutual gravitational force. So literally, Brian's group, they named themselves the high redshift supernova project, Colin measuring the deceleration of the universe. So what they found, first Adam and Brian announced in February 1998, and then Saul's group a few months later, that the universe is accelerating. And we headed, this is easily the most important, most surprising empirical discovery and fundamental physics in. I want to say in my lifetime, certainly since I've been doing science. Let's say that way. Since I've been 10 years old, how about that? It just came out of the blue. There was some hints, and I can even give you another autobiographical anecdote in late 1997. So again, by this time, the microwave background was in full gear in terms of both theorizing it and proposing new satellites and new telescopes to look at it, but the fruits of the labors had not come in yet. So cosmologists were gearing up 1997, late 90s, for all the new flood of data that would come in to measure parameters using the cosmic microwave background. So in late 1997, Phil Lubin, who was an astronomy professor at Santa Barbara, organized a workshop at KITP on measuring cosmological parameters with the cosmic microwave background. And he asked me, I was a soft target, obviously. He asked me to give a talk on at the meeting, and my assignment was measuring cosmological parameters with everything except for the cosmic microwave background. So my job was to talk about everything else. And a task for which I was woefully unsuited as a particle physics theorist, but someone, again, who was young and naive and willing to take on new tasks. So I was, it was to my benefit that I didn't know really what the state of the art was. Like I was at an astronomy degree and it hung out with cosmologists so I knew the buzzwords and everything, but I hadn't read the latest papers. So I read all the latest papers in many different areas and I actually learned something and I gave a talk and I said, look, something is wrong. This was December 1997. I said, we've had this idea, we theorists anyway, that the universe is simple, that omega equals one matter dominates the universe. It's what we call an Einstein decider cosmology that the density perturbations are scale-free and invariant, the dark matter is cold. All these different things were the favorite model for the cosmologists. And I said, the thing that you learn by looking at all these different forms of data or that that can't be right. And no one had quite put that together in a definitive statement yet. There were hints of it. I was certainly not the first to get the hint, but like something had to be wrong and maybe it was that the universe was open, that the omega matter was just point three, okay? Maybe it was that there was some mixture of hot dark matter and cold dark matter or maybe it was that there was a cosmological constant, right? These were all live possibilities. And so when Brian and Adam and Saul announced and their friends announced in 1998 that there was a cosmological constant, everyone was like, oh yeah, okay, that's it. Despite the fact that it was hugely surprising, we were all totally ready for it, right? And I was in on the ground floor because I had also worked on theoretical models of it. Greg Anderson and I had written a paper. He was another postdoc at MIT with me. We wrote a little particle physics model dark matter that included what is now called dark energy interacting with each other and so forth. So I was not that far away from going to law school because I was not getting any faculty offers, but suddenly the most interesting thing in the universe was the thing that I was the world's expert in. True no great planning of my own. To my slight credit, I realized it and I jumped on it and I actually collaborated with Brian and his friends in the Heisee Supernova team on one of their early papers on measuring what we now call W, the equation of state parameter. And I wrote a couple papers by myself on quintessence and dark energy and suddenly I was a hot property on the faculty job market again. And this was all happening during your Santa Barbara years. All when I was in Santa Barbara, like literally, I would, it was, you know, you have to remember for three years in a row, I've been applying for faculty jobs and getting the brush off. And now like I would go to the APS meeting, American Physical Society meeting. And when I would get back to my hotel, there would be a message on my phone answering machine offering me jobs. It was like suddenly I was really in the right place at the right time. What were the faculty positions that were most compelling to you as you were considering them? There were two that were especially good. I mean, there was one that was sort of an interesting counterfactual is the one place that came really close to offering me a faculty job while I was at KITP before they found the acceleration of the universe was Caltech. Caltech has this weird system where they don't really like look for slots. They just are, it's rolling admissions in terms of faculty. Like every year they place an ad that says, we are interested in candidates in theoretical physics or theoretical astrophysics. So you can apply and they'll consider you at any time. And they brought me down when I gave a talk, but I didn't, like the talk I could give was just not that interesting compared to what was going on in other areas. I talked about topological defects and it was good work, solid work, but they were honestly, and this is the sort of weird thing. They said after I gave the talk and everything, they said, you know, look, everyone individually likes you, but no one is sure where you belong. And some messages that I've received many, many times. Like what they meant was like what department or what subfield or whatever. So they said, here's what we'll do. We have this special high prestige, long term, postdoctoral position. Almost a faculty member, but not quite. So apply for that. We'll hire you for that. You can come here and then it's basically it'll be a trial run to see like if you fit in and where you fit in the best. So I said, okay, I'll apply for that in a, you know, I'll go there and it'll be like many faculty members. And so this is my second year at Santa Barbara, and I was only two year postdoc in Santa Barbara. So I'm like, okay, I'll do that. And the postdoc committee, a Caltech rejected me, not hire me, because they're different people than we're on the faculty hiring committee and they didn't talk to each other. And so I had to go to David Gross, but then was the director of the KITP and say, could you give me another year at Santa Barbara because I just got stranded here a little bit. And he said, yes, sure. And then they discovered the acceleration of the universe and I was fine. But then so once that happened, I got several different job offers. And the two that were most interesting to me were the University of Chicago where I eventually ended up going and University of Washington in Seattle. And Washington was just like, it was just a delight. There were so many good people there. And they were really into the kind of quirky things that I really liked. Eric Adelberger and Chris Stubbs were there who did these fifth-force experiments. The astronomy department was great. The physics department was great. Ann Nelson and David Kaplan, Ann Nelson is sadly passed away since then. But, and they had like atomic physics, which I thought was really interesting and Seattle was beautiful. So it was very tempting. But Chicago was much more like a long-term dream. Remember I applied there for as to go to undergraduate school there? And I applied there to postdocs and to graduate school and to postdocs. And every single time I got accepted, they wanted me and every single time I turned them down. So like the idea that I could finally go there as a faculty member was very exciting to me. To the extent to go back to our conversation about filling a niche on the faculty, what was that niche that you would be filling? Like what would your academic identity, I guess, be on the faculty at the University of Chicago? Well, I was in the physics department. So I was, you know, my desk was, again, to their credit, they let me choose where I wanted to have my desk. And the obvious choices were, you know, there was order. The theoretical cosmology effort was mostly split between Fermi Lab and the astronomy department at Chicago, less so in the physics department. The physics department had the particle theory group and it also had the relativity group. And I chose wrongly again, like I do this over and over again. I clearly made the worst of the three choices in terms of like the cosmology group, the relativity group, the particle theory group. Because I wanted, like I thought in my naivete that I should do the thing that was the most challenging and less natural to me, right? Because then I would learn the most. And I can do cosmology. And I already had these lecternos on relativity. I knew relativity very well, but I still felt years after graduate school that was behind when it came to field theory, string theory, things like that. So that's where I went in my desk to be. So I could hang out with those people. And that, you know, not to give away the spoiler alert, but I eventually got denied tenure at Chicago. And I think that that played a lot into the decision. I was a less good of a fit there. If I had just gone to relativity, they probably would have just kept me. I mean, who knows, maybe not, but it's at least possible. But my, I think I thought and think, I think it's true that they and I had a similar picture of who I would be, namely bringing those groups together, right? Serving as a bridge between all those groups. You know, a few years after I got there, Bruce Winsdheim, who also has passed away tragically since then, but he founded what was at the time called the Center for Cosmological Physics and is now the Cove the Institute for Cosmological Physics at Chicago. So he founded that. Like I was there. He invited like a few of us. I will not reveal who was invited and who was not invited, but you'd be surprised. Yeah. And who was invited and who was not invited to sort of write this proposal to the NSF for a Physics Frontier Center. And I was, as long as I was at Chicago, I was the group leader of the theory group in the Cosmological Physics Center. So that's what I was supposed to do. I think that I did it pretty well. So Sean, what were your initial impressions when you got to Chicago? I mean, the good news was, I mean, there's a million initial impressions. And again, I did badly at things that I now know are very obvious things to do. What you should do is you should really go if you're a new faculty member in department within the first month of being there. You should have had coffee or lunch with every faculty member. Yeah. I just get to know people. But it was kind of overwhelming. I mean, there's so many people at Chicago and it's sort of the wonderful thing about it was that the boundaries were a little bit fuzzy. So there was the Physics Department and the Astronomy Department. And there was also what's called the Enrico Fermi Institute, right? Which was a research institute, but it was like half of the Physics Department and half of the Astronomy Department was in it. And there was a James Fronk Institute, which was separate. So there's just like too many people to talk to, really. So I kind of talked with my friends. And it was, yeah, I mean, it was, it was, I don't know, you need to ask a more specific question because that's just an overwhelming number of simulations that happened when I got there. Well, I guess one way of putting it is, you know, you hear such a thing as an East Coast Physics and a West Coast Physics. And I can never, I can never decide if that's just a stand-in for Berkeley and Princeton or it means something more, more general than that. But to the extent that you had this exposure Harvard and then MIT and then you were at Santa Barbara, one question with Chicago and sort of more generally is you're developing your experience in academic physics. When you got to Chicago, was there a particular approach to physics and astronomy that you did not get at either of your previous institutions? I mean, there was, but it was kind of splinter because of this sort of large number of people. I mean, and Chicago to its credit, these people are not as segregated at Chicago as they are at other places, right? Like at Caltech, as much as I love it, I'm on the fourth floor and the particle theory group and I almost never visit the astronomers, like they're across the street. So that seems infinitely far away. And the idea of visiting the mathematicians is just implausible. I mean, I could do it. Again, it could be, I could generate the initiative to do that, but it's not natural. Whereas at Chicago, it kind of did all blend into each other in a nice way. And I really leaned into that. Like I started new seminar series that brought people together in different ways. And I thought that, you know, there's always some institutional resistance. Like my biggest contribution early on was to renovate the room we all had lunch in in the particle theory group because it was like a dump. And there's a lot of dumpiness. There's not a lot of aesthetic sensibility in the physics department of the university of Chicago. And I remember, even before I got there, I got to pick out my office. And it was a very big office. It was like cinder blocks, et cetera, but at least it was spacious. And they asked me, okay, pick a furniture. Here's your list of furniture. And I looked at the list and I said, well, honestly, the one thing I would like is for my desk to be made out of wood, rather than metal, like they have these cheap metal desks. And the guy, the, whatever the person in charge of these things says, no, you don't get a wooden desk until you're a dean. And the Frank Merritt, who is the department chair at the time, you know, he crossed his arms, he said, no, no, I think Sean's right. I think that new faculty should get wooden desks. We should move into that era. So I raised the user friendliness of it a little bit. You know, also with the graduate students, it's not as bad as Caltech, but Chicago is also not as user friendly for the students as Harvard, astronomy was, let's put it that way. But, you know, sorry, I forgot the specific question. I'm supposed to be answering here. On kinds of physics, right? Kind of physics at Chicago. Yeah, so I mean, actually I should back up a little bit because, you know, like I said at Harvard, there were no string theorists, right? There was Comor and Bafa, one person, he was looked on, it's a bit of an aberration. And when I went to MIT, it was even worse. Well, sorry, also one string theorist, Barton's feedback was there. Also assistant professor, right? Young people. And in that era, it's kind of hard to remember the first super string revolution had happened around 1984. So by 1992, 1993, it's been like, all right, what have you done for me lately? Like what? We were promised the mass of the electron would be calculated by now. And you know, it got a little stuck. And then through the dualities, the cyber and Witten invented, and then the deep brain revolution that Joe Polchinski brought about, suddenly the second super string revolution was there, right? And so it was explicable that neither Harvard or MIT, when I was there, were deep into string theory. But when I was in Santa Barbara, I was at the epicenter. Like Santa Barbara was second maybe only to Princeton as a string theory center. Polchinski was there. David Gross arrived, Gary Horowitz. And it was really Andy Strowman, who was still there at the time. So it was really just a great place. And it was a little bit of whiplash, because as a young postdoc, one of the things you're supposed to do is bring in seminar speakers. And I suggested some speakers. And they were the people looked at my list and like, these aren't string theorists at all. This is weird list. We don't know what to do with this. So in Chicago, was somewhere in between. Like the particle theory group was very heavily stringy. I mean, basically John Rosner, who's a very senior person, was the only theorist who was a particle physicist, which is just weird. The University of Chicago, which is right next to Fermi Lab, like they had almost no particle physics. They tried to correct that since then. But it was a little weird. But they also had Bob Wall, who almost by himself was a relativity group. It had been founded by Chandra Seikar. So there's some momentum there going. And Bob Gross was there also, but he wasn't very active in research at the time. And then of course, the cosmology group was extremely active. But it was clearly in the midst of a shift from early universe cosmology to late universe cosmology at the time. You know, the emphasis, you know, they had hired John Carlstrom, who was a genius at building radio telescopes. The South Pole telescope is his baby. And they had hired Wayne Hu, at the same time, as they hired me as a theorist to work on the microwave background. Soon afterward, they hired Andre Kotsov, just these wonderful numerical simulations. So the late universe was clearly where they were invested. So despite the fact that I connected all the different groups, like none of them were really centrally interested in what I did for a living. To go back to the question of exuberance and naivete and not really caring about what other people are thinking, to what extent did you have strong opinions one way or another about the culture of promoting from within at Chicago? In other words, you know, like you said yourself before, at a place like Harvard or Stanford, if you come in as an assistant professor, you're coming in on the basis of you're not getting tenure except for some miraculous exception to the rule. Was that the case at Chicago? Or was that not the case at Chicago? No, you know, and to be super duper honest here, I can't possibly be objective, because I didn't get tenure at the universe at Chicago, right? So I do try my best to be objective. But you're good at that. What are the odds? That's what you know. Yeah, most people got tenure. You were hired with an expectation that you should get tenure, not a 100% expectation. Like honestly, Caltech, despite being, you know, intellectually as good as Harvard or Princeton, if you get hired as an assistant professor, you will almost certainly get tenure. They really like the bottleneck is hiring you as an assistant professor. At Harvard, it's the opposite. Chicago is a little bit in between. I mean, I did, I was on the faculty committees when we hired people and you would hear more than once people say, it's just an assistant professor. If they don't pay it out, they just won't give them tenure. So that was definitely an option. But I would guess at least three out of four, four out of five people did get tenure, if not more. Structurally, do you think looking back that you were fighting an uphill battle from the beginning because as idealistic as it sounds to bring people together, intellectually, administratively, you're fighting a very strong tie. There's a lot of inertia, there's a lot of bureaucratic resistance to that very idea, even if the collaborations are going to produce great, great topics. I think that is part of it. The specific way in which that manifests itself is that when you try to work in or dabble, if you want to put it that way, in different areas, and there are people at your institution who are experts in those specific areas, they're going to judge you in comparison with the best people in your field in whatever area you just wrote in. And it's not just me. I mean, Angela Linto, who is now or was the chair of the astronomy department at Chicago. And so she got tenure while I was there. And I learned afterward it was not at all easy. And she'd not sail through. And one of the reasons why, she mostly does work in ultra high energy cosmic rays, which is world class. But like she wrote some paper about extra dimensions and how they could be related to ultra high energy cosmic rays. And so the string theorist, judge her like they would be judging Kermur and Vafa or Ed Witten. And that's not quite an easy hill to climb on. So that's one of the things you walk into as a person who tries to be interdisciplinary in every little discipline, you will be judged compared to the best people who do nothing but that discipline. And maybe that's not fair. And I hope that the whole talk about Chicago will not be about me not getting tenure. But I actually, after not getting tenure, I really thought about it a lot. And I asked for a meeting with Dean and the provost and they met with me. And it was a complete disaster because they thought that what I was trying to do was to complain about not getting tenure and change their minds about it. And I had no interest. Like once I didn't get tenure, I didn't want to be there anymore. Like you couldn't pay me to stick around if they didn't want me there. What I wanted to do was to let them know how maybe they could improve the procedure going forward. Because it was a very casual procedure. Like I heard my friends at other institutions talk about their 10 year file, like getting all these documents together and a proposal for what they're gonna do. And none of that at Chicago, which Chicago you hand over your CV and you suggest some names for them to ask for letters for. And then that's the only thing that you do. There's no other input that you have. And as a result, the fact that I was interdisciplinary in various ways, not just within cosmology and relativity and particle physics, but I taught a class in the humanities. I went on expeditions with the dinosaur hunters as a public outreach thing. I did various things. I talked to the philosophers and the class assistants and whatever, but I don't think anyone knew. They didn't even realize that I did these things, but they probably wouldn't care if they did. But it's absolutely true that the system is not constructed to cast people like that in the best possible light. How do we square the circle with the fact that you were so amazingly positioned with the accelerating universe a very short while ago? Well, you know, again, I was not there at the meeting when they rejected me. So I don't know what the reasons were. Various people on the faculty came to me after I was rejected and tried to explain to me why and they all gave me different stories. And, you know, I think one, in retrospect, there's two big things. One is you do get a halfway evaluation. So like if your assistant professor for six years, after three years, they look at you and the faculty talks about you and they give you some feedback, okay? And I, you know, honestly, the thought of me not getting tenure just didn't occur to me, really. And like I was so clear to me that I did everything they wanted me to do, that I just didn't try to strategize. I didn't stress about that. And so the year before my midterm evaluation, I spent almost all my time doing two things. Number one, writing that textbook that I wrote in general relativity, space time and geometry. And number two, I did a lot of organizing of a big international conference, Cosmo02, that we eventually, that I was the main organizer of. As a result, I think I wrote either zero or one papers that year. And it was always, that was always temporary, is it? I had that year that I was spending doing other things and then I returned to doing other things. And so at least one person, exposed facto, said, well, you know, I think some people got an impression during that midterm evaluation that they didn't let go of that you don't write any papers, even though it wasn't true. And I do remember, you know, you're given some feedback after that midterm evaluation. And the director of the Enrico Fermi Institute said, you know, you really gotta, you know, not just write review papers, but you know, high impact original research papers. And so I said, yeah, yeah, no, I, again, I sort of brushed it off. I thought I knew I was, what I was doing, right? And I said, yeah, don't worry, I will. But then the thing is, I did. I wrote papers that were hugely cited and very influential. Like several of them, more than one. And at my, you know, post 10 year rejection, debrief with the same director of the Enrico Fermi Institute, he said, yeah, you know, we really, really wanted to write more papers that were highly impactful. And I said, but I did do that. And he says, yeah, I saw that. I was really surprised. And I'm like, what, what could I do? I'm not sure what I am being asked for. But I do think that people get things into their heads and just won't undo them. So that was one big thing. I think that, that one year before my midterm, I blew it. And the other thing was honestly just the fact that I, especially, well, the fact that I showed interest in things other than writing physics research papers. The biggest one was actually, people worry that I was blogging and things like that. They didn't know. People have actually had no idea that I was doing that. But you were who, whatever the text you're toe into, this kind of work. You were starting that. I had started blogging in 2004. Okay. And I was rejected in 2005 by Chicago. And yeah. And so I, but they did know that I wrote a textbook in general relativity, right? A graduate level textbook. And it just never occurred to me that that would be a strike against me. But apparently it was a huge strike against me. And what you hear, the honest opinion you get is not from the people who voted against you on your own faculty. But before I got the news, there were people at other universities who were interested in hiring me away, right? I was still thought to be a desirable property. Of course, once you get rejected for tenure, those same people lose interest in you. They can't convince their deans to hire you anymore. Now that you're damaged goods. But they told me they said, yeah, we talked to the people at Chicago and they said, they thought that you were just interested in writing textbooks, not in doing research anymore. So just, even if it's a graduate level textbook filled with equations, that is not what they wanna see. One of the people said to me afterwards, we thought that you'd be more suited at a place with a more pedagogical focus than what I had. And I could point to the papers I wrote with the many, many citations all I wanted to, but that impression was in their minds. Is writing a graduate level textbook in general relativity? Might that have been perceived as a bit of a bold move for an assistant professor? Oh yeah, entirely. That was definitely like, again, while I was doing it, I had no idea that it would be anything other than my job. But afterward, this is the thing, if I do get to just a gripe, zero people at the University of Chicago gave me any indication that I was in trouble of not getting tenure. So you were blindsided totally? Completely blindsided. Like I said, like never, it just didn't even occur to me. I thought it would be more likely that I would be offered 10 year early than to be rejected. And partly that was because I knew I'd written papers that were highly cited and I contributed to the life of the department and I had the highest teaching evaluations and I was invited to internet. I did everything right. And part of it, because no one told me, right? But anyway, again, afterward, more than one person says, like, why did you write a textbook? Why did you do that? Several of these people had written textbooks themselves, but they had done it after they got tenure. So let's get off the tenure thing. Let's go back to the happier place of science. First on the textbook, what was the gap in general relativity that you saw that necessitated a graduate level textbook? Well, it's funny. This is a great question because there's plenty of textbooks in general relativity on the market who hasn't written one really. And one of the best was by Bob Wald. We may be the best, honestly, on the market. And he was my colleague and Bob is a good friend of mine and I love his textbook. And but it's very different. And I think that in my mind, I'll say it if you don't want to, but it's regarded as a very difficult textbook. It's difficult. Yes, it's challenging. In my mind, there were some books, like Bernard Schruetz wrote a book, which had this wonderful ambition and Jim Hartle later wrote a book of teaching general relativity to undergraduates. And by the strategy of sort of saving some of the more intimidating math until later, okay? Like doing as much as you could without intimidating math. And then there were book like Bob Wald's or Stephen Weinberg's or Mr. Thorne Wheeler, the famous phone book, which were these wonderful reference books because there's so much in them, so much knowledge and helpful. But it's just very intimidating if you're a student. And so I thought that graduate students trying to learn general relativity and just trying to learn general relativity didn't have a good book to go through. At least I didn't when I was a graduate student. We used Wald and it was tough. So literally like in some, it's not quite true, but in some sense, my book is Wald for the common person. It's sort of the most important ideas there, but expressed in a way which was hopefully a lot more approachable and user-friendly. And really with no ambition other than letting people learn the subject, not any ambition to be comprehensive or a resource for researchers or anything like that for people who wanted to learn it. And I wonder Sean, if there's a German-aiding idea that would inform your interests in outreach and in doing public science and things like that, it was that same-lin inclination that was bounded in an academic context that you would take eventually into the world of YouTube and hundreds of thousands of lay people out there who are learning quantum gravity as a result of you. Yeah, absolutely. I think that again, good luck, good fortune on my parts, not good planning, but the internet came along at the right time for me to reach broader audiences in a good way. And in fact, that even helped with the textbook because I certainly didn't enter the University of Chicago as a beginning faculty member in 1999 with any ambitions whatsoever of writing a textbook. That was not all my radar. But when I was, I guess, yeah, this is to go back a little bit, when I was at MIT, no, let's go back even farther. When I was at Harvard, Ted Pine, who I already mentioned is a fellow graduate student, good friends, still a good friend of mine. He and I sort of stuck together as like the two theoretical physicists in the astronomy department. And we both took general relativity at MIT from Nick Warner, but absolutely brilliant course. Nick is also a friend of mine now, he's a professor at USC now. And we just bubbled over an excitement about general relativity. And our friends in the astronomy department generally didn't take general relativity, which is weird in a sense. And Harvard taught a course, but no one liked it. Everyone could tell which courses were good at Harvard, which courses were good at MIT. So Ted and I said, we will teach general relativity as a course. And Bill Press did us a favor of like nominally signing a piece of paper that said he would be the faculty member for this course. But he was very clear. He said, as long as I have to do literally nothing, I don't have to go to the class, I don't have to listen to you. I will sign the piece of paper. He said, good. And so we taught it. We had like 10 or 12 students in our class. And we had problem sets that we graded the whole bit. We made up lecture notes. And it was great. It was a huge success. And again, a weird thing you really shouldn't do is a second year graduate student. Is this not good time management? But we did it and we enjoyed it. And then when I got to MIT, they knew that I had taught general relativity. And so my last semester as a postdoc, after I'd already applied for my next job, so I didn't need a friend about that, the MIT course was going to be taught by a professor who had gone on sabbatical and never returned. MIT was a weird place in various ways. And so that would happen. And so they actually asked me as a postdoc to teach the GR course. And I so again, foolishly said, yes. And this time, first I had to do it all by myself. But because I was again foolishly ambitious, I typed up all of the lecture notes in law tech, so equations and everything before each lecture, Xerox them and handed them out. And it was like over 50 students in the class that time. And while the enthusiastic reception, everyone loved it. I won a teaching award. That was great. It was great experience. And then a couple of years later, when I was at Santa Barbara, I was like, well, the internet exists. I have 200 pages of typed up lecture notes. I'll just put them on the internet. So I did. And they became very popular. And once you do that, people will knock on your door and say, please publish this as a textbook. So I was sweet talked into publishing it without any plans to do it. Now, the high impact research papers that you knew you had written, but unfortunately, your senior colleagues did not at the University of Chicago. What were you working on at this point? What were those topics that were occupying your attention? Well, as usual, I bounced around doing a lot of things. But predictably, the things that I did that people cared about the most were in this what I was hired to do, especially the theory of the accelerating universe and dark energy. So I wrote a paper with, and most of my papers in that area that were good were with Mark Trotton, who at that time, I think, was a professor at Syracuse by then. And so we wrote one paper with my first graduate student at Chicago on, so this is a kind of funny story that illustrates how physics gets done, right? I mentioned very briefly, I collaborated on a paper with the high-redshift supernova team, right? So they had already did their important papers showing the universe was accelerating. And then they want to do this other paper on, OK, if there is dark energy as it was then labeled, which is a generalization of the idea of a cosmological constant, that cosmological constant would be energy density and empty space, that is absolutely strictly constant as an energy. Every cubic centimeter has the same amount of energy in it. Dark energy is a more general idea that it's some energy density in empty space that is almost constant, but maybe you can go down a little bit. And the obvious idea is you have some scalar field, which was dubbed quintessence. So slowly, slowly rolling, and has potential energy that is almost constant, OK? Well, how would you know? Well, you could kind of measure the rate at which the universe was accelerating, and compare that at different eras. And you can parameterize it by what's now called the equation of state parameter, W. So W equaling minus 1, for various reasons, means the density of the dark energy is absolutely constant. W minus 0.9, or minus 0.8, means the density is slowly fading away, OK? W of 0 means it's like ordinary matter. So the density goes down as the volume goes up as space expands, right? So dark energy is between minus 1 and 0 for this equation of state parameter. So an obvious question arises, well, what about minus 1.1? Like, could the equation of state parameter be less than minus 1? And the high Z supernova team, my friends, Bob Kirschner and Brian and Adam and so forth, came to me, and they were like, you're the theorist. What should we do? It should be let W be less than minus 1. And I thought about it. And I said, well, there are good reasons to not let W be less than minus 1. There's good physics reasons. It would be bad. And I said, here's a couple paragraphs saying that in physics speak. And so they just cut and pasted those paragraphs into their paper and made me a co-author. And it was very funny because in astronomy, whose first author matters? In physics, it doesn't matter. It's just alphabetical. But the high Z supernova team strategy was the whole thing would be alphabetical except the most important author, the one who really did the work on the paper would be first. So be a first author and then alphabetical. Except because my name begins with a C, if they had done that for the paper I was a co-author on, I would have been the second author, right? And so it would look like I was important. But clearly, I wasn't that important compared to the real observers. So just for me, they made up a special system where first author, alphabetical, and then me, at the end. So biologists think I'm the boss, right? Because in biology, the lab leader goes lax to the author list. So that was just a funny abusing anecdote. But anyway, so even though we wrote that paper and I wrote my couple paragraphs and things I said were true, as a theoretical physicist, I kept thinking about it. And I'm like, well, I presented good reasons why W could not be less than minus one. But how good are they? And in the meantime, Robert Caldwell, Mark Heming, Halsey and others came up with this idea of phantom energy, which had W less than minus one. And what that means is, as the universe expands, the density of energy in every cubic centimeter is going up. So it's not hard to imagine there are good physical reasons why you shouldn't allow that. Where's the energy coming from? But they imagined it. And they wrote down little models in which it was true. And that leads to what's called the big rip. If you ever heard of the big rip, that's created by this phantom energy stuff. So Mark Trond and I teamed up with a graduate student, my first graduate student at Chicago, Mark Hoffman, was his name. And we wrote a paper that did the particle physics and quantum field theory of this model, right? And said, is it really OK? Or is this cheating? Is there something wrong about it? What we said is, oh, yeah, it's catastrophically wrong. Like you would have negative energy particles appearing in empty space. You should not let W be less than minus one. And so we wrote a paper on that became very popular and highly cited. And another follow-up paper, which we cleverly titled, could you be tricked into thinking that W is less than minus one by modified gravity or whatever? And that got some attention also. And then the other big one was, again, I think the constant lesson, as I'm saying all these words out loud, is how bad my judgment has been about guiding my own academic career. So when I was at Chicago, I would often take on summer students from elsewhere or from Chicago to do little research projects with. And I was thinking of a research project. So here is the thought process. It's good to talk about physics. So I'll talk about physics a little bit. Here is my thought process. We have dark energy pushing the universe apart. It's surprising. We don't know why it's the right amount or whatever. We also have dark matter pulling the universe together. It's for the opposite of dark energy. But there was this interesting phenomenon pointed out by Milgram, who invented this theory called Monde that you might have heard of. And he says, if you have a galaxy, roughly speaking, there's a radius inside of which you don't need dark matter to explain the dynamics of the galaxy. But outside of that radius, you do. And for every galaxy, the radius is different. But what he noticed was, and this is still a more or less true fact that really does demand explanation, and it's a good puzzle. If you just plug in, what is the acceleration due to gravity from Newton's inverse square law? What is the acceleration due to gravity at that radius? It's the same for a whole bunch of different galaxies. That crossover point from where you don't need dark matter to where you do need dark matter is characterized not by a length scale, but by an acceleration scale. OK. You can do a bit of dimensional analysis and multiply by the speed of light or whatever. And you notice that acceleration scale you need to explain the dark matter in Milgram's theory is the same as the Hubble constant, the expansion rate of the universe, even though these two numbers are completely unrelated to each other. And the Hubble constant is famously related to the dark energy, because the current value of the Hubble constant where dark energy is just taking over. This is what's known as the coincidence problem. Why is the matter density of the universe approximately similar to the dark energy density, 0.3 and 0.7, even though they change rapidly with respect to each other? What's so great about right now? So my thought process was, OK, could there be both dark matter and dark energy or things we haven't touched? You've only noticed them through their gravitational impact. Everyone knows, Milgram said many years ago, in the case of dark matter, but everyone knows in the case of dark energy that maybe you could modify gravity to get rid of the need for dark matter or dark energy, hard to do in practice, OK? But in principle, maybe you could do it. So I said, well, maybe there's one theory that does both. That gets rid of dark matter and dark energy by modifying gravity. And the criterion would be, gravity gets modified when a certain numerical parameter is less than the Hubble constant, right? The acceleration due to gravity or the acceleration rate of the universe or whatever. And so I said, well, how do you do that? And so this is where it did, it was beneficial that I thought differently in the average cosmologist, because I was in a particle theory group, right? I thought like a particle theorist. I wrote down the grongians and actions and models and so forth. So I said, well, and as a general relativist, so I knew how to characterize mathematically, what does it mean for what is the common thing between the universe reaching the certain Hubble constant and the acceleration due to gravity reaching a certain threshold? Well, you parameterize gravitational forces by the curvature of space time, right? And the simplest way to do that is what's called the curvature scalar, OK? And what's interesting, you're finally getting the punch line in this long story, about that. What's interesting is something which is in complete violation of your expectation from everything you know about field theory, that in both the case of dark matter and dark energy, if you want to get rid of them and modify gravity, you're modifying them when the curvature of space time becomes small rather than when it becomes large. Everyone knows when fields become large and strengths become large, then your theories are going to break down, right? Like a Planck scalar, whatever, is going to be new physics. No one expects that it's small curvatures of space time. Anything interesting should happen at all, but maybe it could. So I played around writing down theories, and I asked myself, well, what is the theory for gravity? It's literally that curvature scalar r. That is the thing you put into what we call the Lagrangian to get the equations of motion, OK? It's the simplest thing you possibly could do. How can I modify r so that it acted normal when space time was curved, but when space time became approximately flat, it changed. It moved away. Well, I just did the dumbest thing. I said, well, what about r plus 1 over r? So we'd already done r plus a constant. If you said a constant, that's the cosmological constant. Everyone knows about that. Einstein did that. But no one had done 1 over r. And it wasn't that that was necessarily motivated by anything. It was just, could that explain away both the dark matter and the dark energy by changing gravity when space time was approximately flat? So I actually worked it out. And then I got the answers in my head, and I gave it to the summer student, and she worked out and got the same answers. The answers are, you can make the universe accelerate with such a theory. You can explain the acceleration of the universe, but you can't explain the dark matter in such a theory. In fact, the short-shield solution, the solution that you get in general relativity for a spherically symmetric matter distribution is exactly the same in this new theory as it was in general relativity. So here's where, so far, so good. My firing on all cylinders intellectually, like everything's going great, came up with a good idea. But now I said, well, I had this goal of explaining away both dark matter and dark energy. I did not succeed in that goal. We'd be having a very different conversation if you did. Yes. Well, that's true. That would have been a very different conversation if I had. But it should have been a different conversation anyway, because I said, well, therefore, it's not interesting. I didn't do what I wanted to do. And like at least a year passed, I'm not sure how much time passed. But within the course of a week, coincidence problem. Vikram Devorey, who was a graduate student in Chicago, knocked on my door and said, has anyone ever thought of taking R and adding one over R to the Lagrangian for Gravity and seeing what would happen? I said, well, yeah, I did. It doesn't really explain a way dark matter, but maybe it makes the Empress accelerate. And he goes, oh, yeah, OK, that's worth it. And then I got an email from Mark Trotten. And he said, has anyone ever thought about adding one over R to the Lagrangian for Gravity? And I said, well, I did. And I worked it all out. And I thought it was not interesting. But clearly, it is interesting, since everyone says, yeah. So we wrote a paper. Mark and Vikram and I, and Michael Turner, who is Vikram's advisor, four of us wrote a paper, huge excitement because of this paper. Was this your first time collaborating with Michael Turner? Yes, I think so. I think we only collaborated on two papers. That one and a follow up to that. So yeah, so we wrote a four author paper on that. It became a big deal. And they generalized it from R plus 1 over R to just F of R, any function of R. And there's a whole industry out there now, like looking at F of R gravity, OK? And I could have written that paper myself. Like, I had it. I had the results. And we did some extra numerical simulations. And we said some things. And you know, Vikram did some good things and marked it too. But I could have done it myself. And then I would have had a single author paper a year earlier that got a thousand citations and so forth. And I didn't. So taste matters. Like it's good to have good ideas. But knowing what people will think is an interesting idea is also kind of important. Sean, did you enjoy teaching undergraduates? I assume this was really a unique opportunity up into this point to really interact with undergraduate students. I like teaching a lot. It's a lot of work if you do it right. So Chicago was great because the teaching requirements were quite low compared to other places. It was on a quarter system. Fall, winter, spring, quarters. So there's three quarters in an academic year. And as a faculty member in the physics department, you only taught two of them. So basically, there's like a built in sabbatical. You get one quarter off of teaching every year. And I taught both undergraduates and graduate students. I taught graduate particle physics, relativity. I started a new course in cosmology, which believe it or not, never been taught before. Theoretical cosmology, the University of Chicago had not been taught before. I also started a new course general relativity for undergraduates, which had not been taught before. And they loved it, right? I mean, I think that the secret to teaching general relativity to undergraduates is it's not that much different from teaching to graduate students, except there are no graduate students in the audience. So the undergraduates are just much more comfortable learning it. They're a little bit less intimidated. I actually think that different approaches, like Jim Hartel has, to teaching general relativity to undergraduates by delaying all the math are not as good as trying to just teach the math. But go gently, give them a plenty of room to play with it and learn it. But I think the math is teachable to undergraduates. And I taught this what is called a big picture course. So Bill Wimmsat, who was a philosopher at Chicago, had this wonderful idea because Chicago, in many ways, is the MIT of the humanities. It's very, very demanding. But it's more humanities based overall as a university. And it could be very interdisciplinary in some ways. It falls short of that goal in some other ways. But it gives lip service to the ideal of it. And one of the things is that they have these first-year seminars for, like many places do, first-year seminars to sort of explore big ideas in different ways. But Bill's idea was, look, we give our students our undergraduates these first-year seminars are interdisciplinary, big ideas, very exciting. And then we funnel them into their silos to be disciplinary. And we teach them all these wonderful techniques. And we never quite let them apply those techniques they learn to these big interdisciplinary ideas. So he started this big problems, might as well say big picture, but it's big problems curriculum where you would teach to seniors an interdisciplinary course in something or another. So Shadi Barch, who is a classics professor at Chicago, she and I proposed teacher course on the history of atheism. So whether atheism is true or false, but how it developed intellectually. And it was a lot of fun because there wasn't any good books. Like no one has written the history of atheism very, very well. Now we did a terrible job teaching it because we just asked them to read far too much. And it was like, if it's Tuesday, this must be day cart kind of thing. We did not give them nearly enough time to catch their breath and synthesize things. But it was a great experience for me to teaching humanities course for the first time. Sean, I want to push back a little on this idea that not getting tenure means that you're damaged goods on the academic job market. I mean, we can both quite easily put together a who's who of really top flight physicists who did not get tenure at places like Harvard and Stanford. And then went on to do fundamental work at other excellent institutions. Like University of Washington or Penn or all kinds of great universities. I want to ask, going to Caltech to become a senior research associate, did you self consciously extricate yourself from the entire tenure world? Did you do that self consciously? Were there tenure line positions that were available to you? But you said, you know what? I'm blogging. I'm getting into outreach. I'm doing humanities courses. I'm going to bail from the whole enterprise. What was your thought process along those lines? Well, by that point, I was much more self-conscious of what my choices meant. I was kind of forced into it by circumstances. And so I gave a lot of thought to that question. I mean, I really took the opportunity to sort of think as broadly as possible. I forced myself to think about just leaving academia entirely had I made a wrong choice by going into academia. And I'm like, no, no, I kind of like it here. I made that choice consciously. Because a lot of my choices throughout my career have not been conscious. I just did the next step that I was supposed to do. That's what I think so far. Yeah, so this is a chance to really think about it. So then the decision was, well, so to answer your question, yes, I didn't well, sorry. I didn't quite technically get tenure to offer as if I'm being very, very honest. But it was clear I was going to. If I had pursued certain opportunities, I could have gotten tenure. Let me ask specifically, is your sense that you were more damaged goods because the culture at Chicago was one of promotion? In other words, an assistant professor not getting tenure at Stanford. It's like that is nothing to do with him or her. That's just the system. Is your sense that really the situation at Chicago did make it that much more difficult for you? I think so. But I think it's even an exaggeration to say that people get that Harvard or Stanford don't give people tenure therefore, it's not that bad. I think it's bad in the following way. Once you're, I had done a postdoc for six years than a assistant professor for six or seven, right? For six by the time I was rejected for tenure, you're old. Like you, people know who you are. You've been around the block a few times. You can't get a non-tenured job, right? You're just too old for that. Some places like Stanford literally have a rule. Like if you've been so many years past your PhD or you're so old, either you're hired with tenure, you're not hired on the faculty. So you have to be hired as a senior person as a person with tenure in a regular faculty position. The Caltech job is unique for various reasons. But that's always hard. And it should be hard. Hiring senior people, hiring people with tenure at a really good place is just going to be hard. You really have to make a case. You as the physics department trying to convince the provost and the dean and the president that you should hire this person, that's an uphill battle always. And if the most obvious fact about the candidate you're bringing forward is they just got to an eye tenure. And the dean doesn't know who you are, who this person is or the provost or whatever. They're like, why don't you hire someone who is not an eye tenure? And I'm not making this up. This is literally the words that I was told. People shrugged their shoulders and said, yeah, the zero chance my dean would go for you now that you got an eye tenure. This is also the time when the department of energy is starting to fully embrace astrophysics and to a lesser extent cosmology at the national laboratories. I wonder if that was a quasi alternative career that you may have considered at some point, particularly because you were so well acquainted with what Saul Pro-Mutter was doing. There are not a lot of jobs for people like me. They were really pure theorists and at national labs like that. I mean, they're a theorist who are sort of very closely connected to the experiments. There's always exceptions to that. I mean, Slack has done a wonderful job hiring strength theorists, for example. There's a strong theory group at Los Alamos, for example. Hello, Los Alamos, yes, that's right. But I think I didn't quite answer a previous question that I really do want to get to, which is, I did get offered 10-year jobs, but I was still faced with a decision, what is it I want to maximize? What I want to optimize for my career, now that I am being self-reflective about it. And one option was to not just irrespective of what position I might have taken to orient my research career toward being the most desirable job candidate I could be, playing the game, writing papers that got highly cited and being in the mainstream and doing things that everyone agreed were interesting, which I did only to a certain extent, but not all the way, when I was at Chicago. Or I could say, screw it, no one goes into academia for fame and fortune. You go in it because you're passionate about the ideas and so forth. And I'm interested in both the sort of research of academia and the broader picture of the society of academia. And I could double down on that. And I could just do whatever research I wanted to do. And I could put even more effort into writing books and things like that. And I did reflect on that option. And I decided on option B that it was not worth it to me to sacrifice five years of my life, even if I were doing good research, which hopefully I would do. But to shut off everything else I cared about was not worth it to me. And so the Caltech job with no teaching responsibilities or anything like that. And where I'd be surrounded by absolutely top-rate people because my physics research is always very highly collaborative with mostly with students, but also with faculty members. Being surrounded by the best people was really, really important to me. So that combination of freedom to do what I want and being surrounded by the best people convinced me that a research professorship at Caltech was better than attend your professorship somewhere else. Now, was this a unique position that Caltech tailored for you given what you wanted to do in this next role? I'd like to do it once again, planning not my forte. So Gordon Moore of Moore's Law thing, who's a Caltech alumnus, had a couple of years before I was denied tenure, he had given Caltech the largest donation that anyone had ever given to an American Institute of Higher Education. I think it was like $800 million. And honestly, I'm not sure Caltech quite knew what to do with it. Like, OK, this is a lot of money. What are we going to do? So one of the things they did was within Caltech, they sent around a call for proposals. And they said, for faculty members, give us good ideas what to do with the money. And Mark Heming and Kowski proposed the Moore Center for Cosmology and Theoretical Physics. And they said, sure, and gave him, you know, I don't know, not a huge budget, but a few $100,000 a year. And he used that to offer me a job to pay my salary. So without that money coming in randomly. So for people who are non-academics out there, there are what are called soft money positions in academia, where you can be a researcher, but you're not a faculty member, and you're generally earning your own key by applying for grants and taking your salary out of the grant money that you bring in. So most research professors at Caltech are that. That's the job. The slot is usually used for people like, let's say, you're a researcher who is really an expert at a certain microwave background satellite. But maybe a faculty member either is not what you want to do or not what you're quite qualified to do, but you could be a research professor and be hired and paid for by the grant on that satellite. Theorists never get this job. So the fact that it was just happened to be there and the time he worked out perfectly and Mark knew me and wanted me there and really gave me a good sales pitch, made it a good sale. Did you intuit, I know the theme is that there's no grant plan, but did you intuit that this position would allow you the intellectual freedom to go way beyond your academic comfort home and to get more involved in outreach, do more in humanities, interact with all kinds of intellectuals that academic physicists never talked to. Did you understand that that was something that you would be able to do and that was one of the attractions for you? Yeah, absolutely. I mean, it's not, I don't want to be snobbish, but being at one of the world's great intellectual centers was important to me because you want to bump into people in the hallways who really lift you to places you wouldn't otherwise have gone. And that can happen anywhere, but it happens more frequently at a place like Caltech if you mean not just in physics, you mean generally across the faculty. Well, right, and not just Caltech, but Los Angeles, right? I wanted to live in a big metropolitan area where I could meet all sorts of different people and do all sorts of different things. The specific thing I've been able to do in Los Angeles is consult on Hollywood movies and TV shows. But had I been in Boston, New York, in San Francisco, I would have found something else to do. But I did come to Caltech with a very explicit plan of both diversifying my research and diversifying my non-research activities. So let's start with what I think I'll talk to a really good place to do that. Let's start with the research first. To what extent now that you're sort of outside of the 10 year clock and considerations and even if you're really bad at impressing the right people, you are still generally aware that there are the right people to impress. Now that you are sort of on the outside of that, it's almost like you're back in graduate school, right? Where you can just do the most fun things that come your way. So was that your sense that you had that opportunity to do graduate school all over again? Yeah, I mean, it's what you dream about academia being like, right? Yeah. And I could have probably done the same thing had I have tenure also. In fact, I can go into details but I think it would have been easier for me if I had tenure than if I'm a research professor because research professors are hired, you get a lot of freedom to do things but there's a reason why you were hired, right? Theoretical cosmology was the reason I was hired. So there is some, it's not quite a perfect fit in that sense. But that's okay, I'm gonna do what I'm gonna do and let the ships fall where they may at this point. And so I did start slowly and gradually to expand my research interests, especially because around 2004, so soon before I left Chicago, I wrote what, to me was the best paper I wrote at Chicago, not one of the ones that got highly cited. In fact, no one cited at the time, people were catching on now, but it was on the arrow of time in cosmology and why entropy in the universe is smaller in the past than in the future. Something that's very hard to get cosmologists even to care about, but people who care about it are philosophers of physics, some people who do foundations of physics. And I had actually, this goes way back when I was in Villanova, was where I was introduced to philosophy and discovered it because they forced you to take it. There were a lot of required courses and I had to take three semesters of philosophy, like it or not, but I liked it, I loved it. And I ended up taking six semesters and getting a minor in philosophy. But interestingly, the kind of philosophy I liked was moral and political philosophy. I took some philosophy of science classes, but they were less interesting to me because they were all about the process of science, right? Thomas Goon, Paul Fireob and how do scientists make decisions about theories and so forth? It is interesting stuff, but it's not the most interesting stuff. What I discovered in the wake of this paper I wrote about the arrow of time is a whole community of people I really wasn't plugged into before, doing foundations of physics. So their philosophers mostly, some physicists, but they're really doing things that are physics, they're trying to understand not how science works, but what the laws of nature are. And it's just they're doing it in a way that doesn't get you a job in a physics department. It's you a job in a philosophy department. And I love that and they love my paper, like the cosmologists couldn't care, but the philosophers think that this paper that I wrote is really important. So that gave me a particular direction to move in and the other direction was complex systems that I became increasingly interested in. And I've been much less successful so far in actually publishing in that area, but I hope until the pandemic hit, I was hopeful that my Santa Fe connection would help with that. All of which is to say, once I got to Caltech, I did start working in broadening myself, but it was slow and it wasn't my job, right? I was hired to do something. And for better or worse, I do take what I'm hired to do kind of seriously. And so most of my papers are written with graduate students. I have a lot of graduate students. I have group meetings with them and we write papers together. And I take that very seriously. And having been through all this that we've just talked about, I know what it takes them to get a job. I'm not going to let them be the position I was in and not being told what it takes to get a job. And so I want to not only write papers with them, but write papers that are considered respectable for the jobs they want to eventually get. So again, for better or for worse, this caused me to do a lot more conventional research than I might have otherwise done. And being at Caltech, you have access to some of the very best graduate students that are out there. Absolutely. And some of the papers we wrote were again, very successful. I wrote a paper with Lottie Akerman and Mark Wise on NI-Sotropies. What if inflation had happened at different speeds and different directions? And we made a new prediction for the microwave background, which was very interesting. I wrote a paper with a couple papers with Mark Heming-Kowski and Adrian Airechak, who was a student on a similar sounding problem. What if the universe, what if inflation happened faster in one side of the sky than in the other side of the sky? And these are all things people instantly can latch onto because they're connected to data, the microwave background. And I always think that that's important. I am in favor of being connected to the data. So we had some success there, but it did slow me down in the more way out there stuff I was interested in. Sean, what are the more prosaic aspects of tenure is, of course, financial stability. I'm curious if you were thinking long-term about this being a more soft money position branching out into those other areas was a safety net to some degree to make sure that you would remain financially viable no matter what happened with this particular position that you were in. No, not really. That had never, like, I had never quite, I mean, maybe even today, I still not quite appreciate how important bringing in great money is to academia. Like, I've never cared. I've done it. I brought in money, like with a good amount of success, but not, you know, lighting the sky on fire, anything like that. I played a big role in the Physics Frontier Center. We got a Chicago, I got the Packard Fellowship. I'm on the DOE grant to both places, et cetera, et cetera. Normal stuff, I would say. But getting money was always like, okay, hope it'll happen. I'm not going to really worry about it. I'm crystal clear that this other stuff that I do hurts me in terms of being an employable elsewhere. That's just not, there's no real way I can convince myself that writing papers about the foundations of quantum mechanics or the growth of complexity is going to make me a hot property on someone else's job market. Sean, when you start to more fully embrace being a public intellectual, appearing on stage, talking about religion, getting more involved in politics, I'd like to ask that there's two assumptions at the basis of this question. You can challenge them if that seems right. As a public intellectual who has discussed, I mean, really, it's like it's a library worth of things that you've talked about and talked with. Is your sense first that physics being the foundational science is the most appropriate place as an intellectual launching head to talk about these broader topics? And then even within physics, do you see cosmology as the foundational physics to talk about the rest of physics and all the rest of science and society? In other words, if you were an experimental condensed matter physicist, is there any planet where it would be feasible that you would be talking about democracy and atheism and all the other things that you've talked about? How do you understand all of these things? I think to some extent, yes, and I'm not sure how conscious that was on my own part. But there's definitely a feeling that I have had for a while, however long back it goes, that in some sense, learning about fundamental theoretical physics is the hardest thing to learn about. And so if I can do that, I can branch out afterward. I mean, there's definitely a semi-permeable membrane where if you go from doing theoretical physics to doing something else, you can do that. No one gets a PhD in biology and ends up doing particle physics, right? I mean, it's conceivable, but it's very, very rare. Whereas there's multiple stories of people of PhDs in physics doing wonderful work in biology. And I don't think it has anything to do with what's more important or more fundamental or exciting or better science. But there is a certain kind of discipline that you learn in learning physics and a certain bag of tricks and intellectual guiding stars that you pick up that are very, very helpful. So I do think that my education as a physicist has been useful in my caring about other fields in a way that other choices would not have been. Having said that, the slight footnote is, you open yourself up if you are a physicist who talks about other things to people saying, stick to physics. I get that all the time. I literally got it yesterday on the internet, someone said it. There's a sense in which the humanities and social sciences are more interchangeable. You can be an economist talking about history or politics or whatever in a way that physicists just are not listened to in the same way. And that's OK in some sense, because what I care about more is the underlying ideas. And no one should listen to me talk about anything because I'm a physicist. It's not a matter of credentials, but hopefully being a physicist gives me insight into other areas that I can take seriously those areas in their own rights, learn about them, and move in those directions deliberately. Let me ask you that question specifically on the topic of religion. Do you feel is your sense that your academic scholarly vantage point of cosmology allows for some kind of a privileged or effective position within public debate? Because so much of the basis of religion is based on the assumption that there must be a god because a universe couldn't have created itself. I'm not sure if privilege is the word, but you do get a foot in the door. You do get a seat at the table in a way talking about religion that I wouldn't, if I've talked about the economy, for example. Physics does give you that evolutionary biology. Also gives you that. There's a lot of biologists who have been fighting the trenches against creationism for a long time. So that's a recognized thing that is going on. But yeah, in fact, let me say a little bit extra. There is the Templeton Foundation, which has been giving out a lot of money. It's really the biggest, if not only source of money, and a lot of areas I care about, philosophical reflections on the nature of reality and the origin of the universe and things like that. It also has, as one of its goals, promoting a positive relationship between science and religion. I don't think the Templeton Foundation is evil. There are evil people out there. I don't think they're trying to do bad things. I just think that they're wrong. I just disagree with where they're coming from. So I don't want to be supported by them, because I think that I would be lending my credibility to their efforts, which I don't agree with, and that would become a little bit muddled. Almost none of my friends have this qualm. So I'm surrounded by friends who are supported by the Templeton Foundation. And that's fine. I have no problems with that. But they often ask me to join their grant proposal to Templeton or whatever. And I'm like, no, I don't want to do that. It's my personal choice. And the point I try to make to them is the follow. And usually they're like, sure, I'm not religious. I'm an atheist. I don't agree with what they do, but they're going to give me money and who cares? And my response to them is, what we do, those of us who are interested in the deepest questions about the nature of reality, whether they're physicists or philosophers or whoever. Like I said before, we're not going to cure cancer. We're not developing a better smartphone. There's no immediate technological, economic, political applications to what we do. There's very few ways in which what we do directly affects people's lives. Except we can tell them that God doesn't exist. That's a huge effect on people's lives, right? And I do think it's not 100% airtight. But I do think that not that science disproves God, but that thinking like a scientist and carefully evaluating the nature of reality, given what we know about science leads you to the conclusion that God doesn't exist. And we have been very, very bad about letting people know that. So I think if anything, like the obligation that we have, is to give back a little bit to the rest of the world that supports us in our duties, in our endeavors, to learn about the universe. And if we can share some piece of knowledge that might change their lives, let's do that. And the most direct way to do that is to say, look, you should be a naturalist. God doesn't exist. And that has enormous consequences for how we live our lives. Let's sit and think about this seriously. But very few people in my field jump on that pan-wagon. Sean, just as in earlier in life, your drift away from religion, as you say, was not dramatic. Was your pull into becoming a public intellectual, like Richard Dawkins, a Sam Harris, on that level? Was your pull into being a public intellectual on the issue of science and atheism? Was that equally non-dramatic? Or were you sort of pulled in more quickly than that? I'm not exactly sure when it happened, but I can tell you a story. When I got to Chicago, as a new faculty member, what sometimes happens is that if you're at a big name place like Chicago, people who are editors at publishing houses for trade books will literally walk down the halls and knock on doors and say, hey, you want to write a book? Do you have any good plans for a book? And so I was in my office, someone knocked on the door, Stephen Marrow was his name. He was an editor at the Free Press, and he introduced himself and he said, do you want to write a book? And I said, well, I've thought about it. So this is probably 2000, maybe 1999, but I think 2000. As I've thought about it, but the world has enough cosmology books. What the world really needs is a book that says God does not exist. So I would like to write that as a scientist, right? Here's how you should think about the nature of reality, whether or not God exists. And he was intrigued by that. And he went back to his editors, and I think that their business people, they're not in the job of making me feel good. They made a hard-nosed business decision. They said, no one knows who you are. No one cares what you think about the existence of God. No one would buy that book, so we're not going to do it. So I said, that's fine. I did not have it as a real priority. I'm like, if I do something, that's what I wanted to do. And then of course, Richard Dawkins wrote the God delusion and sold a bajillion copies. And I almost wrote a book before Richard Dawkins did it, but I didn't quite. But the contingencies of history. Stephen later moved from the Free Press to Dutton, which is a part of Penguin, and he's now my editor. He is the one who edits all my books these days. So they worked out for us. I'm curious how much of a new venture this was for you, thinking about intellectually serving an academic department. Was your sense that religion was not discussed because it was private or because being an atheist in scientific communities was so non-controversial that it wasn't even something worth discussing? I think both, actually. It is fairly non-controversial within physics departments anyway. And I think other science departments with very noticeable exceptions. One of my good things about this is that very noticeable exceptions. One of my good friends is Don Page at the University of Alberta who is a very top flight theoretical cosmologist and a born-again evangelical Christian. And he is not at all ashamed of telling you that and explains things sometimes in his talks about cosmology by reference to his idea about God's existence. And everyone's sort of nods along and puts up with it and waits for the next equation to come on. I think it's more that people don't care. I mean, as much as if you sat around at lunch with a bunch of random people in the Celtic Physics Department, chances are none of them are deeply religious, some of them might be one of my best graduate students, Grant Rehmann is deeply religious. And he's one of the best graduate students I've ever had. But the idea that there's any connection with what we do as professional scientists and these bigger questions about the nature of reality is just not one that modern physicists have. They just don't care. What is the theory? What can I write down? What are the equations I can solve? Oh, there aren't any? Then why are you wasting my time? I think that's much more the reason why you just don't hear these discussions that much. But within the physical sciences, there are gradations in terms of one's willingness to consider metaphysics as something that exists, that there are things about the universe that are not, it's not a matter of them being not observable now because we lack the theories of the tools to observe them, but because they exist outside the bounds of science. Are you so axiomatic in your atheism that you reject those possibilities? Or do you open up the possibility that there might be metaphysical aspects to the universe? So two things. One is the word metaphysical in this sense is used in a different sense by the professional philosophical community. Metaphysics to a philosopher just means studying the fundamental nature of reality. You can be a physicalist and still do metaphysics for your living. So I think what you're referring to is more the idea of being a non-physicalist. And they come in different varieties. There are dualists. People who think there's a physical world and the non-physical world. There are substance dualists who think there's literally other stuff out there, whether it's God or angels or spirits or whatever. There are property dualists who are like the more closer to ordinary naturalist physicists. They're probably atheists, but they think that matter itself is not enough to account for consciousness or something like that. There's extra mental stuff, pan-psychism, et cetera. OK, with all that clarified, it's funny that you should say that because literally two days ago, I finished writing a paper on exactly this issue. Part of my finally at last successful attempts to be more serious on the philosophical side of things, I'm writing a bunch of invited papers for philosophy edited volumes. And so I was invited to write one on levels of reality. Whatever that means, it's taken as a given that every paper will have a different idea of what that means. That's how philosophy goes. That's OK. And so the paper that I wrote is called the quantum field theory on which the everyday world super beans. Supervenience is this idea in philosophy that one level depends on another level in a certain way. It's superveens on the lower level. If you change something at the higher level, you must change something at the lower level. It's never true. The two different things at the higher level correspond to the same thing at the lower level. That's what superveens means. So the quantum field theory on which the everyday world superveens means you and I, and the tables and chairs around us, the lights behind you, the computers we're talking on, supervene on a particular theory of the world at one level, at the quantum field theory level. And what I mean, of course, is the standard model of particle physics plus general relativity, what Frank will check called the core theory. And the argument I make in the paper is, if you are a physicalist, if you exclude by assumption the possibility of non-physical stuff. That's a separate argument. But first let's be physicalists. Then we know the laws of physics governing the stuff out of which we are made at the quantum field theory level. We don't know the theory of everything. We don't understand dark matter and dark energy. We don't understand economics or politics. But if you want to say, OK, I made out of electrons and protons and neutrons, and they're interacting with photons and gluons, we know all that stuff. We will literally not discover, no matter how much more science we do, new particles and fields that are relevant to the physics underlying what's going on in your body or this computer or anything else. OK? I think that's a true argument. I think I can make that argument. Now, who cares? You might ask who cares. Well, one ramification of that is technological. It used to be the case that there was a close relationship between discoveries in fundamental physics and discoveries in technology. And advances in technology, right? Whether it was mechanics or electromagnetism or quantum mechanics, there haven't been any for decades. Arguably since the pi-on was discovered in 1947, OK? Because fundamental physics has understood enough about the world that in order to create something that is not already understood, you need to build a $9 billion particle accelerator miles across. OK? It does not lead. And then you make something that disappears in a zeppno second, 10 to the minus 21 seconds. It doesn't lead to new technology. So that's one important implication. The other is this argument absolutely does not rule out the existence of non-physical stuff, OK? Because I said, you assume that there's no non-physical stuff, and then you derive this conclusion. But exactly because the standard model and general relativity are so successful, we have exactly the equations. It's not just good ideas. There's an equation you can point to, OK? If you want to tell me that that is not enough to explain the behavior of human beings and their conscious perceptions, then the burden is on you, not you personally, David, but whoever's making this argument. The burden is on them to tell me why that equation is wrong, to tell me exactly the way in which this extremely successful quantum field theory fails. And no one does that. No one who wants to be in favor of panpsychism or ghosts or whatever ever tells me where exactly the equation needs to be modified. So it's not a disproof of that point of view, but it's an illustration of exactly how hard it is, what an incredible burden it is. Whereas if you're just a physicalist, you're successful. You have the equation. You're still faced with this enormous challenge of understanding consciousness on the basis of this physical stuff. And I completely am sympathetic with the difficulty of that problem. But I think it's as difficult as it is, it's an easier problem than adding new stuff that pushes around electrons and protons and neutrons in some mysterious way. Sean, as you just demonstrated, atheism is a complex proposition. And so I wonder just in the way that atheists criticize religious people for confirmation bias in this world that you resided with your academic contemporaries and fellow philosophers and scientists, what confirmation biases have you seen in this world that you feel are holding back the broader endeavor of getting at the truth? There are so many. And it's very easy for me to admit that I suffer from confirmation biases. But it's very hard for me to tell you which ones they are, because we all each individually think that we are perfectly well calibrating ourselves against our biases. Otherwise, we would change them in some way. In my book, The Big Picture, I suggested this metaphor of what I called planets of belief. That there's a different set of things that you believe, propositions about the world. And you want them to sort of cohere. There's a sort of gravitational pull that different beliefs have that they fit together nicely. And one thing you want them to cohere with is reality, is the evidence of the data, whatever it is. But there's an enormous influence put on your view of reality by all of these preexisting propositions that you think are probably true. And even if you're not completely dogmatic, even if you think, well, they're likely true, but I'm not sure. You filter in what information you think is relevant and important, what you discount, both in terms of information, but also in terms of perspective theories. If someone says, oh, I saw a fuzzy spot in the sky, maybe it was a UFO driven by aliens, I am likely to discount that, because of all various other prior beliefs where someone else might give it a lot of credence. So you're asking for specific biases, I'm not very good at giving you them, but I'm a huge believer that they're out there. And we should all be trying our best to open our eyes to what they could be. The way that you describe your dissertation as a series of papers that were stapled together, I wonder the extent to which you can superimpose that characterization on the popular books that you've published over the past, almost 20 years now. You know, everyone is different, like every child, they all have their own stories and their own personalities. When I did move to Caltech circa 2006, and I did this conscious reflection on what I wanted to do for a living, writing popular books was one of the things that I wanted to do and I had not done it to that point. So here's another funny story. I just, I thought that, you know, given what I knew and what I was an expert in, the obvious thing to write a popular book about would be the accelerating universe, right? And people had mentioned the accelerating universe in popular books before, but I honestly didn't think they had done a great job. I thought that, you know, honestly, I still think the really good book about the accelerating universe has yet to be written. But so I wrote up a little proposal and I sent it to a Katinka Matzen, who is an agent with a Brockman group. And, you know, and she said something I think which is true now that I know the business a lot better, which was that, you know, it's true maybe there's not been a perfect book, but people have a vague idea that there has been the perfect book. Like people think that they've heard too much about dark energy and honestly, your proposal sounds a little workman-like. It doesn't seem very inspired, so I think we will pass. But I said, okay, and again, I was not like completely devoted to this in any sense. I thought it would be fun to do, but I took it that in stride. And then a short time later, John Brockman, who is her husband and also in the agency, emails me out of the blue, says, hey, you should write a book. So they had clearly not talked to each other. So I said, yes, I proposed a book and your wife rejected it. Okay. Awkward. So Katinka wrote back to me and said, well, you know, but John is right, you know, she's very, very good. I like her a lot. She said, John is right and I was also right. You should write a book and the book you proposed is not that interesting. What is it that you really are really passionate about right now? And she had put her finger on it quite accurately because already by then, by, you know, 2006, I had grown kind of tired of the whole dark energy thing. I'd done that for a while and I have a short attention span that I moved on. But in 2004, I had written that arrow of time paper and that's what really was fascinating to me. I really wanted to move that forward. So I said that and she goes, well, proposed that as a book. We'll publish that or we'll, you know, put that out there and that was what led to from eternity to here, which was my first published book. And in many ways, it was a great book. In many ways, I could do better now, if I rewrote it, right from scratch, but you know, that always happens. The second book, the Higgs boson book, I didn't even want to write. I don't know how public knowledge this is. But so remember the Higgs boson was final. So from eternity here, it came out in 2010. Late in 2011, Surn had a press conference saying, we think we've gotten hints that we might discover the Higgs boson and, you know, physicists knew, given the schedule of a large Hadron collider, et so forth, there would probably be another year before they raised the significance to that to really declare a discovery. So there was a little window to write a book about the Higgs boson. And Stephen Morrow, my editor who published from eternity to here, you know, called me up and said, the world needs a book on a Higgs boson. They need it written within six months, so it can be published before the discovery is announced. The only person who both knows the physics well enough and writes fast enough to do that is you, because six months is a very short period of time. He wasn't bothered by the fact that you were not a particle physicist. I'm close enough. I'm enough of a particle physicist. I know the field theory, but it's not what I do research on. So that's why I said I didn't want to write it. I said, my response to him was, no thanks. You know, if I'm going to spend my time writing popular books, like I said before, I want my outreach to be advancing an intellectual argument, right? I wanted to be proposing new ideas, not just explaining ideas out there. And writing a book about the Higgs boson, I didn't really have any ideas to spread. So I said, you know, there are other people who are really experts in the Higgs boson who could do this. And so his response was to basically make me an offer I couldn't refuse in terms of the financial reward that would be accompanying writing this book. And you said, look, it's in the way. I'm sorry to interrupt there, but in the way that you describe the discovery of the accelerating universe as unparalleled in terms of its significance, when you put the discovery of the Higgs at a lower tier. In other words, if you held it in the same regard as the accelerating universe, perhaps you wouldn't have had to need your arm to be twisted to write this book. No, yeah, there's no question. The Higgs is not in the same tier as the accelerating universe. The Higgs gravitational waves, and isotropies in the cosmic microwave background. These are all hugely important Nobel worthy discoveries that did win the Nobel Prize. But also ones we expected. No sensible person doubted they would happen. Whereas the accelerating universe was a surprise. I mean, there were people who absolutely had thought about it. I wrote a big review article about it. But most of us didn't think it was real. I mean, so the difference is that when you're surprised like that, it causes a rethink. And honestly, we're here, we're talking in the beginning of 2021. I still don't think we've taken it seriously. The implications of the cosmological constant for fundamental physics. So I think it's a big difference. And that's one of the things I wanted to do. I thought that for the accelerating universe book, I could both do a good job of explaining the astronomy and the observations, but also highlight some of the theoretical implications which no one has really done. So anyway, with the Higgs, I don't think I could have done that. But yeah, he may be more afraid I couldn't refuse. As it turned out, Sirn, you know, surprised us by discovering the Higgs boson early. The discovery was announced in July. It was July 4th. Yeah, we were expecting it to be in November. My book would have been out. But the good news was, I got to be at Sirn while they announced it, right? And so that appeared in my book as of in yet. And I did use the book, the last half of it as an excuse to explain some ideas in quantum field theory, engage theory and symmetry that don't usually get explained in popular books. So I used it, you know, for my own purposes. But mostly, I hope it was a clear and easy to read book. And it was, you know, the first major book to appear soon after the discovery of the Higgs boson. And as a result, it did pretty well sales wise. And it won a big award. It won the Royal Society Prize for Best Science Book of Year, which is a very prestigious thing. And so actually, like without expecting it, and honestly, between you and me, it wanted because not because I'm the best writer in the world, but because the Higgs boson is the most exciting particle in the world. They basically admitted that. They were like, how can you not give it to the Higgs boson book, right? Those poor biologists had no, you know, chance that year. And, but that gave me some cashier to, you know, when I wanted to write my next book, like I had done what Stephen asked for the Higgs boson book. And it won a prize. And so I could, basically I could choose really what I wanted to write for the next book. And so that's when the big picture came along, which was sort of my, you know, my slightly pretentious, entirely pretentious, what am I saying? Super pretentious exposition of how the world holds together in the broadest possible sense. You know, a defensive philosophical naturalism, a brand of naturalism, I doubt poetic naturalism. So basically giving sales pitch for the idea that even if we don't know the answers to questions like the origin of the universe, the origin of life, the nature of consciousness, the nature of right and wrong, whatever those answers are going to be, they're going to be found within the framework of naturalism. That's the case I tried to make. So I, it was a very, you know, I, it was a big book, it was very long. I very intentionally said, this is too much for anyone to read. So I wrote very short chapters. There's a lot of chapters for, they're all very short. You can read any one of them on the subway ride, right? So it didn't appear overwhelming. And it was a huge success. There was the first book I wrote that appeared on the New York Times bestseller list. So it is, I don't know whether this is a, it's a, it's a, it's a, only one data point there. But you know, the Higgs boson was the book people thought that they wanted and they liked it. No one wanted the big picture, but it sold more copies. So, you know, sometimes you should do what you're passionate about and it will pay off. And then my final book, my most recent one was something deeply hidden, which again was, you know, going back to the research I was doing, right? In this case, on the foundations of quantum mechanics and a sales pitch for the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics and the most recent research I've been doing on deriving how space time can emerge from quantum mechanics. And so I think that, and again, got on the bestseller list very, very briefly, it literally did the least it could possibly do to technically qualify as being on the bestseller list. But it did. And so that believe me, the paperback had a sticker on the front saying New York Times bestseller. But I think that that book will have an impact, you know, 10 and 20 years from now, because a new generation of undergraduate physics students will come in having read that and they will take the foundations of quantum mechanics seriously in a way that my generation did not. So I'm very, very happy to have written that book. Do you see the enterprise of writing popular books as essentially in the same category, but a different medium as the other ways that you interact with the broader public, giving lectures, doing podcasts? Do you see this is all one big enterprise with different media, or are they essentially different activities with different goals in mind? I think it's part of a continuum. They're not exactly the same activity, but they're part of the same landscape. They reach very different audiences and they have very different impacts, right? Like to me, the book is still the most profound way for one person to say ideas that are communicated to another one. You have enough room to get it right. I mean, I laugh because I'm friends, Jennifer, my wife is a science journalist, so we're friends with a lot of science journalists. Some of them also write books, but most of them, you know, focus on articles, and a lot of them, even who write books, they don't like it, because like, is all this work I got to do? Like I can't just get a story out in a week or whatever. And I love it. I love writing books so much. Like you tell me you got 100,000 words to explain things correctly, I am never happier than that. But okay, not everyone is going to read your book. Like, you sell tens of thousands of books if you're lucky, right? Whereas if I'm a consultant on the Avengers, and I can just have like one or two lines of dialogue in there, the impact of those one or two lines of dialogue have is way, way smaller than the impact you have from reading a book. But the number of people that reaches is way, way larger. And you know, Twitter and social media and podcasts are somewhere in between that. So, I mean, I'm very pleasantly surprised that the podcast gets over 100,000 listeners to every episode, because we talk about pretty academic stuff. You know, we get pretty heavy and intellectual there sometimes, but it just, it warms my heart that so many people care about that stuff. And I'm a big believer that all those different media have a role to play. Sean, given the vastly large audience that you reach, however we define those numbers, is there a particular demographic that gives you the most satisfaction in terms of being able to reach a particular kind of person and age group, whatever, however you might define it, that gives you the greatest satisfaction that you're introducing real science into a life that might not ever think about these things? That's a great question, because I do get emails from people who read one of my books or whatever and then go into physics, right? They decide to do physics for a living. And yeah, I mean, it absolutely is great, or other things, like I had this email from a woman who said literally when she was 12 years old, there was at some event, and she was there with her parents, and they happened to sit next to me at a table, and we talked about particle physics, and now, you know, she wrote just after she got accepted to the PhD program at Oxford in particle physics. And she said it all started with that conversation. She had pinpointed there. And it's, yeah, it just is incredibly touching that you've made it affect an impact on someone's life. Having said all that, my goal is never to convert people into physicists. I think there's plenty of physicists. So I mean, I'm glad that people want to be physicists, but there's no physicist shortage out there. What I would much rather be able to do successfully, and who knows how successful it is, but I want physics to be part of the conversation that everyone has, not just physicists. I want people to, and this is why I think that it's perfectly okay in popular writing to talk about speculative ideas, not just ideas that have been well established. I want people, I've said this before, but I want to live in the world, where people work very hard, nine to five jobs, go to the pub for a drink and talk about what their favorite dark matter particle candidate is, or what their favorite interpretation of quantum mechanics is. I want it to be okay to talk about these things amongst themselves when they're not professional physicists. That's when I have the most fun. Like the idea that the emails or responses that make me the happiest are when someone just says, you know, I used to love physics, and I was turned off by it by like a bad course in high school or whatever, and you have reignited my passion for it. That's what really makes me feel successful. Sean, I wonder if it through line in terms of understanding your motivation generally to reach these broad audiences, is a basis of optimism in the wisdom of lay people. In other words, you're decidedly not in the campus, somebody like a Harold Bloom, a closing of the American mind, where you are pessimistic that we as a society in some are not getting dumber, that we are not becoming more close-minded, that you have an optimism that that's not true, and that what you're doing as a public intellectual is that you're nurturing and being a causative effect of those trend lines. Yeah, I think that's right. And I think it's Alan Bloom, who did the closing of the American mind. Harold Bloom is a literary critic. No, right. Yeah, other things. I got my blooms mixed up. Don't yet. That's, you get dangerous. I say this as someone who has another Sean Carroll, who's a famous biologist, and I get emails for him. You know, look, I don't want to say the wisdom of lay people, or even the intelligence of lay people, because there's a lot of lay people out there. I want to say the variety of people. And just in exactly the same way, that academic institutions sort of narrow down to the single most successful strategy, having strong departments, let people specialize in them. Popular media tries to reach the largest possible audience, right? And so they, you know, keep things at a certain level. They have a certain way of doing things. And that's actually a whole other conversation that could go on for hours, about the specifics of the way the media work. Like I've appeared on a lot of television documentaries since moving to LA. And that's a whole sausage you don't want to see, maybe, really, in terms of modern science documentaries. And some of them are excellent, but it's almost by accident sometimes, so they appear to be excellent. So I do think that in a country of 300 and some million people, there's clearly a million people who will go pretty far with you in hard intellectual stuff. And if I could get a million people to buy my books, I'd be like a best-selling author, right? I'd be a really best-selling author, like a crazily successful. You don't get that, but there's clearly way more audience in a world as large as ours, for people who are willing to work a little bit. Not for everybody. And again, I'm a huge believer in the big ecosystem. I love the little books on quantum physics for babies or philosophy for dummies. So those are all very important things and I'm not going to write them myself. The things I write, even the video series, I do, in fact, especially the video series I did, I made a somewhat conscious decision to target it in between popular level physics and textbook level physics. So I realized right from the start, I would not be able to do it at all if I assume that the audience didn't understand anything about equations. If I was not allowed to use equations. So in the second video, I taught him calculus. I taught him what an integral was and what a derivative was, not so they can do it. Like, I didn't know if you take a calculus class, you're learned all these techniques, like the product rule and what to do with polynomials. And I didn't do any of that. But I taught him the concept. An integral is measuring the area under a curve or the volume of something. A derivative is a slope of something. And then I could use that and I did use it quite probably in all the other videos. And the video 16 got half a million views. And it was about gravity, but it was about gravity using tensors and differential geometry. Like, I did it. And I do think that audience is there. And it's wildly underserved. And someday I will turn that video series into a book that is, again, in between, there's this huge gap in between what we give the popular press where I have to fight for three equations in my book. And a textbook, which is three equations every paragraph. So I'm curious if you think podcasting is a medium that's here to stay? Or are we in a podcast bubble right now when you're doing an amazing job writing it? That's a very hard question. I don't know. Blogging was a big bubble that it almost went away. It's that people still do it. I still do it sometimes. But mostly it's been professionalized and turned into journalism. Or it's just become Twitter or Facebook, right? Social media, Instagram kind of thing. So it's sort of bifurcated in that way. I don't know what's going to happen to the future of podcasting. It's still pretty on part of the reason why I was able to get as many listeners as I do is because I was enough early two and a half years ago. All the big podcasts were already there. How did it been five years ago? That would have been awesome, right? But now there's a lot of competition. So it is popular and the nice thing about it. One of the many nice things about it is that the listeners feel like they have a personal relationship with the host. This is why the thing, this is a very interesting fact to learn that completely surprised me. Advertising on podcasts is really effective. Like compared to TV or radio or web pages or whatever, ads that you buy on a podcast really do get return. And in part it's because they're read by the host to the audience has developed a trusting relationship with. So I suspect that they are here to stay. Audio and one former and other is here to stay. But I could be very open-minded about the actual format changing by a lot. Like I do long podcasts between an hour and two hours for every episode. And some people say that's bad. Like people don't want that. Some people love it, go longer. Again, rather than trying to appeal to the largest number of people, I'm appealing to my people and they like it. And it will never be the largest. I will never be Joe Rogan or Mark Marren or whatever. Play it plenty of people listening and that makes me very pleased. I wonder in what ways given the fact that you have this tremendous time spending with all of these really smart people talking about all these great ideas, in what ways do you bring those ideas back to your science, back to the Caltech, back to the pen and paper? Well, I do, but not so much in the conventional theoretical physics realm. Because for a couple of reasons, for one thing, I don't have that many theoretical physicists on the show, like they're rare. They appear, but once every few months, not every episode. And that's by choice because you don't want to talk to them with as much eagerness as you want to talk to other kinds of scientists or scholars. Well, it's not that I don't want to talk to them, but it's that I want to, I want the podcast to very clearly be broad-ranging. Like, even if it were half theoretical physicists and half other things, that's a weird crazy balance. I want the podcast to be enjoyable to people who don't care about theoretical physics. And one out of every 10 episodes is about theoretical physics. That's fine. You can skip that one, right? But the audience is still there. And also, of course, when I'm on with a theoretical physicist, I'm trying to have a conversation at a level that people can access. It doesn't always work. Sometimes we get a little enthusiastic. Netta Engelhardt and I did a podcast on a black hole information. And in the first half, I think we were very accessible. And then we just let our hair down in a second half. You're not absolutely. I remember that. It was following. And it's funny when that happens. I did an episode with Kip Thorn. And I would ask him questions that he knew exactly what the point of this was. But he would say, like, why are you asking that? You know the answer to that. I have to say, yes, but maybe the audience does not know what a black hole is. So, you know, you need to explain it to us. However, because I am, you know, intentionally and dynamically moving into other areas, not just theoretical physics, I can totally use the podcast to educate myself. And I have been, and it's been incredibly helpful in various ways. And you know, sometimes I get these little tiny moments when I can even suggest something to the guest that is useful to them, which makes me tickle it a little bit. So this dream of having a truly interdisciplinary conversation at a high intellectual level, I think, is we're getting better at it. Creeping up on it. I wouldn't say we're there yet. But I do think that it's possible and it's something as a goal worth driving for us. Put it that way. Sean, just to bring the conversation up to the present, are you ever concerned that you might need a moment to snap back into theoretical physics so that you don't you don't get pulled out of gravity. You don't get too far away that you don't know how to get back in. Or are you comfortable with that idea as so many other physicists who reinvent themselves over the course of a career are? I think I'm pretty comfortable with that idea. I don't think I'm in danger of it right now. So who knows five years from now, 10 years from now or whatever. But you know, my standard is what is it that it sites me at the moment? So if five years from now or 10 years from now, the set of things that excite me do not include cutting edge theoretical physics, then so be it. If they do, then I like to think I will jump back into it. I mean, not even jump back into it, but keep it up. I haven't given it up yet. I'm trying to finish a paper right now. I should be finishing this paper rather than talking to you on quantum mechanics and everything. I'm sorry. That's okay. But I mean, I have no shortage of papers I want to write at theoretical physics. So many ideas I want to get on paper. So but you know, I'm unconstrained by caring about whether they're hot topics. So it's incredibly liberating because I don't have to keep up with the billion other papers that people are writing in the hot topics, right? That's my secret weapon that I can just write the papers I want to write. Now, look, if I'm being objective, maybe this dramatically decreases my chances of having a paper that makes a big impact because it's I'm not writing papers that other people are already focused on. But the dream, the goal is that they will realize they should have been focused on it once I write the paper. And the only way to do that is to try. So let's see what happens. Are you particularly excited about an area of physics where you might yet make fundamental contributions? Or are you again going back to graduate school? Are you still exuberantly all over the place that maybe one of them will stick or maybe one of them won't? No, I think I'm much more purposive about choosing what to work on now than it was back then. I mean, infinitely more. Let's put it that way. And I do think that within the specific field of theoretical physics, the thing that I think I understand that my colleagues don't is the importance of the foundations of quantum mechanics to understanding quantum gravity. I think that if I read papers by very smart people, smart of me doing cutting edge work on quantum gravity and so forth. And I still think that there are little ham strong by old-fashioned classical ideas. And I think that the reason why is because they haven't really been forced to sit down and think about quantum mechanics as quantum mechanics all for its own sake. So temporarily, this puts me in a position where I'm writing papers, answering questions that no one cares about because I'm trying to build up a foundation for going from the fundamental quantumness of the universe to the classical world we see. Like literally right now, I'm interested in why we live in position space, not in momentum space. Why is there an imbalance in theoretical physics between position and momentum? And the answer is, you know, to most people like, there is. Move on with it. It can only your life. That's not like going to lead us to a theory of dark matter or whatever. But I have a conviction that understanding the answer to those questions or at least appreciating that they are questions will play a role or again, could very easily play a role because who knows, but could very easily play a role in understanding what we jokingly call the theory of everything, right? The fundamental nature of all the forces and the nature of space time itself. So there is definitely a sort of comparative advantage, kind of calculation that goes on here. There's very promising interesting work being done by strength theorists and other people doing ADSCFT and wormholes and tensor networks and things like that. There's a whole set of hot topics that are very, very interesting and respectable in favor of them. But there's plenty of smart people working on that. There's nobody working on using insights from the foundation of quantum mechanics to help understand quantum gravity or these very, very few people. So that's to me a really good chance of making a really important contribution. It might fail and I always try to say that very explicitly. It might be a good idea that is promising at the moment it doesn't pan out. We'll have to see, but we don't know yet. And it's absolutely worth trying. Given the way that you rank the accelerating universe way above LIGO or the Higgs boson because it was a surprise, what are the other surprises out there that if they were discovered might rank on that level of an accelerating universe? For example, like integrating gravity into the standard model. Would that be on that level? Well, that's not an experimental discovery. That's not data, right? You have to say like what could we see in our telescopes or our laboratories that would be surprising. There's a bunch, you know, like I said, the reason why we're stuck is because our theories are so good. So just show that any of our theories are wrong. The thing that people are looking for, like the experimental effort these days is very, and for very good reason is aimed at things that we think are plausibly true. There's nothing like, you know, back 15 years ago, we all knew we were going to discover the Higgs boson and gravitational waves. And we all knew that eventually we discovered CMD and isotropies if you go back even farther than that. So even though these were anticipated, they were also really good benchmarks, really good targets to shoot for. We're kind of out of that, right? Not only do we have a theory that fits all the data, we don't even have a prediction for that theory that we haven't tested yet. This is a tough position to be in. We could discover what the dark matter is, right? That would be great. We could discover gravitational waves in the microwave background that might be traced back to inflation. We could discover that the dark energy is not a cosmological constant, but some quintessence-like thing. There was, as you know, because you listened to my recent podcast, there is a hint of a possibility of a suggestion in the CMD data that there is what is called cosmological birefringence. The polarization of light from the CMD might be rotated just a little bit as it travels through space. This is not what you predict in conventional physics, but it's like my baby, the first paper I ever wrote and got published with George Field and Roman Jakibe predicted exactly this effect. Later on, I wrote another paper that sort of got me my faculty jobs that pointed out that dark energy could have exactly the same effect. I would become famous if they actually discovered that. My only chance to become famous is that they discover cosmological birefringence. But look, all of these examples are examples where there's a theoretical explanation ready to hand. It's not overturning all of physics. If you found something like a violation of Lorentz invariants, right? If you found something like a violation of the Schrodinger equation in quantum mechanics, like some of the fundamental predictions of entanglement or anything like that, if you found that there was a fundamental time directness in nature, that the arrow time was not emergent out of entropy increasing, but was really part of the fundamental laws of physics. In other words, that dynamics of physics were irreversible at the fundamental level. If you found that information was lost in some down-to-earth process, I'm writing a paper that says you could possibly find that energy is not conserved, but it's a prediction of a very good theory. It's not a crazy departure. But there's all those kind of big picture things, which there are little experiments here and there, you know, high-risk high-gain kinds of things that are looking for these kinds of things. And those would really cause re-thics in a deep way.