 Hello everybody and welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host Sean Carroll. Today's guest is Dr. Anthony Pin, who's a professor in the Religion Department at Rice University. Now do not be alarmed despite being a professor in the Religion Department and in fact, despite describing himself as a theologian, Dr. Pin is an atheist, a humanist. That's not to say that we will not occasionally have actual religious people, actual theologians on the podcast, but that day is not today. Anthony Pin has a very interesting trajectory. He grew up in upstate New York where he was a child preacher. So at age 12, he was standing up there in the pulpit, preaching sermons, bringing people to Jesus, and he was really good at it. It actually was quite the calling that he had. He went on to college, in fact, to Divinity School, but then along the way he lost his faith. He got the idea that he was trying to help people in underprivileged communities. He didn't really think that God was helping them. He didn't really think that his Christianity was helping the cause of bringing these people's lives to a better state. So he ultimately lost his faith, but he didn't lose interest in the idea of helping people. So he stayed a self-described theologian, but now he tries to bring humanism to people rather than Christianity. And in particular, he tries to bring humanism to the African-American community where atheism, agnosticism, humanism are not very popular. If you look at different demographic groups in the United States, I just looked it up. Only 2% of blacks in the United States describe themselves as completely atheist. That's compared to something like 6% of Latinos, 11% of whites, 19% of Asians. So somehow, if you're an atheist, you're saying, what are we doing wrong? Why aren't we reaching these people? If you're Christian, you might say, what are the African-Americans doing right? Why are they so much better at maintaining their faith than the rest of Americans are? Well, I can't imagine a better person to talk to about these issues than Anthony Pinn. He's the author of many books. I'm not going to list them all here. You can look them up on his webpage, but a few of the more recent ones are when colorblindness isn't the answer, humanism and the challenge of race. The end of God talk, an African-American humanist theology, and a very interesting semi-autobiographical book called Writing God's Obituary, have a good Methodist, became a better atheist. So we're going to talk about all these things. We're going to talk about the time that Dr. Pinn taught a course at Rice on religion and hip hop to other parts of human culture that you don't often hear put together, but it makes for a great little stew of intellectual topics. So we're going to have a lot of fun. Let's go. Here's a tip for growing your business. Get the Venturex Business Card from Capital One and start earning a limited double miles on every purchase. That's right. With unlimited double miles, the more your business spends, the more miles you earn. Plus, the Venturex Business Card has no preset spending limit, so your purchasing power can adapt to meet your business needs. The Venturex Business Card also includes access to over a thousand airport lounges. Just imagine where the Venturex Business Card from Capital One can take your business. Capital One, what's in your wallet? Terms and conditions apply. Find out more at capitalone.com slash venture xbusiness. All right, Anthony Pinn. Welcome to the podcast. Great to be with you. So the point that I'm trying to get across from any of these podcasts, the conceit, if you will, is that I'm after the ideas, right? The big ideas, I want to kind of figure out like how we can think about the world, how we can learn about it, less about people's individual autobiographies or anecdotes and so forth. But I'm thinking that maybe we should make an exception a little bit. Sometimes you get to some big ideas by personal autobiography, right? Sure. Sure. So why don't we tell our listeners a little bit about where you started and how you got where you are? Well, I grew up in Buffalo, New York, very much involved in the church. Started on the path to ministry as a preteen and moved through ordination. So by the time I was finishing my first year of college, I could marry, bury, and baptize people. I was the youth pastor at a rather substantial church in Brooklyn, New York. But I was struggling a bit. I'd come from a rather conservative Southern Baptist high school, a feeder program for institutions like Bob Jones University. Okay. Yeah, we know well, right? Let that sink in. Yeah. And so I get to New York and I'm taking classes. And of course, I thought I needed to major in religion because I loved religion. But I'm encountering students and faculty who thought of the Bible as simply a piece of literature and not necessarily very good literature. And so this was throwing me and I'm encountering people who adhered to a variety of traditions, all of them from my vantage point led to hell. And they were unapologetic about their involvement. It was throwing me for a loop. And I'm encountering young people. This is the early 80s. I'm encountering young people in Brooklyn who are having an easier time thinking about their death than thinking about a bright and productive future. And what I could offer them through my tradition amounted to nothing. And so over the course of those four years, I started I started rethinking faith, still committed to ministry, but rethinking faith. You're working as a minister and also as a student. And as a student, right? Right. Right. Rethinking faith, but knowing I needed to get out of New York City to kind of think through these issues without the pressure of ministry. At my church, people wanted me to have answers, not good questions, just answers. They had enough questions. So correct the answer. Yes. And so I decided to go to an institution that really didn't care very much about ministry. It was about ideas. And during the course of the Master of Divinity program, the professional degree for ministry, my thinking began to shift. And by the time I was a PhD student, I realized I needed to make a decision. I could be a custodian of the tradition and forget about the misery and the pain that people encountered. Or I could move beyond theism and and concern myself with what people encountered on a daily basis. So I contacted the Minister of the local church I was involved with, and the bishop of my denomination, the African Methodist physical church, and gave my resignation and never looked back. Wow. And so this was at Harvard? Yes. Yes. Did it be school? Yes. And when were you there exactly? I was at Harvard 86 through 94. Okay. So we overlap. I graduated with my PhD from Harvard 93. Right. Right. So I would have had, I had almost no, you know, connection with people in other schools except for the graduate student counsel intramural basketball league. So is there any chance that you were that we played basketball against each other? I played at the law school every Saturday. Oh, but just pick up. Okay, just pick up. Just pick up. You weren't formally there. No, no, no. Did you play against Barack Obama? You overlap with him too? A couple of times. Yeah. A couple of times. Did you know? Did he like play with him and go like this guy's going to be president someday? Well, all of the buzz about him suggested he was really special. Right. Right. So I'm at the Divinity School and then the graduate school of school of arts and sciences. And everyone knew about him. Yeah. Okay. Good. That's what I didn't know about him, but I was in a different moving in different circles. Yeah. So okay. So it sounds like you're you had a journey from being a child preacher to atheism that was mostly driven by what we could call practical concerns about your ability to successfully minister. And that was, is it safe to say that's sort of what nudged you into a change of worldview? Oh, sure, sure. That what I believe theologically and what I practice religiously did not line up with what people were actually encountering in the world. It did not give me a way of addressing misery. Right. Right. So I always wonder because in philosophical or theological circles, we debate whether God exists. Right. We prove that God exists or doesn't exist. And I've always thought that these debates have essentially zero impact on people's belief structures. Right. Like the reasons why we actually believe for one thing or another, usually at least biographically come from these more practical concerns. I remember a friend of mine, I taught a course at the University of Chicago for undergraduates on the history of atheism. And we were both atheists. So we we were a little worried. We weren't trying to proselytize. Right. So we wanted to make the religious students in the class comfortable. And so we worried talking about all these proofs or arguments for an against the existence of God, whether people would get disturbed. No, no one cares. Right. Didn't make any impact on that. But when we talked about how the Bible had been written, right. The history, as you say, of the Bible as a work of literature, some people got a little upset. Like that was hitting them at a place that they hadn't really thought about before. Oh, sure. Yeah. And though I think you're absolutely right. Those those debates only accomplish so much because this theological theological commitments and religious practice are faith driven. There's nothing reasonable about this. It's faith driven. And so even much of this evidence will be used by theist to prove their point, right. So for many of them who grew up like I grew up, even this rigorous debate, this this effort to tackle the faith proves that they're on the right path because the devil is out to get them. Yeah, it's a non falsifiable theory. Right. There's nothing that can happen in the world where you would say, well, that's how God and the devil would have arranged. Right. Right. But you, I mean, you felt mostly that it wasn't helping, right. Your faith was not actually giving you answers that would improve people's lives and it's interesting. It more certainly was not because some of this struggle for these young folks at first in Brooklyn and then in Roxbury, where I ministered before I left the church, they are literally dying. Right. Right. Crack cocaine is taking them out. Yeah. Late 80s early 90s. Yes. And nothing about church practice kept them safe. But they would have agreed, right. They would have said that that was an important part of their lives at the time. I think for some of them, it was cultural commitment. Yeah. This is what their family did. This was what black people do on a Sunday. But I think life for them raised questions that they tried to push to the side because of these other obligations. And in retrospect, would you say that if you, you know, as a PhD now as a professor, if someone asked you to explain and defend your views of the world, your ontological views about the nature of reality, is it the same answer? Or would you say, did you come to atheism for the right reasons? Or do you have better reasons now? I came to atheism for reasons that made a tremendous amount of sense. And based upon the condition of the world, the environment of which we are apart and human life, those reasons are still sound. Right. And you are someone who is happy to characterize yourself as religious, although you are the atheist. Is that accurate? Yeah. And I've done that for a variety of reasons. As I initially moved into atheist and humanist circles, there was a failure and of recognize what humanism and atheism mean for some folks. Right. There are ways in which we were reluctant to talk about the nature of community and interactions. Right. So there was no real interest in talking about ritual. Right. There was limited conversation concerning the wonder of life. And so I posed that initially to break that stranglehold. But it also, for me, was a matter of this that I think for humanists and atheists, the real target is theism, not religion. Those two overlap, but they are not synonymous. Exactly. Right. So religion is a much more broad, expansive category than theism. Oh, most certainly. And by opposing atheism with theism, that makes sense. But then if you say that your atheism undermines religion, there's a lot of stuff left. Right. A lot of questions. Most certainly. Most certainly. Because on one level, it's based upon a false assumption that all religious people are theist. Right. I mean, Nietzsche got this right. Right. You know, he pointed out that God is dead. Okay. What are you going to do about it now? I think a lot of the atheists have this view that realizing that our best scientific philosophical explanations of the world don't include room for God. That was the hard part. And once we get that done, then now we can just be good people. And that's the easy thing. I see it exactly the opposite way around. Like, that was the easy part. You know, figuring out that God doesn't exist. Now it's easy 2000 years ago, maybe not. But what are we going to do about it leaves us a lot of discussion yet to have? Right. Oh, most certainly. And he was right on target. Nietzsche was right on target. Right. It's not simply enough to take God off the throne. The challenge is, can we leave that throne empty? Right. And we tend to put in place of God other categories that strangle us in very similar ways. So you're, so if you talk about ontology, what the world has made of at a fundamental level, you are fundamentally, you're not theest, obviously. A naturalist, is that fair to say? It's fair to say. But that question doesn't occupy a lot of my time. Okay. And so I tend to do this in reverse. The question for me is, what's necessary in order to make life productive? What is the best vocabulary, the best grammar of life that allows us to flourish? Right. And then from there, move to these issues of ontology. And so you're happy to call yourself religious in the sense that you think that there should be some set of ways. I don't know, I shouldn't put words in your mouth. Tell me, like, what does it mean? How do we replace the other roles of religion other than saying that God exists? Well, religion for me is this. I think of religion as a strategy, and a way of interrogating human experience. So if we think about human experience, for example, as cookie dough laid out, okay, religion would be that Christmas tree-shaped cookie cutter. It's a way in which we isolate certain moments of human experience for interrogation. But it isn't substantive. So I've tried to move away from a sense of religion as sui generis. That is to say, I've moved away from a sense of religion as something in and of itself, a kind of special experience. No, it's just a way of interrogating human experience. And I think whether we're theist or atheist, we isolate and interrogate moments of human experience. This episode of Mindscape is sponsored by BetterHelp. When it comes to relationships, we often hear about the red flags we should avoid. But what if we focus more on looking for the green flags in friends and partners? If you're not sure what green flags look like, therapy could help you identify them. Actively practice them in your relationships and embody the green flag energy yourself. Whether you're dating, married, building a friendship, or just working on yourself, it's time to form relationships that love you back. One of the great things about therapy is by looking inside yourself, you can both learn to take those warning signs seriously, but also learn to be open to new experiences and new things. To know when something might be worth pursuing, BetterHelp is a fully online service that makes therapy affordable and convenient, serving over 5 million people worldwide. You can easily switch therapists anytime at no extra cost. So discover your relationship green flags with BetterHelp. Visit betterhelp.com slash Mindscape today to get 10% off your first month. That's BetterHelpHELP.com slash Mindscape. A lot of us start the new year saying that we will learn a new language, but it's hard to actually commit to it. Babble makes it easy to learn one in less time than you think. Babble's quick 10 minute lessons handcrafted by over 200 language experts, get you to begin speaking your new language in three weeks or whatever pace you choose. And because conversing is the key to really understanding each other in new languages, Babble is designed using practical, real world conversations. What I love about Babble is you can either dive in deeply and truly get fluent or you can just master some of the basics before going on a trip. So let's get more of you talking in a new language. Babble is gifting our listeners 60% off subscriptions at Babble.com slash Mindscape. Get up to 60% off at Babble.com slash Mindscape spelled B-A-B-B-E-L dot com slash Mindscape. That's Babble.com slash Mindscape rules restrictions may apply. And your professor of theology and so you're sort of happy to use words like theology and religion. Now other people maybe even myself would say, look, if you're using words like theology and religion, like it or not, people associate these words with various connotations. Is it a little bit dangerous to put ourselves in that basket or is it is there more to be gained by saying you know you can be a religious atheist or religious humanist? My attitude has always been this that there are there are elements of this religious theological language that are still productive elements that aren't like God. Right? That language needs to go away but there are elements of that language that are still useful and I'm unwilling to let theist just have this. Right? Right. Being being loud and persistent isn't sufficient claim to this and so it seems to me there's still something about this language that allows us to remain open to the wonder of life. Right. And I something struck me I was just in Japan a few weeks ago and I've always been struck by churches, by cathedrals especially in Europe, you know, the grand structures and there's something about them. Some human beings hit on a way to design a space where when you walk in you feel something and in Japan going to Buddhist temples it's the same thing. Right? Like some people across the world and would you say that we have somehow seated that to theists and maybe we should recapture that try to you know be have a humanist way of constructing these spaces but should we even call them sacred or transcendent what what is a vocabulary we should use there? I don't like the vocabulary of sacred and secular because I don't think there is an easy split. Right. And so I don't find that with those two terms particularly useful. From my vantage point I think humanists and atheists have simply forgotten that we construct these spaces. It's not Riverside Church it's MoMA. Yeah. Yeah exactly but we have these spaces that open us to a different range of questions. The big questions of life who are we what are we when are we why are we we have those spaces but we've forgotten to name them. I love that University of Pittsburgh they have the tall building called the Cathedral of Learning. Right? And I get that I'm like yes this is my space. I mean how much should humanists try to more or less directly mimic the practice of religion? Should we have I know that some people have you know secular weekly meetings right? I've been to talks by atheists small gatherings where not only was there a sermon but they passed around a collection place you know like is this are we just making excuses for not having all the wonderful practices of religion or are these things that we can hope to really replace? I think it's a mistake to try to mimic these theistic ritual moments it does not work well. Right. I think ethical culture and the UUA Unitarian Universalist Association are prime examples of how poorly that works. Okay. And part because it doesn't really that those sorts of services don't allow us to fully recognize appreciate and act on what is uniquely us. Right. Right. What is unique about our philosophy of life? And so I think the hard work is in front of us and that involves developing ways of celebrating community and ritualizing life that speak directly to what it means to be a humanist or an atheist as opposed to taking something and rendering it no longer Christian but Christian light. Right. That's right. You're doing just water down the existing things but this is a you're asking a lot right. I mean how to build up a form of life after we've removed a lot of the excuses or justifications that we had for all these practices we used to have. I mean is this something is it working? Are people actively pursuing this? Is it going to happen? I don't think it's really happening. I think in too many circles people confuse asking the questions with doing the work. Right. And so we failed and have recognized this. So even the occasion that brought us to Las Vegas the American Humanist Association this is a ritualized activity. If we think about ritual simply as repeated activity and founded space. Right. Right. There's nothing magical about that or theistic about it. It's just people getting together for a particular purpose and doing this over and over again. This is what this gathering is but we've kind of wiped out our ability to understand this as our ritualizing of life a getting together that celebrates community. But how does it happen? So is it purely organic or should we be a little bit more top down about it? Should we try explicitly consciously to invent rituals or will they just appear? I think it requires some intentional work. Yeah. And the question is how to do that exactly and I don't know the answer. Yeah. Okay. But I know it can't happen if we aren't intentional about it. I mean universities are pretty good at it. Right. Pomp and Circumstance. Oh sure. I just had several students get their PhDs. The footing ceremony. Yeah. Exactly. Those kinds of ceremonies. So you're suggesting that we'll be part of how we recover these forms of life that used to belong to religion or to theistic religion. We can still have that. Oh sure. But we first have to recognize that theists don't own those moments. They've utilized them. They've had really good PR around them but they don't own them. And it seems to me this is also vital if we are to grow. This is one of the questions I hear over and over again. Why aren't we getting bigger and why don't folks from this community participate with us and why aren't there more African-Americans? We don't give them a soft place to land. They already know theism doesn't work. That's why they're looking for something different. So a lot of atheists want to give you an argument for God's not existing and what you're saying is you need a lot more than that. Yes. We're placed what they're losing. Right. And how do we do it? Is it the American Human Association or is it talking on blogs? Where do you find these communities? I think for a lot of folks they've gone online. But again I don't have the answer but I think I have a really good question we ought to wrestle with. And I think how this happens at its best involves local organizations, local communities that are able to address particular needs and desires in real time as opposed to the national organization saying well this is what you need to do in Cleveland and this is what you need to do in San Francisco let local folks figure this out. There's no atheist Pope right? There's no atheist. No it shouldn't be. It shouldn't be there and there isn't right. But what about so someone might say look the rituals are great but some people need a promise of salvation. They need to believe that there's something bigger that comes after this life. What do we tell that? Here is my thinking that we are already involved in something that is bigger than the individual. We are individuals within the context of communities and it seems to me it's this recognition of this larger thing we call life that serves as the humbling moment for us. It's not God or God's it's the fact that we are involved in this process of life that is bigger than we are. Yeah I would love to ask you sort of tough questions about this but I agree with you so much that I find it difficult you know I've had people say to me without God without something bigger than our lives here on earth how can you find meaning? How can you find how does why does it matter? You're just going to die. It's just you know chemical reactions. How can you possibly associate that with something meaningful and I want to say how else like what what else matters? This is the life we're leaving exactly exactly and so I turn to people like Richard Wright or W.E.B. Du Bois or Albert Camus who who provide strategies provide insights on how you move through life without those sorts of assurances right or what Albert Camus calls this kind of grand unity and it involves the the deep desire and the effort to make life more comfortable to to provide healthy life options for all right and to kind of recognize that this involves a much softer relationship with the world and I know that you've also emphasized music quite a bit I love it in one of your books when you talk about the blues and its relationship to secularism I never really thought about it this way but I think you make the point a lot of the earliest blues songs were if not openly secular than at least skeptical of the religious traditions in which the artists were singing is that right? Oh there's an important fact to keep in mind that for centuries it was illegal for people of African descent to learn to read and write and so for us to probe this community and assume that their humanism or their atheism is written in books is just ridiculous they weren't allowed to learn to read and write but it doesn't mean they didn't think and express themselves and so one of the easier ways one of the vehicles available to them was music and so we can't accurately date the spirituals we don't know when spirituals begin in the same way we can't accurately date the blues it's a mistake to think in terms of the early 20th century and race records blues is older than that and whereas the spirituals are all about a theism divine forces breaking into human history the blues hold that suspect and the blues demonstrate a comfort with and and ease with the the nature of life the kind of messy nature of life and that goes all the way up to hip hop is it accurate certainly I mean I know you taught a course on hip hop and religion yes yes not on hip hop and humanism what what is the difference there well with this course there are several things I wanted to accomplish one I wanted to my university to think differently about hip hop as a culture and and and stop simply assuming that this is bad stuff yeah right on one level that's mistaken because while hip hop artists need to be held accountable for their their misogynistic viewpoints and etc etc it's a mistake to assume that they created these problems yeah they're in a context right they came from a culture you know look I'll admit when it comes to hip hop I'm a very old man like I think that everything after every bee and rook in has been downhill since then paid in full but I understand that the kids today have their own artists that they that they like very much and it is a way of it's one way of finding meaning right oh certainly and so what we try to do is give a sense of the inner the interactions between hip hop and traditional forms of religiosity Christianity Islam for example but we also look at the ways in which hip hop culture constitutes an alternate religious orientation but then we also look at the ways in which hip hop critiques theism and embraces something that's more humanistic in nature so how does that happen you have examples because I'm really not familiar yeah well so if you look at someone like Jay Z let's let's think in terms of Jay Z and Kanye West no church in the wild that song dismantles all of the major sources of authority in human civilization and they also as part of that process bring into question the utility of the god idea and it's even more fully expressed by Jay Z and the track crown and the a solo album that comes around the time of no church in the wild and in that he dismantles the idea of god and you get something along these lines in it if if fear is the only god then getting people out of fear is his only job right he's kind of dismantling all of this and it's a much more materialistic viewpoint or you get a Kanye West who has a song I am a god right that just kind of dismantles so much of what we've typically thought about a theism or even if we move in the direction of the five percentors right and think about hip hop in the five percentors well why don't you explain more about what the five percentors well during the early 60s there's a figure figure Clarence 13x in Manhattan who has questions concerning the nation of Islam and his argument is the nation of Islam is not teaching the truth it knows the truth but it's not teaching the truth that he argues the nation of Islam argues that black people are made in the image of god right they they they have a direct relationship to Allah but Clarence 13x argues no no no no the black man is god not made in the image of god is god is that secretly unate theist move there well I think it certainly opens up it removes well if it doesn't remove metaphysics it radically altars what we can even mean by metaphysics maybe it's a humanist move it's a fair way to say it right if you I would think so yeah did you know fast growing trees is the biggest online nursery in the US with thousands of different plants and over two million happy customers they have all the plants your yard needs like fruit trees privacy trees flowering trees shrubs and so much more whatever plants you're interested in fast growing trees has you covered find the perfect fit for your climate and space fast growing trees makes it easy to get your dream yard order online and get your plants delivered directly to your door in just a few days without ever leaving home their alive and thrive guarantee ensures your plants arrive happy and healthy this spring they have the best deals for your yard up to half off on select plants and other deals and listeners to our show get 15% off their first purchase while using the code mine scape at checkout that's an additional 15% off at fast growing trees dot com using the code mine scape at checkout fast growing trees dot com code mine scape now's the perfect time to plant use mine scape to save today offers valid for limited time terms and conditions may apply and so five percent nation it's it's named this because they argue that that 10% of the population let's think in terms of the nation of islam has truth but they don't teach it right 85% of the population just ignorant and they will follow anyone who sounds good only five percent of the population has proper knowledge and these are the poor righteous teachers the five percenters right and five percenters as you know right as a fan of right him you know that the five percenters are big within hip hop culture but they provide a very different way of thinking about how theism functions at the very least what you get with the five percenters is a sense of religiosity that is grounded in human history and within the material world and a suspicion of authority in some sense oh most definitely what if if if if they are correct and the black man is god who gets to tell god what to do i mean is it accurate to say i think i read things by you that call into question the common belief that back in the day you know around the time of the 19th century let's say that African-Americans were so deeply embedded in the Christian tradition that that's sort of the only way they thought you want to recover a little bit of a humanist tradition even way back then that assumption yeah you're absolutely right that assumption just demonstrates that the black church has had very good PR right the assumption that black people are part of the black church or they're really not black right but if you really give attention to African-American thought and life you get a sense that there always been a variety of vantage points a variety of systems of thought of philosophies of life that have competed and some of those strands are humanistic if not atheistic in nature and so part of my responsibility part of my work has involved trying to surface those for greater attention and investigation to countervail some of the PR that the black church has been so good at and to and to reclaim some of these figures that they have falsely argued are part of their camp so W.E.B. Du Bois for example major figure you cannot really think about race relations in the 20th century without thinking about his souls of black folk published in 1903 major major figure but in his autobiographical work he makes it clear that he was not a believer interesting I did not know that oh no no he's not but it's nothing he's really interesting arguing about but he isn't a believer yeah you can easily imagine that people would say like look I have other battles to fight right now right and maybe even up through the civil rights movement that kind of thing like we need to come together believers and non-believers because there's a big crisis that we're facing that is a little bit more immediate and it's a false assumption what what he argues in some of his writings that that on a mundane practical level the black church can be useful it has resource it has space but he's not buying the theological claims and the same with other figures like James Weldon Johnson quite not familiar with he's fantastic fantastic figure he did this book called God's Trumbones and it's an analysis of the black cermonic style the black style of preaching and so black Christians have assumed ah he wrote this he's one of us no he understands the utility of this sort of conversation understanding how ideas get communicated in a rather effective way but he wasn't a believer in his autobiography he makes it clear that as a college student he gave up on God a filibrandal mm-hmm major figure in the civil rights movement he's a non-believer he's an atheist but he maintained membership in a church for the same reason he maintained membership in a union right that this is an organization and it can be helpful in terms of getting us organized but he didn't buy the theology right right and the list goes on Zorno Hurston argued that prayer was for the weak mind it well it's a complicated history as far as I know between atheism and humanism and race relations generally right like some of our favorite enlightenment thinkers at the dawn of the scientific age said things about Africans and yeah they did make our skin crawl a little bit now right and they you know they have descendants today who are a little bit less popular mainstream but this you know use of secular reasoning science and so forth as a tool for putting down black people in Africans that goes way back so we can't really say we humanists can't really say we were right from the start about that and we get the question wrong I get this question over and over again why are black people still Christians when Christianity was used to enslave them when the better question for us is why isn't humanism or atheism more attractive to this population and part of that will be you know moving away from debating arguments for fine-tuning in cosmology in the existence of God to living our lives better right exactly exactly and so science extremely important there's there's no reason to debate that but I think it's also important when we felt and we felt to recognize this on occasion that even scientists live within the cause within the context of cultural and these cultural worlds and pinch and so it's inefficient to say that there's nothing real about race so let's not even bother with it right because it has real consequences it's a social category that has real consequences it's like my death that's right and so this this is getting to something I definitely wanted to talk about because I know that a lot of people in the atheists secular communities would like to say that our goal should be to be colorblind right our goal should just be to be pure reasoning rational creatures universalists humanists and to just not even notice when someone is white or Asian or African-American and that so again I don't want to put words in your mouth I suspect you're going to say that's not at least a good medium-term strategy I'd say it's ridiculous and I say that for a couple of reasons one it paints difference a problem to solve when difference is an opportunity and our strategy ought to be seeing difference but not allowing that perspective on difference to taint populations but also it seems to me that it is problematic not only because it's poor thinking with respect to difference but it allows whiteness to remain normative right because what we end up with are more shades of the same right and and so what people are actually saying it seems to me is you're okay as long as I can see you through the values the sensibilities the move through the world that is mine yeah there's people and there's people of color and yeah this it's it has to do with you know psychology and how we view the world the lens again another theme that I want to emphasize over these podcasts is the lens through which we view the world a choice of focus you can say many many things that are true statements but you're emphasizing some things and not emphasizing others and that's a truly important choice that affects what you think is important or even the phrase people of color allows whiteness to remain normative right because the assumption is this is everyone else it seems to me a better phrase people of a despised color it's a little more normative there and people might worry about it but yeah it gets at the point that that is that is going on here I mean and this gets us into a broader category that goes beyond atheism and humanism there are phrases that are very powerful that have been used in this discussion like identity politics white privilege and I think that you know I can sense it in a lot of atheists that phrases like this make them uncomfortable like somehow this is you know something that is being worried about that I don't kind of want to deal with so you know do you do you find these concepts important crucial should we rehabilitate them should we make sure that atheists are cognizant of what is going on in those levels almost certainly and rethink discomfort that we really can't make progress on these sorts of issues with people remaining comfortable that everything about these conversations concerning race gender sexuality class etc ought to make us uncomfortable and we ought to see that discomfort as an opportunity to rethink reengage and put in place better strategies right I mean discomfort is something that makes people run away but I thought I like it you're saying that discomfort can be is always I'm not quite sure a sign that something questionable is being questioned yes so I mean what you know sometimes I'm uncomfortable just because I think people are wrong but other times it's because I'm worried that my presuppositions that I've gone through with life may be colored things in a way I wasn't conscious of and it seems to me in both of those instances the question is what does that discomfort open you to do right right and what so what should it to rethink assumptions yeah right that perhaps what I've been thinking about my engagement with issues of race or my engagement with issues of gender maybe my assumptions here are wrong maybe I need to rethink maybe I need to listen to what they're saying do a little homework so how would you define white privilege well first thing I would say is we need to move away from the assumption that it's only economic it's not just the amount of money you're banking no nobody who is critiquing white privilege is simply looking at bank accounts although there is that I read just very recently the statistic in the Boston area the median wealth of a white household is about $240,000 the median wealth of an African-American household is $8 sure sure and there's something to this economic issue but that's that's not all there is with respect to white privilege so so even poor whites are there's an assumption that what is available within our society all the best that's available in our society is rightfully mine I am entitled to this and it gets played out in a variety of ways I'll give some easy examples right so it may be a matter of privilege if you go into the restaurant and you see it near the restroom in your first thought isn't is it because of who I am or you go to the car lot and your thought is can I afford this car as opposed to how much attention from the police will this car get me right so there are ways in which this operates that has nothing to do with the bank account but the assumption that this society is for me and certainly in the news recently obviously of the last couple years we've heard we've heard more stories of African-Americans being shot and killed and at least in the last couple weeks we've heard all these stories about you know people calling the cops on an African-American because they were walking down the street or sitting in the Starbucks or something like that and presumably these stories have been happening all along and we're just now beginning to notice them this is a feature of the attention to which we pay to different things I think that is that's certainly part of it and and I think there are ways that we're seeing over the past decade for example different types of challenges to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness right so a black male with his child and a stroller and a park is a threat to black men waiting for a buddy in Starbucks I threat so even the pursuit of happiness right this occupation of space becomes problematic and it so it seems to me that if you think in terms of most drastic instances death or these these other instances of disregard you are not entitled to this public space all of this really speaks to a sensibility on the part of some in the United States that black life does not constitute anything that needs to be respected and there is no rightful occupation of time and space for black bodies and it can be hard for a white person who thinks of themselves as well meaning well intentioned they would say look I'm not a racist and it can be hard for them to appreciate right like what the differences are that might be very very subtle just from living your life on an everyday in an everyday way because of the color of your skin right beyond spoken elements of privilege and I think that as a scientist you know I'm a theoretical physicist there are not a lot of African-Americans in my field there's a question so what can we do about that it's it's a very analogous question to the misrepresentation of gender in the field also and there are definitely people out there arguing well it's just a clear reflection of underlying distribution of innate abilities but there's other people who might say you know we can't worry about the representation of African-Americans in science because we need to just worry about getting them out of poverty right so worrying about getting physicists as African-Americans is premature right now do you have feelings about this it seems to me that because the issue is so layered and complex we need a variety of strategies so we do need better representation of African Americans and others in higher education but we also need to start much earlier right so we can't think about the benefit of higher education as a way of breaking for example the cycle of poverty with high school juniors it's much too late right we need to start with kindergarten first grade and put in place and put in place a different way of educating a different way of understanding these populations and encouraging them to explore there's something about life in the context of the United States that wipes out curiosity for African-Americans and Latinos because curiosity can be dangerous interesting so so even more so I think that there's something that wipes out curiosity for everyone who is in elementary school but you're saying that it's especially felt by people in these people of despised color communities and so I would I haven't heard before you think that this idea that just being curious is dangerous I might have heard before you know we don't have time for that right like we need to work on earning a living right but you're but you're saying there's sort of an active force working against asking questions in the way that would lead you to these more intellectual academic pursuits oh sure definitely and and it's harder for us to recognize this now when when a certain type of lynching was more prominent the idea that curiosity kind of moving outside of the accepted boundaries could be death dealing that was easier for us to get but there's still something about racial dynamics within the context of the United States that can make curiosity moving outside of accepted boundaries really dangerous and do we combat that with better role models with more sort of more explicit programs that you know secondary and elementary and university education levels like what's the what's the strategy yes and more right because the problem is so complex and layered we need a variety of strategies and some of these strategies have to involve reinvesting in public education for example and kind of highlighting opportunities that really encourage and reward curiosity and but that's only part of it it's only part of it right yeah and it's there's something we can ask about what individuals should do and something we can ask about what organizations should do and it goes back to your soft landing question like how do we use humanists and secularists create a way is it safe to say replace what the churches offered them I would argue we need to do better than these churches yes and on one level we should not be holding people hostage right so so at their worst churches have given but with a stranglehold we're giving you this but you better be a part of what we're doing right we're giving you this but only after you listen to the sermon and you walk down that aisle right we need to do better than that and so on some level we need to give people a soft place to land but we need to invest in communities and so in part this is why I say this is the kind of work that needs to take place on the local level so local humanists and atheist organizations need to look and ask the question these communities were concerned with what do they say they need right and then work to provide that and could you imagine working with churches in doing that I think that is absolutely necessary for us to partner with progressive fiest and we're not going to make substantial changes alone I mean there were there were slight controversies back in the the early days of blogs I remember about whether or not atheists should partner with churches on climate change right because there are people say look climate change is important if you find someone who's on your side who cares what their beliefs about God are and others who said well yes but beliefs about God are also important and we're sending mixed messages if we team up with them so you're on the teaming upside yes my argument is this we can maintain the awareness that on the philosophical level we disagree right but in terms of and so we might disagree with what motivates our ethics but if we can agree that we have to do something and we can commit to sharing our resource to get that done why not yeah very good what do you think about sort of the tenor of conversation in the country these days I don't want to get too much into our current president and so forth but resentment of minorities of people of color of immigrants and so forth does seem to be a feature of certain parts of our political discourse number one what can we do about that number two what can humanists in particular have to say about that first thing I'd say is we have to recognize that this isn't new right that this sort of disregard is extremely old it's manifest in different ways now but the underlying animosity has been in place right right difference has troubled us right and and so I think on one level humanist and and atheist organizations need to commit resource to making a difference and and this means kind of recognizing from my vantage point recognizing that if we are not concerning ourselves with issues of justice a broad range of issues of justice then we are actually part of the problem it's interesting that the phrase social justice warrior has taken on for Georgia connotations right do you would you be happy to call yourself a social justice warrior sure yeah sure my humanism doesn't make sense to me if it doesn't continuously remind me that the world and people are suffering and what do you say to people who would say well I shouldn't worry about other people's personal problems and fitting in in this society people should help themselves up right like what we should do for African-Americans is let them succeed on them on their own rather than trying to help them up after I stop laughing I see that this isn't I'm not very good at asking these questions from the point of view no no that's I know I get it but it's not a double playing field and the fact that we had a black president for eight years doesn't change that it is not a level playing field and so we need to put in place strategies programs opportunities that reflect the fact that it isn't an even playing field do you have a point of view on what is you know there's the the standard question of what is motivating these midwestern voters who flipped from Democrat to Republican over the last few years I mean some people want to say that it's inequality it's economic anxiety others will just point right to racism or fear of immigrants or resentment what's your point of view on that my initial response was why are people voting against their own interest but then it hit me that on some level they might be voting against their economic interest but what they are doing is safeguarding their social stand their social standing right so they're willing to forego political political advantage economic prosperity for the sake of being able to say whiteness still matters do you think that's explicit or it's sort of behind the scenes in their minds I think there are instances when it is extremely explicit right but I would argue for the vast majority it's it undergirds they're thinking in their ways in which they may not be aware of it but that's the power of this social construct called race we don't have to talk about it anymore it's just a soon that's its power yeah and it's the thing that to a leftist a liberal is always surprising is that people in disadvantaged circumstances somehow see that they're disadvantaged or that they're low down on the economic ladder and they choose to blame other poor people rather than blame the rich people and it seems I'm not an expert in this in any way but it seems that race and nationality and ethnicity work as proxies to make this happen right in a way that is kind of a fundamental issue for democracy to deal with yeah right it's not just the United States it's around the world different democracies are sort of being threatened by the fact that a lot of people are resentful and want to become more tribal in response and and I think there's this element of of what those who hold the vast majority of the wealth are saying about themselves and others right and those who look at them and say ah that's what it means to be successful if these successful people are saying it's these other folks are we're keeping you from getting yeah their success kind of wins the day it's and it seems to me there's something akin to this and the prosperity gospel movement so take someone like CREFLO DOLLAR who is extremely wealthy and his argument is well the problem is you're you're not following the strategy it's all laid out in scripture there's opportunity that you're not maximizing and people buy it against the physical evidence because this person who has everything they want is saying this is the case and it seems to me that this has happened on a larger scale in the United States those who have are pointing the finger and those who want buy it in some sense yeah I mean uh Donald Trump is rich he must be on the right track right and I I work for him I've tried to understand how someone can read the New Testament and come away thinking that somehow it is glorifying material success ah see but here's your mistake you're assuming that Christians are actually reading that well that's possible I mean but there are always for every line that as far as I can tell for every line in the gospels where Jesus says something like being poor is better than being rich there's an interpretation right there's a hermeneutics that says what he actually means right is that being rich is better it's a it's a it's a wonderful testament to the cleverness of theological thought oh most definitely most definitely is this is this are we allowed to you know critique hip hop in the same uh uh standards like there is a glorification of material success right oh yeah I mean there's and in that way hip hop is extremely American and outlook and and again my argument would be that we need to hold these artists accountable for the ways in which they contribute to problems and so I have no issue with that my concern is when we assume that they are the source of the problem right that there was no sexism until hip hop right no misogyny until hip hop do you see it changing do you think that hip hop is evolving in that way I think hip hop has always been complex right and and so it seems to me that there it's always been layered you you've had a more aggressive dimension of hip hop that understood that that drugs for example are the way to success right that this is the way to achieve the American dream and they celebrate that and you get elements of hip hop that are about social critique right a public enemy about social critique and and rethinking the system so I think these elements have always been present and now you have in the mix Pulitzer Prize winner Kendrick Lamar who has a really complex depiction of life in the U.S. so just to close this is the last topic let's be a little bit more philosophical I know that you said and I get it that you're less concerned about metaphysics and ontology and more about the lives that we lead but okay there's a connection right so you know back in the day if you wanted to lead a good life you could ask yourself what does God want me to do and there might be very complicated to figure that out but you at least knew that was the strategy if God doesn't exist how do I decide to lead a good life it's great to say like that's what I should try to do but do we have is there some immediately following metathical strategy for figuring out what makes a person good or bad the first thing I would suggest is that humanists and atheists need to move away from outcome driven strategies let's leave that to theist who have divine assistance right that kind of keeps things level for humanists and atheists it's just us right trying to do what we can and so we need to move away from from strategies that assume outcomes that hard work and proper thought will win the day and privilege struggle right that in our very effort to say no to injustice in its various forms we might find something of our own humanity it's not the outcome it's just the process of saying no the process of struggling against and so my answer to that question would be we need to give attention to strategies that that have the potential to create the greatest good okay aware that they might fail and we might have to start this over again right so it's not the same sense of loss what happens if the strategy isn't right that's an outcome driven perspective what we need to say as well it may not be right we move on to another one you know here in Las Vegas if you're a poker player there's an insult that people throw at you if you're two results oriented because if you do the wrong thing but then you get lucky you can get a good result but you shouldn't be too happy with yourself right you made the wrong play there is randomness right this is kind of what you're saying like it's not about the reward it's about the process getting there but I saw you sneak in there you have the greatest good this is a utilitarian vocabulary there are others who want to be virtuous or day on to long to go would you call yourself a utilitarian in that way no not really and I thought that might get by you and so for me I see inadequacies in that but at this point thinking in terms of the greater good is a strategy that's available to me I see shortcomings with it but it's available to me and and again not being outcome driven just seeing process right the our ability to say no to what we do recognize this injustice and so so much of what we need to be doing and thinking with respect to issues of social justice involves negation I have a sense of what what a just world can't look like yes okay and so you know that's wrong I know that is wrong I know sexism can't get us there I know racism can't get us there right it's by negation right but okay I mean I I think that's right our present society is so far away from utopia right that maybe the details of which moral system is perfect are less important than the fact that we're nowhere near any of the potential perfections but even in the journey right we can we're motivated by thinking that well you know should we be trying to just start everyone with a level playing field and let them go like almost a more libertarian kind of strategy or should we provide some basic safety net for everyone I think even these more philosophical questions do come down to practical issues a little bit sure and my argument would be we have to provide a safety net right we have to provide some resource so that if we don't provide some resource if we don't take away the anxiety over basic needs we really can't progress all right do you have any closing thoughts words of wisdom for the young humanists secularists out there who want to be more opening welcoming to other communities you know I'm I'm continuously having the back of my mind the line from the myth of Cicifist by Camus and I'm ends that short essay with this one must imagine Cicifist happy so all we can do is make the effort to improve circumstances for life I couldn't agree more in fact I quoted that line from the myth of Cicifist in my last book big picture so good we're on the right track so Anthony Finn thank you so much for joining me thank you hi