 Hello everyone and welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host, Tron Carroll, and today we're going to be talking about heredity. This is of course a very old idea, the idea that there's something inside us, some properties, some features that get passed down through the generations, so we inherited something from our ancestors and we send something down to our descendants. Back in the day there used to be the thought that royal blood was handed down, that the right to be the king or the queen or the emperor, depended on who your parents were. I suppose there's still countries in which that is the case. But we know a lot more about how heredity really works now than we used to. We know that all of our cells have a little molecule in them called DNA, and that DNA is a little code. It's a chain of letters, AGCT, that the arrangement of those letters tells us what makes up who we are. Or at least there's a simplistic version of it, where you think of DNA as kind of like a blueprint, that if you knew what the DNA was, you could predict exactly what the organism was going to be, maybe even what kind of food they would like or what kind of occupation they would have later in life. Today we know it's a little bit more complicated than that. There's more going on than just our DNA to make up who we are, and not only nature versus nurture, but even the nature part is very complicated. There's epigenetics and development factors. There's mitochondrial DNA. There's the expression of different parts of the genes that we have. So we're in a very, very rapid state of evolution, as it were, in terms of how we think about how heredity works. These days you can get your genome sequenced. You can send it into a company, pay some money, and they'll tell you something about your genetic heritage. On the horizon we see the ability to edit genes. We can do it in some ways now, and the ability to do that for human beings probably is not very far away. So it's natural to imagine, can we design what the next generation of human beings is going to be like? Can we design the animals and plants that make up the rest of our ecosystem? These are important questions as well as fascinating ones. So we have today Carl Zimmer as our guest. Carl is one of the very best science writers working out there. He's been working and writing about this area of genetics and heredity in DNA for a very long time. You may know Carl through his blogging or his Twitter account, his New York Times column, where you may have heard him on NPR. Now Carl has a major new book out called She Has Her Mother's Lath, The Powers, Perversions and Potential of Heredity. It's a doorstopper. It's a big one, but it's full of fascinating individual human stories as well as the deep science behind what we know about heredity. So we're going to talk about how heredity works, what we do and don't know about it, and most importantly, where the new knowledge that we're gaining every day might take us. It seems very plausible that what we're learning these days might dramatically change how we think about being human beings. So let's go. Did you know Fast Growing Trees is the biggest online nursery in the US, with thousands of different plants and over 2 million happy customers. They have all the plants your yard needs, like fruit trees, privacy trees, flowering trees, shrubs and so much more. Whatever plants you're interested in, Fast Growing Trees has you covered. Find the perfect fit for your climate and space. Fast Growing Trees makes it easy to get your dream yard. Order online and get your plants delivered directly to your door in just a few days without ever leaving home. Their live and thrive guarantee ensures your plants arrive happy and healthy. This spring they have the best deals for your yard up to half off on select plants and other deals. And listeners to our show get 15% off their first purchase while using the code Mindscape at checkout. That's an additional 15% off at Fast Growing Trees.com using the code Mindscape at checkout. Fast Growing Trees.com code Mindscape. Now's the perfect time to plant. Use Mindscape to save today. Offers valid for limited time, Terms and Conditions may apply. Carl Zimmer welcome to the Mindscape podcast. It's great to talk to you. But now we've known each other virtually, at least online, since the early, healthy on salad days of the blogging world, right? Isn't that how you got to know you reading your blog and your red mind? Absolutely, yeah. Back when blogs were the future. Blog? Yes. Now we're in the future and no one writes blogs anymore. They delivered us here. Exactly. The future is a journey. That's then we've been through the future. Now we're in the post future. So I couldn't help you've written this gigantic, medisterial book about heredity in heritins. She has her mother's laugh and the subtitle, of course, the power perversions and potential of heredity. And while reading it, I can't help but think as a physicist, my goodness, how lucky I am that what I do for a living doesn't really matter to people's lives. Because this is a kind of science that everyone has feelings about, right? Is that come through in your work? Oh, I think that everybody clings to heredity in a profound way. And I see that when I give talks about my book, I mean, I have learned to keep my prepare remarks fairly short because people just have tons of questions and the questions come from the fact that we use heredity to define who we are. And also what is our connection both to the past and to the future? I mean, you can't ask for anything more intimate than that. Yeah. So the future in terms of our children or descendants, you mean? Sure. Absolutely. And also like what if we tamper with the heredity of other species? Then what is left after we're gone? Well, heredity will carry on those sorts of changes into the future. So I think everyone who is involved in this conversation right now knows a little bit, right? We're not telling people something they've never heard before that there's something called DNA in our cells and that carries some information. So let's try to remember what it was like before we knew that, right? People still had an idea of inheritance and heredity and things being passed down through the blood even before Darwin and Mendel came along. Right. I mean, it's kind of hard to reconstruct the way people fought in the past, especially when they didn't use the concepts and the words that we used today. And yet, you know, we can start to get some clues about it just by looking back and trying to piece together. You know, for example, there were ideas about blood, as you say. You know, we still use the word blood to talk about what we really mean by genes. You know, there's the blue blood, for example. You know, like blue blood is something that is like, well, you come from a blue blood family. In other words, somehow like that is inherited down to the generations, your sort of status. I mean, the irony is, of course, that the phrase actually comes from a particular time in a particular place. There was in Spain in the 1500s when people in Spain were trying to distinguish themselves from Jews and Muslims. So this is where, and this is where the whole issue of race comes from. I mean, literally the word race starts to be used in Spain in this way. And so, you know, you're talking what century you said? 1500s. 1400s and into 1500s. And the, so the idea with blue blood was that if you were, you know, racially pure, then someone could see your veins through your translucent skin. And so, you know, you can kind of get these ideas about how in Western society, there were these ways in which we started to define ourselves as being sort of made up of something that was being passed down through the generations. But, you know, really, you know, and then it wasn't until the 1800s that people like Charles Darwin actually like framed it as a scientific question like, okay, there's something, something molecular that is being passed down through the generations and explains why people have these traits that seem to run in families. So, what is it? So, yeah, I mean, Darwin wouldn't have said the word molecular, right? But we know what you mean. There is something that is being given from parents to children. What did, but without genes, without DNA or anything like that, with this basic idea that we inherit from our mothers and our fathers, did anyone ever wonder about the fact that why aren't we always just exactly halfway in between our mothers and our fathers in every trait? And it really seemed to be variations around that. Do people in pre-Mendell and DNA worry about this fact? Yeah, they, I mean, they could see for themselves that these patterns of herity were not simple. They really puzzled over them. Mendell was just in a long line of people who were scratching their heads. And, you know, these were plant breeders. These were animal breeders. In the 1700s, someone named Bakewell in England became legendary because he created a new breed of sheep. And he did it by carefully breeding different kinds of sheep together and coming up with these rules of his own for how to breed them. And it was an incredible accomplishment, you know, because, you know, people would breed animals and, you know, like the air offspring would be all sort of a mess. They would be like, you know, all this variation when, you know, if you're breeding animals, you all, you want them all to be the same. You know, if you want a particular kind of meat from an animal, you want them all to have that same taste. You want it kind of wool, you want the same wool. So it was a huge puzzle and struggle. And the stakes were enormous. I mean, you know, by the 1700s and 1800s, countries were actually looking at breeding. In other words, heredity as part of their national wealth, you know, if you could breed new crops and new livestock, you were going to make your country rich. I love the practicality of it. It reminds me of, you know, how thermodynamics, which can be a very abstract and theoretical subject, arose from trying to get better steam engines, right? You know, this is definitely an era where there was a give and take between people with boots on the ground trying to make better products and trying to understand the world better as scientists. Yeah, it is interesting. I mean, because, you know, we assume that everybody must have thought about heredity the way we do and wondered about it the way we do 500 years ago or a thousand years ago, but they just didn't. And it wasn't really until some practical questions drove people to really think carefully about this. And, you know, the other people in addition to breeders were psychiatrists in the early 1800s, particularly in France and also some extend the United States and elsewhere. And psychiatrists were trying to understand madness. And then they were struck by the fact that when they would do questionnaires for their patients, their patients often had people in their family or more distant relatives who also were institutionalized or, you know, maybe they had, you know, something that seemed like a form of madness. And so they said, hmm, so is this a hereditary disease? And if so, how on earth could this be passed down through the generations? And so Darwin actually read a lot of psychiatry when he was developing his own ideas of our heredity. So this connection between heredity and intelligence and madness and thought was there from the very, very beginning? Yeah. A lot of the things that we're talking about right now, people were talking about 150 or 200 years ago with just as much loudness and passion and conflict. Maybe not just as much because now we have Twitter and they didn't have that there. So that's an amplifier that they didn't have. Yeah, but they had pamphlets, you know, like they, they're, yeah, a lot of this stuff would get circulated and things like pamphlets where, you know, you get a new pamphlet every day. I feel like Twitter is just an extension of the old traditions of pamphlets. So maybe blogging is the past more than the future. There you go. I don't know where podcasting fits in though. So then we did get to genetics, right? To real genetics to Mendel. Mendel by the way, I have to always say this. I went to an Augustinian university, Philanova and Augustinians have a slight inferiority complex compared to the Jesuits who are, you know, wonderfully, intellectually have this wonderful intellectual tradition, but we have two really important Augustinians in history. One was Gregor Mendel and the other was Martin Luther. So they weren't always, you know, the best Catholics, but they did affect the world in an important way. So Mendel, among other things, he helped sort of pinpoint this discreetness, right, of heredity that there could be like, you get this feature or you don't. So there must be somehow, it wasn't just a blending of your two parents. There was some piece of information, a quantum, a physicist would call it, as being handed down through the generations. Right. Mendel didn't call them genes. Sometimes the terms he used get translated as factors. So there would be some kind of factor that was in a plant. And there was an almost mathematical beauty to how these factors combined in new offspring and then produced a trait. So just what, you know, an example that people may recall from high school is that a piece can be wrinkled or they can be smooth. And if you cross two wrinkled people on together, they're, you're going to get nothing but wrinkled piece. If you cross two smooth piece together, you might get nothing but smooth piece and then the next generation after that, smooth piece and smooth piece forever. On the other hand, if you cross a smooth piece and a smooth piece together, you might be surprised to suddenly have a quarter of the piece being wrinkled. And so the fact is that these wrinkled factor can hide because it's what we would now call, well, actually Mendel called it too, recessive. So yeah, so that was the first recognition that there was a sort of, there was a sort of thinking about heredity with these two kind of distinct parts, the invisible factors that get carried on through the generations and then sort of what you see, what scientists call the phenotype. This episode of Myonscape is sponsored by Better Health. When it comes to relationships, we often hear about the red flags we should avoid. But what if we focus more on looking for the green flags in friends and partners? If you're not sure what green flags look like, therapy could help you identify them. Actively practice them in your relationships and embody the green flag energy yourself. Whether you're dating, married, building a friendship or just working on yourself, it's time to form relationships that love you back. One of the great things about therapy is by looking inside yourself, you can both learn to take those warning signs seriously, but also learn to be open to new experiences and new things, to know when something might be worth pursuing. Better Health is a fully online service that makes therapy affordable and convenient, serving over 5 million people worldwide. You can easily switch therapists any time at no extra cost. So discover your relationship green flags with Better Health. Visit betterhelp.com slash Myonscape today to get 10% off your first month. It's BetterHelpHELP.com slash Myonscape. A lot of us start the new year saying that we will learn a new language, but it's hard to actually commit to it. Vappel makes it easy to learn one in less time than you think. Vappel's quick 10 minute lessons handcrafted by over 200 language experts, get you to begin speaking your new language in three weeks or whatever pace you choose. And because conversing is the key to really understanding each other in new languages, Vappel is designed using practical real world conversations. What I love about Vappel is you can either dive in deeply and truly get fluent, or you can just master some of the basics before going on a trip. So let's get more of you talking in a new language. Vappel is gifting our listeners 60% off subscriptions at babble.com slash Myonscape. Get up to 60% off at babble.com slash Myonscape spelled B-A-B-B-E-L dot com slash Myonscape. That's babble dot com slash Myonscape rules and restrictions may apply. And then we started finally figuring it out. We're moving quickly through the history here, so I want to get to the modern world, but it wasn't till the 20th century that we were able to identify these genes as being carried by this wonderful molecule, the DNA and Watson and Crick, et cetera. And by that time, correct me if I'm wrong, but there was already this new synthesis of genetics and evolutionary biology, natural selection, Darwin. And so the DNA was just sort of figuring out, not just, but it was figuring out what the mechanism of that was. Yeah, well, that's a beautiful distillation of like 80 years of really rough science. Yes, exactly. Yeah. You know, people had known about DNA, really, since the 1800s, but they were kind of like, now, what is this weird stuff? And sorry, just to make that very clear, they knew that there was a molecule called DNA. Exactly. If you pulled apart cells, you would find different components. So you would find some molecules that are known as proteins that all had a similar chemical composition. And then you would find this stuff that they called nucleic acid and people just didn't really know what it was for. Right. And actually, even in the mid 1900s, a lot of people thought proteins were what genes were made of. And it took some elegant experiments to demonstrate. No, actually, if you transfer DNA from one microbe to another, you transfer that trait. The proteins don't matter. And so then once we figured out the structure of DNA, then all of a sudden we can get down to the molecular details of how genes make heredity possible. In other words, that it's almost like genes are like texts. You know, they're made up of these units that where they're like letters made up from a four letter alphabet. And we have, you know, over three billion letters in our DNA and change the letters or cut and paste chunks of text. And you get changes to us. And those changes can be passed down if the DNA is being faithfully copied. Right. And so three billion base pairs, right, in our, in the human DNA. And but we talk about only having like 20,000 genes. So I'm going to ask everybody, I'll just, I ever talk to one the podcast to explain this, because it took me a long while to get it right. Explain the relationship between the base pairs and the DNA and what we call genes. Yeah, it's, it's kind of messy, but you know, biology is messy. Yeah. So, so the way that people traditionally think about genes is a stretch of DNA that encodes a protein. And so, you know, every, every protein is, is encoded by a gene. It is true. Although sometimes you get proteins that are made by combining genes together and all sorts of stuff we don't need to get into. But in any case, we have, as you say, 20,000 of these protein coding genes. And they only make up about 1% or so, one or two percent of the, of the human genome. So then the big question is, well, what's all the other stuff? Yes. And yeah. So, so some of it, you know, maybe 10% of it is, has functions of its own. So actually some of them are also genes. It's just that they don't go the full process towards making proteins. You have thousands of genes. We don't know how many that actually encode RNA molecules. Okay. So you may be used to thinking of RNA as part of the process to make protein. Right. So RNA, yeah. Go ahead. You've got a gene made of DNA. You make a copy in RNA, which is a single stranded version of DNA, basically. And then you use that RNA as a template for building proteins out of a different set of molecules. Corid amino acids. And that's, that's true. But it turns out that sometimes our cells will make an RNA molecule and then that's it. And that, not only that's it, but that RNA molecule has a really important job to do. So for, for example, in, in women, women have two X chromosomes. They need to keep one of them shut off. Or they're going to basically poison themselves with too many proteins from the X chromosome. And only have one X chromosome. So there are, so there are these RNA molecules that basically wrap around the X chromosome, one of the X chromosomes in women and silence it. And so, you know, we know that at least some of these RNA molecules play an important job. So that's, those are more genes. But that still leaves you with a lot of the rest of the genomes. Some of that DNA is really important as kind of genetic switches for turning on and off genes elsewhere in the genome. And then the rest, you know, a lot of it is probably what scientists would scientifically call junk. There are a lot of them are dead genes. They're genes that have mutated and just are useless now. And we just carry them along. Some of them are actually descend from viruses. So viruses infect our DNA and make copies of themselves that get passed down and just spread all over our genome and bulk it up with all sorts of stuff that we don't actually use. So it's that they also could be codes that were injected by aliens millions of years ago to be activated at some point in the future, right? Yeah, all right. And I haven't seen the papers on that yet, but maybe you've seen a preprint. I'm giving you a jewels here, Carl. You should write the paper. All right. I'm going to get on. I'm going to have the scoop of the century. But it's a good reminder that, you know, we're not intelligently designed. The cell is kind of a mess that has been put together over billions of years. And DNA doesn't care that its job is to encode genes into proteins. It does whatever it wants to do. So whatever it needs to do to make things function. So some of the DNA is making proteins, some of it's making RNA that will do something. Some of it's just going along for the ride because it keeps getting copied all the time, right? Yeah, I mean, it's hard to believe, but the cell is a lot sloppier than we think of it as being. You know, a lot of DNA actually is used by ourselves to produce RNA molecules. And then the cell just immediately shreds all that RNA because those were just sort of accidental. They were just not, they didn't really have any function. So you can have junk DNA shooting off RNA molecules, but they don't serve any purpose. So they just, you know, the fact the cell just sort of like manages this chaos, you know, by having certain proteins that kind of go around and say like, are you, are you supposed to be here? And you know, if not, then they just shred them and just recycle it to make more RNA molecules. So yeah, it's not, it's, it's, if you really get to know cells, intelligent design becomes kind of laughable. And so okay, so we have this idea that the coding parts, there are parts of the DNA, stretches of DNA, many, many base pairs at once that will code into a protein. There's probably an informal and incorrect idea. I'm sure none of our extremely sophisticated and well-educated mindscape listeners would have this idea, but some people might think that there's a direct map from a gene to a trait to, you know, how big our nose are, what color our hair is or how, you know, charismatic we are. But it's more complicated than that, right? For the most part, yeah, it is more, more complicated. I mean, you know, we, it's good to learn about Mendel in high school, but, you know, I, I do think that it's going to be important for schools to take students beyond Mendel. Now that people are getting their DNA tested by companies like 23 and me, you can't really understand those test results if you're just relying on people and experiments. Right. You know, they're, I mean, we, you know, your blood type, sure, it's like, you know, there's one gene and they're different versions of the gene and that can determine your blood type. Okay, no problem. But for most of the traits that we actually really care about or think about, and even seemingly simple ones like height, they are influenced by many, many, many, many, many, many different genes. And so that, yeah, you can't say that, oh, I have, do I have the tall gene? Right. It's just meaningless. But so we brought ourselves up to about as you, as you infer, imply the level of high school biology, you know, what people sort of remember. We have a DNA, we pass it along. And I think that, you know, even if there's some complicated nonlinear map from the genes in our DNA to our traits, people still have this idea that basically there's a molecule, the DNA. And from the molecule, that's us. That just makes us, right? But we know a lot more than that now, also, right? I mean, there's various ways in which the thing that we turn into is more than just what's encoded in our DNA in any straightforward ways. Is that an accurate statement? Yeah, yeah, definitely. And, you know, when we, I mean, I, it's funny, you know, like if, if you say to someone, oh, you have two eyes, you must have gotten your two eyes from your parents. They're going to look at you funny, like, what? That doesn't make sense. You know, and the fact is that you do get, you did get your two eyes from your parents. But when we, when we talk about, oh, you got this, you got that from your parents, we're really more interested in the things that are different between people so that we can say, like, oh, you are tall. And your great uncle, Bertie, was tall. So he must have gone in from him, even though, of course, Bertie is off to the side, whatever. My point, my point being that, that we, we just get kind of confused about what it is that we're talking about when we, when we talk about these, these traits. And the fact is that, you know, you might be tall like your uncle Bertie is tall. Um, sure, partly because of, of the genes you inherit, but, um, you know, maybe you and your uncle Bertie also had the privilege of growing up in a, um, a affluent society, an affluent family. You had good diets. You got medicine when you were a kid. And so that you have the opportunity to grow to be tall, um, because the fact is that, you know, all over the world, the average height of people is several inches higher than it was a century ago. And that's not because we are now inheriting a different set of genes. It's just that in that respect, the world got to be a better place. And so, so you have to sort of take into account the, the combined influences of, uh, genes in environment or actually, as Shakespeare, everyone's called it nature and nurture. We will, we'll get there. But I think that even at the level of nature, even at the level of our inheritance, our genetic inheritance, uh, I, you know, I'm learning about from your book among other places, how complicated that is. For example, the idea of mitochondrial DNA, right? We have these little sort of genetic stoa ways in every single one of ourselves and we hand them down to subsequent generations. That's right. That's right. So yeah, even if you just limit yourself to genes, um, heredity can be a lot more complicated and strange than we learned about. So mitochondria, we have dozens or hundreds of them in every cell and we depend on them for our survival. They're the little factories that generate fuel for our cell, uh, you know, using, uh, oxygen and various nutrients to, to build, to build fuel that we then burn. They do lots of other stuff too. So, uh, we're good. We're good. We're good. We're good. We're good. We're good. The weird thing about them, well, several weird things. One is that they've got their own DNA in them. Um, that's, that's a side from the DNA that's tucked away in the nucleus. So they've all got their own DNA. And if you look at a cell, you can actually watch mitochondria divide on their own and they make new copies of their own DNA for those new daughter cells. And you might say like, whoa, that doesn't make sense. That sounds like bacteria. And I was like, yeah, yes, what? They're bacteria. Exactly. About 1.8 billion years ago, when we were single-celled, the ancestors of mitochondria somehow ended up inside of ourselves and some, maybe some kind of symbiotic relationship, kind of like, you know, cleaner fish that go inside the mouths of bigger fish. And, um, and then they became basically permanent residents so that they couldn't live outside of ourselves anymore. And as, as if that wasn't weird enough, um, you know, when a, when a sperm approaches an egg, it's, it's swimming furiously and it's using that mitochondria to generate that fuel to swim. Um, so the only way you can get to an egg is to use this mitochondria. And then it reaches the egg and it dumps in its chromosomes. But then it also destroys its own mitochondria. It just rips them apart. So both the sperm and the egg have separate mitochondria from dead and mom. Right. And the sperm do not deliver their mitochondria into the egg. Lazy bastards. Well, it's puzzling because, you know, we are, when you look at our chromosomes, we are a 50-50 split between, um, our parents. But you look at our mitochondria, it's all mom. It's just all mom. The mitochondrial inheritance is not sexual reproduction. Uh, exactly, exactly. It, you know, back to, uh, it, for some reason, we, we keep out, uh, one of the parents from that process. And it's interesting because what that means is that, you know, your mitochondria is, is extremely similar to your mothers and your grandmother's and so on and so on. Because, you know, with your chromosomes and every generation, the pairs of chromosomes, they shuffle some of their DNA together. Right. And so they swap pieces in this process called myosis. And so, um, so after several generations, you know, your, your, you know, chromosome number two doesn't really look all that much like your great, great, great, great, great grandmother's chromosome two. But, uh, but mitochondria basically the same. I mean, and, and so you, they're really powerful for tracing genealogy, for example. Um, you know, you could, the, the, um, you can say like, aha, well, this person has to be the child of this woman. I mean, there's just, you know, two ways about it. Uh, and, and yeah, it's a, it's a, you know, scientists who are just looking at the basic questions about heredity are like, wow, why, why is this? Why, why, why would the sperm not give the mitochondria? Why, why is it only the mothers? And, um, you know, there's some interesting theories about it. I mean, one theory is that, um, if you have two batches of mitochondria inside a person coming from different people, um, they're going to not play well together. Um, that, that they're going to operate differently and that could actually cause problems. I mean, they're some, right? When we, when we, when myosis happens, myosis is the splitting of this cell into a little sexual reproduction cell, right? So, you know, we split our genome in half and then they're going to recombine with the half from the other parent and the mitochondria kind of aren't participating in that process. So it's, you know, dads, mitochondria and moms are just there separately and they, they might come into conflict like you say. Right, right. And, you know, there are, um, there are, it's interesting. You know, there are, we, we think of sort of mom and dads, genes as, as, you know, playing nicely in our own genome, but, you know, there are, there are conflicts between the genes in our parents and evolutionary conflicts. Um, sometimes there's conflicts between our actual parents too. Yeah, and now think about it inside our DNA, you know, um, you know, sometimes, you know, there'll be like, you know, dads, genes are maybe sort of driving kids to grow faster because that's, uh, good for the father's long-term evolutionary benefit. The mother, meanwhile, if the mother has to carry, you know, the children, like, has to be pregnant, like too much growth is actually, like, can really drain her resources. And it may mean that she has fewer children over her lifetime. And so you will actually find that the man's copy of a gene is turned on. A woman's copy is turned off inside the child. It's so it's like this tug of war going on. Um, short, just to try, just to try to, that finds this sort of optimal thing. Um, and then sometimes you actually find, um, if there are, there are genes or pieces of DNA that basically just totally break Mendel's law completely and just, uh, sort of override that sort of 50, 50 kind of split between which chromosome ends up, you know, in, in an egg or sperm. Um, this was illustrated with a discovery once of certain kinds of flies, certain strains of flies that where they would almost always produce daughters. And it's like, what's going on here? And it turned out that there was a gene that was basically hijacked. It was sitting on the, you know, on the female chromosome in, in, in, in flies and was sort of basically, um, ensuring that these flights did not have any sons because if they, if there were just daughters, I would spread this gene further, sort of the ultimate selfish gene. Well, this makes sense, right? I mean, we, I mean, maybe it makes sense. Maybe I'm, I'm leaping ahead too far. But we have this kind of game theoretic way of thinking about not just the struggle to survive as organisms, but we can, we can, in the selfish gene way of thinking, uh, think of it as the individual genomes trying to pass themselves down. And you know, mom has a genetic, uh, set of information and so does dad and they both want to win. And in human beings and mammals, there's this rough equilibrium that we've reached where, uh, children are 50, 50 male and female, but that's certainly not universal across the animal kingdom. There's a sort of different equilibrium you could imagine reaching where the struggle plays out in different ways. Sure. And, and actually there are some animals that adjust the ratio of their offspring just depending on what their environment kind of looks like. Right. So there, there are birds that, you know, in effect, what they're doing is looking around and saying like, I think I need a lot of daughters to stick around and to help me raise, you know, my other chicks and voila, incredibly, they produce more daughters and sons. And then there are other situations that they produce more sons than daughters, you know, and then the sons fly off. Um, uh, so yeah, I mean, it's, um, we, you know, we, we, we like to think about, um, we like to take biology and put it into categories and, and try to come up with absolutes. So, you know, Mendels, observations become Mendels law, um, or, or males and females become these sort of absolute categories that, you know, you could never have any exception to. I mean, we keep doing that. I think we just have very, you know, brains that really like categories, but, you know, heredity just does not work like that. Yeah. You know, yeah, there are some patterns that kind of repeat themselves a lot, but, um, a lot of times those patterns are the sort of, the sort of a stable balance produced by competition, um, that sort of works out into this, this, almost like a day-tunt. With a spark cash plus card from Capital One, you earn unlimited 2% cash back on every purchase. Plus, no preset spinning limit helps your purchasing power adapt to meet your business needs. Jorge Gaviria, founder of Massienda, reinvests his 2% cash back to help grow the business with new products. What could the spark cash plus card from Capital One do for your business? Capital One. What's in your wallet? Find out more at capitalone.com slash spark cash plus terms and conditions apply. Well, I talked with Alice Drager in episode three of the podcast and we talked about intersexuality and how the fact that the idea there's two sexes, right? That's a convenient fiction. It's very useful. It's a good approximation, but if you're going to try to be a little bit more careful, there's a whole bunch of stuff in between and different ways you can be in between. And this reflects, I think that philosophically, this is just a really important point that you're bringing up that we organize the world, we human beings for our comprehension because it's easy for us. But as we try to be more and more accurate, all those complications are going to become more and more relevant to a better understanding. Yeah, and I noticed that a lot of times people will justify these absolute categories by saying, well, look, this is just nature. This is biology. You have to just accept biology. And I'm like, whoa, you want to talk about biology? Let's take a little tour, shall we? Through my 600 page book on inheritance. Absolutely, absolutely. I mean, the fact is that heredity itself works very differently in a lot of different organisms. And the irony is that this is one reason why Mendel was forgotten, actually. So this is one of these incredible ironies is that Mendel studied peas and he was like, oh my gosh, look at this mathematical thing that's happening. And he wrote to one of his mentors and his mentor is like, hmm, that's interesting. I'm not sure what to make of this. But why do you see if you can replicate this? If this is what you say it is, then you ought to be able to find it in another plant, right? So Mendel, I guess, agreed with that. And he one studied another common garden plant. And it turned out that this other one, Hockweed, I think, I forget the name now. It doesn't reproduce in the neat sort of sexual way that peas do. It has pollen. You know, pollen is sort of like the plant equivalent of sperm. And so they have male and female gametes. And they have, you have to have fertilization. In these other plants, once fertilization happens, the ovules, the eggs as it were, just basically just kick out any male DNA. They don't use it. So they do myosis within their own genes. And so they're kind of like clones, except that they're sort of shuffling their DNA with every generation. So, you know, like boom, like those lovely three to one patterns that Mendel saw with peas, they're just not there at all when you look at another species. And then it's like, huh. And you know, you imagine if he had picked another species that was very neat about, where, you know, worked like peas did, that he might have gained more traction. But no, I mean, he was forgotten for basically 50 years. It's good to know that the deflationary role of mentors has not changed in academia over the centuries. That's, I think I've done that to my students sometimes. I love the idea that mitochondria is important as they are, these stoa ways. I mean, they're basically living their own lives, right? They're handing down their own genetic inheritance. And it's part of what makes us who we are and so forth. Are there other examples of that? I mean, I know that we carry around a whole microbiome, a whole set of little monoselial organisms that function in us. But my impression is that we kind of build those up throughout our life. We don't actually get those from mom and dad. Well, you know, that is a big question right now. And, you know, there are people who are trying to really nail that down at the moment. Because, you know, it is true that you pick up microbes every day. You're picking them up off your keyboard and your doorknob and your shaking hands or, you know, you're having yogurt. I mean, like we're just, yeah, we're just swimming through a microbial ocean. And, but you don't mean me in particular. You mean all of the listeners out? It's not my keyboard that is worse than average, right? Well, I've heard things. No, so the thing is that we also know that there are lots of species that pass down certain microbes as faithfully as they do their own genes. And my favorite example is cockroaches. Okay. So, yeah, cockroaches actually depend on one species of bacteria to help them to eat food. Because the bacteria can actually make some of the compounds they need for proteins out of their food. The cockroaches don't have the genes to do it. So they totally depend on these bacteria. In fact, they actually build special little organs for these bacteria to live in. And the bacteria actually, like, embedded inside the cockroaches' own cells in this organ. And when it comes time for the female to produce her eggs, something incredible happens. Some of these cells that carry these microbes, they just start crawling and they make their way through the cockroaches body to the cockroaches' eggs. And then they open up and they basically deliver these bacteria into the eggs. And so after these eggs get fertilized by a male cockroach, then the cockroaches born with these bacteria ready to go. Just like we are with our mitochondria. Biology is very scary. It's mind blowing. And the best book on all of this is Ed Young's book, I contain multitudes. For me, what interests me in particular about this is to think about this as another form of heredity, another channel of heredity. It's like you've got your own genes, quote unquote, but then you have these bacteria. Yeah. Now we don't have anything quite like that except for mitochondria that we know of. We know of. But, right. But maybe there is something like heredity in the way that some of our bacteria end up inside of us. Scientists are trying to figure out, for example, our human embryos sterile when they're in the U.S. like that. The evidence is not clear. What is clear is that as a baby moves through the birth canal during delivery, it gets slathered in bacteria. And some of that bacteria goes into its gut and there are certain forms of bacteria that the mother encourages to grow in the birth canal. And not only that, but the mother's milk contains bacteria as well, as well as bacteria food. In other words, sugars that in the milk that babies can't digest themselves, but bacteria can't. There is a debate right now whether there might be certain species that are being put into babies early on and sort of our kind of define our own species that way. It's a very romantic picture you are painting. The miracle of childbirth is so enhanced by our scientific understanding. It's really great. It raises some very practical medical questions. So, cesarean sections are exploding in countries like the United States. Those babies are not getting that exposure. And so, there's a question of like, well, does that matter? Can you still pick up those species just by being handled by your parents and other people? Or does that not getting that seeding at the beginning is that a problem? Because if your microbiome isn't quite right when you're young, that can lead to problems throughout your life. Your immune system may not work properly, for example. Is it still thought to be true that the number of cellular organisms in our microbiome more cells than human cells in our body? Actually, no. I heard rumors that that had gone away. That thought. Yeah. I and other people had, when we'd write about the microbiome, we always say like, your microbes outnumber your own cells by 10 to 1, which is always fun to say. Turns out probably not to be true. It's probably more like one to one. We have about 37 trillion cells of our own, or quote unquote, own human cells. It might be around the same, I don't know, 30, 40 million bacteria. That doesn't count the viruses and the fungi and all the other fun critters that are living inside of us. The final number of the full microbiome might be higher, but it's not a 10 to 1 thing anymore. A biological body is a complicated open system. It's an ecosystem all by itself. We're a little bus that is carrying around a whole world of little critters talking to each other and evolving and doing their own things. Yes, but it's not a totally random collection of critters. The same species and the same strains tend to turn up again and again in people. Your microbiome is going to be different than mine, but not too differently. If you look at human microbiomes compared to a chimpanzee, they're going to be a lot more similar to each other than chimpanzees are. It seems like we have filters. Not everybody gets to see it in the bus. There's also the idea that we're learning more and more that just the information in our DNA, even just getting back to the genetic part of inheritance. There's more to it. There's more to how we pass information down. There's the whole story of epigenetics and so forth. I hear that you're advocating that people take epigenetic yoga classes so they can pass down new things that they learn to their children. Is that right? Many people are saying that. I hear people saying that. I hear people saying that. I think you should take epigenetic yoga if you like it, but don't think that your kids are going to be better for it. We can learn something and pass it down. We could have an experience that's alters how our genes work and that alteration can get passed down to future generations. That's the crux of epigenetics and heredity. And it's tricky. I explored it in my book and there's definitely good evidence for it happening in plants. It's good evidence for it happening in little teeny tiny worms. When you get to mice, there's some very tantalizing experiments. I mean, so for example, there's one experiment where scientists would expose male mice to a certain odor and then give them a shock. And then they learned just to associate the odor with the shock. And then they took sperm from the mice and used it in vitro fertilization and then produced mousepups. And it seems like the mice in the next generation kind of responded oddly to that same odor. And so the claim was that somehow that learned memory, that learned association about that smell got passed down to the mousepups. And when that paper came out, the journal put Lamarck on the cover. Remind us who Lamarck is. Mr. Lamarck. Mr. Lamarck. So Lamarck was a French biologist who preceded Darwin. He was most active in the early 1800s and came up with his own theory of evolution, which depended a lot on what's known as the inheritance of acquired traits. And so he had a classic example that, you know, giraffes stretch their neck to reach leaves. There's some sort of nervous fluid that causes their neck to get a little bit longer. You can think about it like building up muscles. And then those giraffes would pass down that longer neck to their descendants. And so then over many generations, the giraffes would adapt their environment by getting a longer neck. And so the claim, I guess, is that well mice are adapting to their environment by learning about the risks that they face and that they're osping or inheriting that knowledge. Right. So that's the basic idea. And how would this work, sort of at the molecular level for the mice? Is it pups? You call them mice pups? Mice babies are pups. Okay. They're pups. I learned something. So it's a matter of obviously the DNA are not being altered. As you smell something, your DNA is still your DNA. But somehow, there's information being passed down to the next generation that is not in the DNA. It's somehow in the chemical makeup of what goes into making a little puppy. Yeah. Yeah. I don't think, if you call them mouse puppies at a biology conference, people probably look at you funny. You think that people will see through me and not realize them by all just. There's an imposter in our ranks. As a cosmologist, get him out. Yeah. So, so the, we know that genes are attended to by lots of molecules in the cell. You know, genes just don't take care of themselves. Right. And so there are proteins, for example, that will clamp on to genes and they can essentially shut them down. There are other places that proteins latch onto DNA and they can switch on a gene. You can coil DNA around spools and then basically anything that gets coiled up, any gene just can't be used to make a protein because it's just all tucked away. And so, and those changes can be very long lasting. Like when a cell divides those same controls will, in effect, be inherited by the two new cells. So that's why your skin cells, when they divide, they make skin cells. They don't, you know, make brain cells or tooth cells or something. You know, like it, so, so we know that epigenetics really matters a lot. There's no question about that. And so the question is, could these kinds of processes, you know, change the way that genes are being used and then could those changes, you know, those proteins and those coils or whatever get passed down through the generations? We don't know. Yeah. The mechanism for it, it's, I mean, it's, it's, especially for mammals, it's, it's kind of hard to figure out how the mechanism would actually work. And you look at a mouse experiment. I mean, the critics of this kind of researcher says like, whoa, so you're telling me that there's this change that that is happening in the mouse's brain, the daddy mouse's brain. And that's somehow then that is getting communicated into daddy mouse's sperm. And then somehow that is then making its way through fertilization, through the development of an embryo, through the development of a brain. And then somehow that's getting plugged into, back into the brain in the same circuits that daddy had being altered. And a lot of scientists just say like, whoa, that doesn't make any sense at all. Right. But this is something is being studied. We'll try to figure it out. Yeah. But in the meantime, there's epigenetic yoga. Like, you know, there are literally like psychiatrists who will, will help you to undo the epigenetic trauma of your, that your grandparents passed down to you. Like, this has totally saturated pop culture. And I, I don't honestly know how it happened because, you know, epigenetics is messy and complicated. And, and the language is totally inscrutable. And yet, you know, when I give talks, like half the questions I get after, after the talks are, what about epigenetics? Look, I'm writing a book about quantum mechanics. So the idea that crazy abstract ideas are going to be hijacked by popular culture is not far into me. Any, any tips? Well, quantum epigenetic yoga might be a best seller. Right. Oh my God. So dark energy in there and we'll be buying yachts any, any moment. So, okay, we need to, we need to try, we need to patent that idea right now. Okay. Author author of the book is, I will edit this out for the podcast. So no one hears it and steals our great idea. It sounds like though, even in principle, if you handed a computer, a complete list of the six billion, three billion base pairs in our DNA, the GCTA, letters in our alphabet, a computer with perfect knowledge, that would not be enough to predict what the organism would look like. I mean, it would be missing the mitochondrial DNA. It would be missing all sorts of chemical signals that could be passed down through the body. But I mean, so it sounds like we're learning how much of the organism is predicted by that. Probably a lot, right? But certainly not the whole thing. Yeah. And in a way, this is one of those deep questions in the history of biology. You know, how much of an organism is basically determined at the very beginning and how much of an organism's end result is just the emergence through development, you know, through, and, and, you know, it, you know, as always, the answer is both, but it's complicated. You know, in a sense that there are a lot of things that you can predict based on DNA. Those predictions are not like, you know, I can't like predict what color shoes you're wearing right now today, based on your DNA, Sean. But I bet if I looked at your DNA, I could get a pretty good idea of what your eye color is. And I might be able to, you know, make, make some very crude predictions about the influence of your genes on your height. I couldn't tell you how tall you are, because I don't know if your parents, you know, fed you properly. But you know, there are things that you can predict out of DNA. But then there's this, you know, the DNA makes, you know, the cells make proteins that are in amolecules from the genes. And the cells are talking to each other and they're taking in cues from the environment. Cells are migrating through the body and all sorts of crazy stuff is happening. And the genes are responding to all of that. And that is how we end up the way we are. So yeah, so, you know, if someone, you know, I had my genome sequence, I'm sure nobody could make any predictions about me from that. Right, I do want to, that's right, I remember this from the book. So when you say you had your genome sequence, so like your special here, because you really had the full blown treatment, if people do ancestry.com or 23 and me or any of these things, they get a little bit of information about their genome, but they do not get a list of 3 billion ACGTs, right? I mean, they get some some sub knowledge of that. Do you actually have a printout of, you know, all 3 billion base pairs in your DNA? I do not have a printout. I have a hard drive. Metaphorical, I was being metaphorical. Yeah, well, if I printed it out, it would, you know, fill up you know, dozens and dozens of books. I mean, that would be a fun art project, but you can use a small font. It's okay. Yeah. And it would be kind of hard to, you know, do a search function on that. So I prefer to have it on that hard drive, because then I can take it to scientists and say like, okay, you know, let's let's play around with this data here, which just so happens to be my genome. And show me how you discover things in human genomes by analyzing this sort of data. And it's been a fascinating experience, but it is a very different thing than getting your DNA sequence from a place like 23 and me. What 23 and me or ancestry does is they do something called genome typing. So basically they look at maybe let's maybe a million markers, a million spots in throughout your genome. And they try to, they look at say, well, which variant do you have at that particular spot? And so it's, you know, it's kind of a high level survey of your genome, but you can learn an awful lot. One of the reasons you can learn an awful lot is because we pass, we tend to like share similar stretches of DNA. So if you've got, you know, a string of variants all in a row, chances are that that whole segment of DNA is identical to somebody else has those same variants. And so you can kind of, you can infer a lot about what's in between those markers. When you get your whole genome sequence, that means that you're trying to figure out as best as you can every single letter in your genome. And, and that, with that, you can discover all sorts of deeper things about your genome. Well, and one of the deeper things you could discover is that you are susceptible or even almost inevitably going to have some disease that might affect you at a certain time of your life. And so there's this question of what do we want to know? Like if, if you could, the, the philosophers would come in and instantly say the version of the question to ask is if you could know you were going to die on exactly a certain day, would you want to know that? Is that information you want? Some much cruder version of that might be available through this, looking at our genomes. That information is really only available to a small fraction of the people who get their DNA genotype or get their genome sequenced. Because the, the, the genes that really have a strong impact on your health, you know, let's say, you know, we're talking about genes that cause hunting disease or genes that raise your risk dramatically of getting early onset Alzheimer's genes that dramatically raise your risk of getting certain forms of cancer. These are rare. Right. You know, natural selection is not fond of these genes. For all these reasons. So they're for their rare. And, and, and so, you know, I, when I got my genome sequenced, the first part of it was, was doing it. I did it as part of a conference. And I think there were like 40 people who were going to this conference who also got their genome sequenced. They weren't getting the raw data, but they were getting these interpretations from clinical geneticists. And there were like 40 of us. And, um, if I recall correctly, maybe like five people were told like, okay, you know, we're going to sit down with genetics counselor and make some plans for you to talk to your doctor because there's something you need to know about. How's your life insurance plan looking? Yeah, right. Right. I mean, for the rest of us, it was like, man, you know, like you don't have anything. They're really, you don't have everything that really jumps out, you know, as, as, as what they would say, you know, there's nothing where it's like, hey, that gene, that's big trouble. Now, you know, I have plenty of genes that have been associated with, you know, raising my risk of this disease or that by some modest amount. But that doesn't mean that I'm going to die of any of those diseases. I mean, I also have variants that lower the risk for certain diseases too. And so, um, so, you know, and that's, you know, that is going to be how most people are going to find what that's most people are going to find when they when they get their DNA sequenced. And it's going to be, um, it, you know, there are a lot, I'm concerned that people not make one of two mistakes. One mistake is to be like sort of angry and irritated that they didn't find anything in their genome. You know, it's like really like, my genome is much more interesting than you're making it out to be. Yes. Well, you know, like, like, this isn't like a status thing. Like, it's not like you want to go to the doctor's office and and get terrible news, you know, and like, it's not like you feel like you should feel happy if they say, oh, you're fine. See you later. And also, um, uh, the flip side of that is that sometimes people will will get in these reports or maybe do their own research and discover they have a gene that is associated with some disease that, you know, let's just say like colon cancer. And then you say, oh, my god, that's it. I'm going to dive colon cancer. Like, no, no, no, you like, think you have to, you have to dig down that extra level and say like, well, what exactly did this study find? You know, like, do you, did find that like people who had this variant had, you know, a slightly higher risk of this disease? Yeah. And also like, how big was the study? Like, if, a lot of these studies, when they're preliminary, it's just like a hundred people. They're tiny. And, you know, tiny studies are often wrong. And so there are plenty of mutations that were thought originally to cause diseases that we now know do not. So, you know, you kind of think about all these things when you're looking at these results. And that's kind of gets back to me in my, how, how I feel that like our high school grade school genetics has just got to step up its game because these things are not just abstractions that you learn about in high school and ever think about again. People are getting these results in their email inbox. Right. But also, isn't it, isn't it maybe an antiquated kind of worry? Because I, well, recently I bought new running shoes. So I went to the Nike website and they let you actually customize your own shoes. Like, you know, what color front and what logo is on the bottom and stuff like that. So within a couple generations, we'll have a website for doing that for our babies, right? We'll just be able to pick what different features we want them to have, edit the DNA and get whatever baby we want. I am sure that there will be people who are offering that if the laws allow. You know, I don't think that you will get the baby of your dreams. I think your baby will just be your baby and will be subject to all the vagaries of experience and biology and all the rest of it. But, you know, we already have all sorts of companies out there that are offering really dubious claims based on looking at your DNA. You know, they'll look at a few variants and they'll say, aha, like here's your special, you know, exercise program or here's your, here's your special DNA diet or there's even a company that called Vynome. I don't know if you've seen them. No, they will recommend wine to you based on your DNA. Sorry, how do you spell that? I actually have to do it to look this up. What does this mean? Yeah, please do. Vynome. All right. Could be podcast sponsor down the road. I like it. Well, yeah, you may not want to play this episode because I mean, when I saw a video for it, I just thought, well, this is this is wait, is this the onion? I'm this can't be real. But it was. And, you know, like, I mean, all these companies seem to be doing as far as I can tell is, you know, looking in the scientific literature and saying like, you know, oh, do you know, here's a variant where people who had it tend to report a stronger sensation for bitter tastes and people who didn't. Right. And then going from that to saying like, here, take this peanut or and, you know, with exercise, it's a very similar thing. I mean, yeah, sure, there are genes that are associated with all sorts of aspects of exercise, you know, the power in your muscles or how much oxygen you take in and so on. And I'm sure that like, there is a genetic element to great athletes being great. But, you know, when I got my genome sequenced, the company that gave me that first sort of first layer of results before I took matters into my own hand, they actually said like, your muscles are build for power. I was like, sorry, I did not mean to laugh. I was laughing at something completely separate that was happening here in the room. I'm sure, I'm sure. No, it's okay, Sean. Yeah, like, I mean, you've, you've met me and, and I, I mean, like, anybody who's met me knows that my muscles are not built for power. I mean, it's just not the case. And, you know, but what they were doing is they were just looking at this one variant and these, these limited number of studies and not taking into account all the other genes that influence our muscles, many of what we don't really understand. So, yeah, there's, so I do worry about, you know, letting, letting folks like that who run these companies do the same thing with, with, you know, designing babies. Well, tell us a little bit though about CRISPR and the reality of gene editing. It is something that is, is rushing at us very, very quickly, right? Yeah, yeah. I mean, I only became aware of CRISPR, maybe six years ago or something. And, and I can remember thinking, I mean, at first, I was sort of puzzled by it because actually CRISPR was, it's a, it's natural thing. What it is is it's basically an immune system for bacteria. They make molecules that that can essentially store information about viruses and then use that information to create new molecules that could zero in on particular stretches of virus DNA and cut it. And I thought, wow, that's, that's cool. I mean, microbes never ceased to amaze me. But, but then some scientists said, well, we could use that. And we could maybe cut whatever DNA we want in Lomba Hall they could. They could zero in on particular stretches of DNA and make cuts and then substitute in new DNA. And all of a sudden they had this very powerful new molecular tool at their disposal. You know, scientists use CRISPR all the time now to do experiments. You know, they might say like, we want to know, you know, which cell, I'm sorry, we want to know, you know, which genes in a cancer cell are essential for it to survive as a cancer cell. So, they'll just use CRISPR to systematically cut out every single gene in individual cell lines and just see which one survive as as cancer. You just couldn't do that before. I mean, so the impact is unbelievable. And then people are starting to say like, well, can we use this to alter the genes of crops or of animals? And the answer is hell yeah. And so the next step is, well, what could we do for people? And one of the things you can potentially do for people is treat hereditary diseases. So if someone has sickle cell anemia, you take some of their their bone marrow cells out. These stem cells that can make blood. You tweak their DNA so that they can now make hemoglobin that they need, you know, the proper kind of hemoglobin because sickle cell anemia is caused by a mischaping kind of hemoglobin. And you put the cells back into people and they make healthy blood cells. That's that's the hope. And there are clinical trials that could start very soon on that. And then the big frontier, the one that, you know, understandably everybody gets excited and scared about is what if you could use these on embryos and change genes and embryos. And then you are creating an inherited change that will be passed down to the generations. Right. Yeah, they're going to do it, right? It's going to, I mean, so, you know, I have a kind of an extremist point of view on this because people say people raise this question that you just raised, you know, can we genetically edit what's going on in embryo and therefore change what the person is going to be like? And there's a sort of instant reluctance, right? It's like, well, of course, that would be bad or at least it might be bad. We should think about it and we should, you know, really be very careful. But I'm not quite sure where the reluctance comes from other than a sort of squickiness, right? It's sort of feeling that we're messing with nature. And what I suspect is that some people will feel that way. Some people will not feel that way. And it's absolutely 100% going to happen. And a hundred years from now, the idea of just making a baby by randomly picking half of the DNA from mom and half the DNA from dad and hoping for the best will seem hopelessly barbaric. Well, you know, you and I are going to have to, you know, hope that, you know, life extension anti-aging drugs advance really quickly so that we can make a bet and see if it pans out, you know? Yeah. But, you know, I have thought about these scenarios a lot. Partly, they're just fun to think about and it's, and, you know, it's what science fiction writers do so well. And, you know, I, there are a lot of questions I have. I mean, I don't, I, I'm not as sanguine, maybe as the word, as you are, like in the sense that, um, so for starters, like CRISPR, like CRISPR is indeed revolutionary, but it's turning out to have some, some problems. Um, it, because it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, people call it gene editing, but it's editing that involves chopping DNA. And that is a pretty radical thing to do to DNA and cells don't like it. I mean, we, the cells actually have all sorts of defenses against chopping up DNA because it can lead to all sorts of damage that can ultimately cause a cell's descendants to become cancerous, for example. Um, and, um, not only, so, you know, there, there are concerns about, um, just how safe CRISPR would be in terms of like creating a line of cells you'd want to put in your body through CRISPR. Like, you don't want to put in cells that are going to be more prone to cancer. That's probably number one problem number two. There's a recent study, um, that, uh, showed that sometimes when, um, scientists try to cut one particular segment of DNA out, they cut out a long stretch that includes that, that particular target. Um, and so you might be cutting out pieces of DNA that you really need. And maybe, maybe that when the DNA is getting repaired, it gets kind of shuffled around in ways it could be a problem. So, so, okay, so there's the safety issue and then, um, then also there's kind of like the logistics issue, you know, like, you know, if you're saying, I mean, you know, you're saying like, oh, this is barbaric. So you're imagining a world where, are you imagining world where all say nine billion people, um, all get in vitro fertilization, you know, I mean, vitro fertilization is a very, uh, difficult, drawn out process right now. Um, it could get a lot better in the future, but you know, maybe not. Maybe there's some inherent sort of limits to do this. Um, it, it's not, so my point is like, Chris, it wouldn't be Chris, you wouldn't have CRISPR alone would not deliver you into that science fiction future. You'd have to have all sorts of other advances in reproductive technology and stem cell research and all the rest of it. Um, before this could even be possible. But I have talked to biologists, you say, you know, we're going to look at, we're going to, we're going to look at CRISPR like vaccination in the future. Right. Yeah. So I, I think, uh, I get absolutely the fact that it's not within the next five years or 10 years, right? We will have to extend our lives. So we're going to see this thing come true. And I'm also not sanguine in the sense that I think that it's not going to be an unalloyed good. I look at, you know, this editing of our children's genomes as some, it's a technology. It's like cars or Twitter, right? There's going to be good parts about it or bad parts about it. I just think it's inevitable. I just think that it's, it's like we have jumped off of a pier into the ocean. And as we fall in, we're debating, should we get wet or not? And that's just not a debate that is very reasonable to have. We can have other debates. Should we swim for sure? Should we try to climb back up the pier? Should we fight off the sharks? But I think it's going to happen. And, you know, people are going to be trying to alter their children's intelligence and skin color and size of their noses and everything. And I think that we're kind of dropping the ball a little bit on dealing with what the implications of that really are going to be. Well, I mean, I guess the question becomes, you know, if people really are going to try to do this if they can, that, you know, should we pass laws to prevent that? Or do we have, do we put regulations in place to allow certain uses of it for certain things? And then, and then really you shifting from a scientific question to a social or a political one. You know, for example, with, we're dealing with that right now, actually. I mean, people don't realize it, but, you know, genetically engineering humans has already begun. Because, you know, some, we were talking about mitochondria before. Like so, so mutations can cause mitochondria to become defective. And so, women can pass down defective mitochondria to their children and you can get these mitochondrial diseases, which can be quite devastating. And there are all sorts of different ones that emerge from, from faulty mitochondria. So, some years ago, people thought, well, what if we were to do a transplant, an egg transplant, take the, the DNA and the nucleus of an egg and put it into a donor egg that has good mitochondria in it. Obviously, you take out the nuclear DNA out of the egg, don't array it first. But anyway, so, so basically you're just, now you have an egg that has the mother's nuclear DNA, the chromosomes, and another woman's mitochondria and then fertilize that. People call it three parent babies, which is unfortunate, but it's stuck. Anyway, we can debate about what it means to be a parent. But, yeah. But in any case, you know, in the United States, that has been banned. I mean, you, there's no, there's no way that's going to happen in the United States. There's no way there's going to be researcher evaluation of it, forget it. That's, that is dead in the water right now. And, you know, there was a case of a, of a doctor in New York who had done some research on this, who actually went to Mexico to treat a couple who the mother had a mitochondrial disease. And so they, Mexico doesn't have any laws one way or the other about it. So they did it kind of on the, you know, secretly. And, but meanwhile, in Britain, they talked about this. They very quite explicitly. They had discussions and parliament. And they said, you know what? These diseases are so devastating. And we feel that, you know, this combination of mitochondria from one woman and chromosomes from another woman, we're okay with that. You know, we don't think that violates sort of human dignity. And we're going to allow this to go forward under a lot of regulation. And so there's a university in Britain that has gotten a license. They're open for business. And so they will start, probably babies will start be, being born soon through this technology. So, you know, I wonder like what's going to happen with CRISPR? Right. Will it be, will it be the American version, total ban? Will it be the Mexico version? Like it's all kind of on a, you know, unregulated black market? Or is it going to be out in the open, carefully explicitly regulated, you know, and under the guidance of government? Well, and I think that's, I'm being a little intentionally provocative here because I think that people are, does it's tendency for people either to sort of ask rhetorical questions and leave them hanging without quite answering them? Or there's this other tendency which we in the United States love so much is just to ban it first and ask questions later for something like designer babies, if it does become possible. And obviously, there's enormous scientific, technical hurdles to getting there. But, you know, I could easily imagine that it's banned here. And so, okay, so someone sits up a clinic in Mexico or the Cayman Islands or whatever and rich people go there and design their babies and poor people can't do it. Or even if it doesn't get banned anywhere, like you alluded to earlier, there's just, okay, you can do it. It costs a million dollars, right? That's just how much the effort is going to require. And so, that's a kind of inequality, socially, that is going to be hard to deal with. It's a little bit, it hits home in a way, you know, the ability to make sure all your children are, you know, tall and beautiful that other kinds of inequality might not. I have a problem with these arguments against CRISPR based on inequality because they all make it sound like we are living in a paradise of equality today. You know, wait, what? We're not. You know, like, you know, if you are concerned about inequality, like, like, it's time to get started now. Because it's not as if genes are the only thing that can influence the success of children later in life. And so, you know, and, you know, and this raises, I do think that this also raises difficult questions because, you know, if you say, okay, well, it's wrong to let parents use CRISPR to make their children, let's say, you know, tall and beautiful or whatever you want to dream that you could do with CRISPR. I don't think that would happen, but let's just pretend you could do that. Anyway, okay. So, what about all the other advantages that children of wealthy parents have that help them to get ahead in life? You know, do we make those illegal? Should SAT prep classes be banned? Yeah, no, I think this is very real, but I still think the analogy is not quite perfect. I mean, I get it. And I think that we are a terrible society at treating people equally right now. So, that point is very, very well taken. But in America, at least, you know, people grow up with this idea that someday, no matter where you come from, you could be a millionaire, you could be president. But no one grows up with the idea that, you know, 20 years from now, my DNA will be better. So, it's this kind of obvious, in your face, a difference between people, which I suspect people will react to very viscerally. I agree. And I mean, I think part of it is that, well, you know, part of the problem here is that we think of genes as being the sort of absolute definition of who we are. It's not. But we also think about heredity, in the sense that like these kids will then pass down these traits to their kids and so on. And that really strikes a chord, I think, because like I was saying before, heredity is such a profound thing to us in terms of how we define ourselves. And so to be tampering with heredity seems like one of the great transgressions. And that I think colors are our discussion of this. And you can see this. And, you know, debates, debates people have, you know, scientists who developed CRISPR actually have just in the past few years, like, had a series of international meetings to figure out like, well, what's right? What's wrong? What should we do with this? And the overriding issue, it seemed, was what is this going to do to heredity? And which is so striking to me, because it really tells you where our concerns are located. And I think it's a good question, but, you know, on the other hand, I mean, I just, I don't, some people say like, oh, we're going to turn ourselves into two separate species. You know, you'll have the rich people who can afford CRISPR, who will become their own species, and the poor people will become a different species. And so it reminds me of you know, the time machine. It's very HD well. Yeah, it's exactly. That's right. You know what I'm talking about. Yeah. But, you know, like, but people, but like that just, people just don't work that way. Like animals in general don't work that way. Like, you, like people have sex, lots of sex, and like people don't respect these sort of arbitrary boundaries when they're having sex. Like, whatever genes get, might get introduced into some rich person will either disappear entirely from the human gene pool eventually, because that's what happens to most gene variants, or we'll just kind of diffuse around all over the world after a while, because of just the way that people have kids together. So, um, so, you know, I just find some of these science fiction scenarios that people are talking about as if they're like real ethical questions to be silly, frankly. I think actually, so I'm going to, I'm going to go on the other side. I think that even if they're wildly unrealistic and not mapping out the future, I'm glad people are envisioning the craziest, most extreme scenarios, I think will help us sort of be prepared a little bit for the brave new world yet to come. Well, but, but, but, but, but, but you have to then, but, okay, we can talk about these scenarios, but then we have to take the next step and say, like, well, okay, but here's the basic, here's the basic facts of science that tell you that this is not even something worth considering, you know, um, you know, like, for example, like I, I wrote an article for the times recently about studies on DNA, uh, and the, and the link between genes and how long you stay in school. There is a connection there. We don't really know why there's a connection there and may, may have to do with genes that influence certain things in our brains or maybe even our parents' brains. We don't know. But there's an association there. It's interesting. It's worth studying. Um, and you can actually like, look at, you know, these million variants, uh, and people's DNA and actually come up with a score, a sort of education score, which, which sounds very fancy, like, oh, well, I could use that to, you know, test some kindergartener and say, like, uh, you're never going to make it to college. So we're just going to put you over here in this, this track and, you know, you just be content with your lot. And that would be a ridiculous thing to do because this score, you know, it only predicts a small amount of the variation in how people do in school. So chances are that your score would be very wrong. Um, so, you know, lots of people with, with a high genetic score who drop out early from school, there are a lot of people with a low genetic score to go into grad school. Like, it's just one variable among several. So, you know, for people to say, like, oh, okay, well, clearly we're going to have this future where everybody's fate is predetermined. Well, no, no. And it's, it's, it's not a scenario worth talking about just because of the basic statistics of what we're talking about. So, you know, I'm all for talking about scenarios, but you have to, you have to be willing to throw some out. No, I completely agree on that. I mean, that, that idea that you just said about sort of predicting people's educational attainments on base of their DNA makes, you know, no sense to me. It's like taking a preseason power pole in some sports league and then saying, well, we don't need to play the games now. We figured out who's going to win, but playing the games actually matters also. So, uh, Carl Zimmer, or as we say around here, Carl built for power Zimmer. Thank you very much for a wonderful conversation. So, he's great to talk to you. Oh, it's good talking to you again, Sean. All right. Bye-bye. Bye.