 Hello everybody and welcome to the Minescape Podcast. I'm your host Sean Carroll. And on this podcast we'll often talk about scientific advances, what we learn about the universe, but sometimes we also talk about philosophical questions of right and wrong, the morality and the ethics of how we should lead our lives. And these domains of science and ethics bump into each other. They're not separate. Things we're forced or nudged toward asking ethical questions about scientific and technological advances. We've learned something about the universe. We've developed the ability to do something with our scientific knowledge, but should we do that thing? Should it be legal to do that thing? And these are not just dorm room philosophy questions either. The government often has to make decisions about what should and should not be legal when science introduces new possibilities into our lives. So today we welcome an honest to goodness law professor onto the podcast for the first time, and we'll be talking about a wide range of questions dealing with these bioethical and legal issues. Alta Sharo is a professor of law and bioethics at the university of Wisconsin and Madison, and she's been active on both the scholarship and policy sides of the equation. She served as a bioethics advisor on the Obama administration transition team when Obama became president, and she's also worked as a senior policy advisor at the Food and Drug Administration. When she's not in that kind of policy role, she's a professor writing articles and various journals, and she's written extensively on things like stem cell research, gene editing, abortion, religious exemptions to providing medical care. Should you be able to not provide a certain medical service if your religious belief says it's not right? Cloning, organ donation, and many, many more. She's an extremely broad thinker in these issues, and we're going to talk about them. We're going to go through a whole list of interesting issues at the intersection of biology, ethics, and the government, the legal side of things. And we're going to also discuss what kind of comprehensive philosophical framework might allow us to address these questions in a systematic way. So let's go. Did you know Fast Growing Trees is the biggest online nursery in the US, with thousands of different plants and over 2 million happy customers. They have all the plants your yard needs, like fruit trees, privacy trees, flowering trees, shrubs, and so much more. Whatever plants you're interested in, Fast Growing Trees has you covered. Find the perfect fit for your climate and space. Fast Growing Trees makes it easy to get your dream yard. Order online and get your plants delivered directly to your door in just a few days without ever leaving home. Their alive and thrive guarantee ensures your plants arrive happy and healthy. This spring they have the best deals for your yard up to half off on select plants and other deals. And listeners to our show get 15% off their first purchase while using the code Mindscape at checkout. That's an additional 15% off at Fast Growing Trees.com using the code Mindscape at checkout. Fast Growing Trees.com code Mindscape. Now's the perfect time to plant. Use Mindscape to save today. FastWatt offers valid for limited time, terms and conditions may apply. All to share welcome to the Mindscape podcast. Please to be here. Now your official self designation is as a bioethasus, does that accurate? Yes and no. I am a professor of law and I work in the field of bioethics. I'm not sure anybody knows how to define a bioethicist. That was one of the many questions I was going to ask. So see your lawyer, all the law professor, the bioethics is the field of law that you specialize in. That's right. And how would you try to define bioethics? You're starting with one of the hardest questions instead of one of the easiest. So really, it's origins in recent history lie in the 1960s and 70s. In two converging areas of interest. One had to do with population growth and environmental conservation. And in fact, the phrase bioethics was actually coined in the context of sustainable population growth. You may remember from the 1960s the zero population growth movement and the concerns the malthusian future of overpopulation inevitably destroying the planet. And so the phrase was actually developed to discuss those dilemmas about obligations to the future. And at the same time in the 1960s and 70s we were seeing real advances in clinical medicine and we were beginning to see theologians particularly talking a lot about what should or should not be part of the medical toolkit. What are the things like genetic screening? Which had implications for how much control we take over our personal reproduction. So genetics screening in the sense of checking someone's DNA as a baby? Carrier screening through family pedigrees. Then in the 1970s, amniocentesis where you would test the amniotic fluid and look for chromosomal defects. And these things created a situation where people had to make choices about whether to have children or whether to keep that particular pregnancy. Whereas in previous generations this was up to luck, fate, God, however you understood these things. And so you saw these two things begin to converge about this notion of the ethical obligations that we should accept on behalf of others and also for what is considered to be a good life. By the 1970s, late 1970s we began to see the theologians, the secular philosophers, the physicians and later the lawyers because we push ourselves in everywhere. Beginning to have conferences and develop sets of principles over things like how we should govern research with human beings and how much respect individuals are entitled to. And that's really where the field kind of begins. I would say to define a bioeathesis is to define somebody who is trying to grapple with those questions. But today they might be sociologists or anthropologists. It could be empiricists who are looking at the patterns of behavior or could be theorists who are looking for a theory about why you should or should not do a particular thing. I mean it's obvious that what we can do today, biologically, in terms of reproduction and so forth, there are scary new prospects, interesting promising new prospects out there. So the questions are changing very rapidly. But I still guess I'm a little bit surprised that the field of bioeathics was not a thing before the 1960s. I mean we had some issues especially on the legal side, right, forever. So was it called something else? Or were there no specialists in that? I think that the patterns before were different and I think it's because with the exception perhaps of understanding the role of bacteria and disease and the development of antibiotics, medicine in particular was fairly powerless. If you look back at what medicine consisted of, a lot of it was really public health brought down to the individual level, eat, write, etc. So even these older theories about the different humors in the body, the wet, the dry, the hot, the cold, if you looked at it really closely often it wound up being eat a balanced diet. And some of it was bad. You know, cutting people open and draining their blood bad, right? Or cocaine, yeah. Yeah, right. And the lead in the makeup, there were some very big mistakes. But in many ways medicine was fairly impotent and then suddenly with the advent, particularly of antibiotics, it became powerful. And power is the point because with each successive decade in the 20th century we have gained more power over our own physical bodies, over our physical fate and over, therefore the fate of our offspring. Both knowledge and technology and technical manipulation has advanced incredibly fast. Now if you've ever gone to try and pick a cell phone plan, I think most people have had the same experience which is I'm so confused by the range of choices. Which one with a different set of pros and cons? So I can't even match them across some kind of Excel spreadsheet that I wind up not doing anything. And I stick with whatever I've got because it's good enough, right? With power comes choice and choices are difficult. Figuring out first which choice to make and why or should you even have the choice? And you get to the point where you almost are sorry you have the choice. And that's the reason why the power over our bodies and over our futures created this kind of crisis that led to an enormous global conversation around what we now call bioethics. Because every one of these new powers demanded us to ask, should we even have the power to choose and if we are going to choose which one should we choose? These are questions we've never had to ask before. And it's very obvious that the government would want to jump in and the lawyers with them, right? Is the government very reflective about these things? Is there an ongoing debate about whether the government should even be involved in what you might call typical bioethical questions? This is really a matter of almost political philosophy rather than moral philosophy which is what most people think about in the area of bioethics. And so you get to very different answers very quickly because different countries are based on different political philosophies. So there was something back in the 1970s and I believe it was from Newsweek, I have tried to, I've tried to find it again, I can't. That really captured the different kinds of political philosophies around the world and it went. In the United States everything is allowed until it's prohibited. Fair state. That's fair, yes. In East Germany everything is prohibited until it's allowed. And that was a very stark way of having the contrast. Of course they continued by saying in Russia everything is prohibited, especially if it's allowed. And in Italy everything's allowed, especially if it's prohibited, right? And there was some truth to those two. So it did capture in a weird way very well these very distinct political cultures. That drives government action more than the actual question. Take human cloning which became an issue in 1998 with Dolly the Clone sheep. There was a tremendous interest in the media. There was the unfortunate revelation of how poor our education system is with regard to biology because people continue to imagine that cloning meant zeroxing yourself and having an adult who's identical to you. I know, do everything I want you to do, right? And there was the misunderstanding that you could clone personality as opposed to body type. So as to whom they would not want to clone they'd say Saddam Hussein who was the dictator of choice at the time and whom would you want to clone and they would say Mother Teresa. As if you were going to get a selfless none as opposed to somebody who was prone to scoliosis in a old age, right? So with cloning you might think that there would be a kind of common analysis that would lead to the same conclusion about whether it should be permitted or not by the government. Use it the role of the government to make the choice and what choice should it make. In fact that's not at all what happened. In fact what happened is that with regard to cloning we saw again the same reflection of governmental approaches. So in many European countries where there is much more of a comprehensive governmental regulation and where the existence of a public healthcare scheme means that you can regulate it simply by saying we will or will not offer certain services you had a government that could actually intervene and say this is not the only choice right. I mean the government did everything so if something's going to be done the government's going to be involved. No they're democracies but the government had that power whereas in the United States right instead of having a general prohibition we had a general absence of law. So we're a handful of states that pass statutes to criminalize cloning often over broad because they criminalized even basic lab research at the same time. Used to give a talk called from stem cells to jail cells about the scientists in these states but at the federal level the Congress talked about it there was some you know murmurings nothing ever happened and it's partly because we don't have the easy avenue in to regulate so that's number one we can't do it through just spending decisions and second we have a constitution that lays out individual rights against government action in particular the government may not abridge my right to free speech or to assembly and we also have this notion of a right to big certain kinds of procreative decisions free of government at least free of government prohibitions not free of government regulation and that creates a counterweight to government action that didn't exist in many of these European countries so we wound up with different policies that didn't reflect our views about cloning everybody might have thought it's a terrible idea or a good idea it doesn't matter what it reflected was the power of the governments. And already it's we're into not only political philosophy but constitutional law in the sense that nowhere in the constitution does it talk about reproductive rights or rights to have sex in certain ways and so forth but there's the idea that there's this implied set of rights given by the bill of rights you know not necessarily that it enumerated everything that we have but it gives you the impression that the government should keep its hands off of certain things and this becomes contentious once you actually get into the court. You know one fairly non-contentious area of constitutionally protected rights is the right to marry now we're talking just about heterosexuals right but yeah there's nowhere in the constitution that says you have a right to marry and yet it became the basis for striking down the laws in Virginia that criminalized marriage between people who are deemed white and people who are deemed black right this is the case of loving versus Virginia one of the best name cases ever that was a great one yes great name so is the right to marry the right to marry and now where did the where did the court get it because the courts over the years have come to recognize that at the time the constitution was written there were two things that were in mind number one something seems so obvious you didn't have to say them like getting married yeah should be able to get married everybody gets married um and it goes along with this philosophy that in the United States if there's not a specific rule against it right then you're allowed to do it but but to have something as a constitutionally protected right is a little different than that because it means that you're protected more rigorously you know men at most this is a digression what we'll get back to the con law most of our liberties are ordinary liberties my freedom to drive is an ordinary liberty and the government can regulate that or even prohibit many of these things so long as they have a rational basis for it but when you have something that is specifically guaranteed in the constitution whether in the bill of rights or in one of these pronouncements from the court as a fundamental right then the government can't stop you from doing it unless it can show first of all a compelling need not just a rational basis a compelling need that cannot be answered by anything that is less onerous uh so that is a very very strict standard that is applied so with the right to marry it raised it from being a state that says well we have a rational basis that um intermarriage is disruptive to the social order and uh it puts the kids at a disadvantage might have passed muster but if it's a fundamental right then um now the the state has to show that there's a compelling need to stop these people from marrying and that there's a disruption to society that can't be handled any other way and they couldn't meet that kind of balance now that right to marry is nowhere in the constitution partly because at the origins nobody thought you had to say it the second part of it is if you look at what's in the original bill of rights these are things that the English actually were trying to stop like assembly and speech or things that they were doing like quartering soldiers in our homes so of course this is what was on their minds and the right to have sex wasn't on their minds right so they never contemplated that that would need to be regulated anyway actually it was heavily regulated but by the churches okay and it was regulated at the state level not at the federal level because each state tended to have a different religious makeup um but the point simply is that over the years the courts have recognized that the constitution is not a complete document and it's a starting point and they have tried to fill in the gaps over time and one of those gaps was the right to privacy right where privacy is a variety of things that are not just about being able to keep information to yourself but also about being able to have a sphere of action that is free from government intrusion and a sphere of personal into personal relationships that is free of government introduction and on that basis we got things like the decision that Connecticut is not allowed to criminalize the sale and use of contraceptives for married couples because the marital relationship is an intimate one that should be beyond the government's intrusion and then it moved beyond that to a right to privacy about the control of your own body when single women were now protected by a fundamental right to have access to contraception so the government couldn't criminalize it for single women no longer it's no longer about marital intimacy now it's about controlling your body and we really do see that playing out through the rovers' way decision about controlling my body during pregnancy and now we see the extension of those things in other areas like the right to marry being extended beyond the heterosexual couple. This episode of Mindscape is sponsored by Better Health. When it comes to relationships we often hear about the red flags we should avoid but what if we focus more on looking for the green flags and partners. If you're not sure what green flags look like therapy could help you identify them. Actively practice them in your relationships and embody the green flag energy yourself whether you're dating married building a friendship or just working on yourself it's time to form relationships that love you back. One of the great things about therapy is by looking inside yourself you can both learn to take those warning signs seriously but also learn to be open to new experiences and new things to know when something might be worth pursuing. Better Health is a fully online service that makes therapy affordable and convenient serving over 5 million people worldwide. You can easily switch therapists anytime at no extra cost so discover your relationship green flags with Better Health visit betterhelp.com slash Mindscape today to get 10% off your first month that's Better Help H-E-L-P dot com slash Mindscape. A lot of us start the new year saying that we will learn a new language but it's hard to actually commit to it. Bappel makes it easy to learn one in less time than you think. Bappel's quick 10 minute lessons handcrafted by over 200 language experts get you to begin speaking your new language in three weeks or whatever pace you choose and because conversing is the key to really understanding each other in new languages Bappel is designed using practical real world conversations. What I love about Babel is you can either dive in deeply and truly get fluent or you can just master some of the basics before going on a trip. So let's get more of you talking in a new language. Babel is gifting our listeners 60% off subscriptions at Babel.com slash Mindscape. Get up to 60% off at Babel.com slash Mindscape spelled b-a-b-b-e-l dot com slash Mindscape. That's Babel dot com slash Mindscape rules and restrictions may apply. Well I think this is just a crucial point in terms of understanding how the legal system works here in the United States that the courts do have this idea that there really are rights that can be used to strike down legislation even though these rights were not explicitly written into the Bill of Rights or the Constitution that there is this feeling that we should air on the side of letting people do things even if those are not delineated item by item. I think that's now become a matter of contention interestingly enough right because they're they're grew up starting with the Federalist Society a couple of decades ago. This kind of movement within legal thinking that the notion of a living Constitution in which courts over time are constantly trying to fill in these these gaps is one that doesn't have any limits that you have no control over what the courts will do and therefore we need to put the breaks on the courts and here's the way we can here's the way we'll do it. We'll say they're only allowed to use things that were actually written down in 1789. Right so originalism roughly speaking. Right now I have to say that many of these people who called themselves originalists including Justice Anthony Scalia one of the most famous ones failed completely to be originalists when it led to an outcome they didn't like. So there was a lot of inconsistent application but nonetheless that was the that was the kind of clarion call. Well and it sounds reasonable when you put it that way right like we we need to protect against the the expansion being completely unchecked of the powers of the courts do whatever they want. And the powers of the Congress so in the 1930s when the debate was about a related set of concerns called substantive due process again not about whether the procedure you use as fair but about whether this is an area the government should be mixed into it all we had the Congress passing laws on for example worker wages and health protections which were struck down by the courts as being beyond the purview of the government. Right and so this led to a crisis again about how do we rein in the courts from in this case undermining congressional enactments so you know from different areas you get this kind of C-song because it is a country with a kind of tripod of key institutions that are all checking one another so it's natural that they go through a wobble. Right and you mentioned the right to privacy and how this gets implemented and obviously one big area of clashing is between individual consciences especially as they reflect religious beliefs versus the demands of the state to do one thing or another. There's many different areas in which these clashes happen do you have a general theory of how we should adjudicate it when the personal religious beliefs of a citizen ask that citizen or demand that that citizen do something of the government is not happy with. I do but it's not uncontested right there are people that disagree completely. I think there's two levels on which you address this one is the very abstract level of what is the role of religion in the public life and the shared public life of people in the United States that's about whether or not I should see the public square metaphorically speaking as one where everybody expresses their religious views even if it adversely affects somebody else my religious view says that black people and white people should marry and so I don't want to give an interracial couple housing in my building. So the word express their religious views is a lot of kinds of expression not just talking. That's right or wearing a symbol there is also the because the argument there would be I'm living my beliefs by rejecting them for housing because if I let them live in my apartment building I'm essentially blessing their union or even tolerating their union is considered to be a violation of my beliefs that's so that one view is that this cacophony of voices in the public square operates to the benefit of us all because we all get to do what we want even if it hurts somebody else and we all have to figure out how to protect ourselves against somebody else. The completely conflicting view is that the public square should be one that is absolutely a vacuum when it comes to religion and you want to express your religion fine go do it in your own living room go do it in your own church mosque synagogue temple whatever but when you come into the public square you must abide by a set of rules that are going to be the same for everybody and nobody's allowed to feel like they are somehow an oddity or a minority or anything like that. So that's one set of competing theories I had a deal with this because it's a fundamental problem more narrowly in bioethics we have seen it really come to the fore when it comes to medical professionals and certain medical procedures in particular contraception and abortion to a somewhat lesser extent some of the issues around how it is that we help people die peacefully. Oh okay yeah that's an important one. And here I think that we shouldn't be looking at it as a contest between religious expression and secular equality I don't think that's the right way to look at it. I think we need to ask about power dynamics and what it means to be a professional because as a physician or as a pharmacist you basically are taking an oath to serve your patient and you have more power than the patient. In fact for doctors and pharmacists there's a monopoly power. I'm not a physician. I'm not allowed to prescribe contraception or perform an abortion. Only a physician can do it and because it's a closed community the community has an obligation to make all legal services available. Otherwise we would have the public utilities the electric company could say we're not going to provide electricity to plant parented or to the KKK headquarters and you don't want that they just give out electricity right. And so I would say we need to look at power dynamics. So you know in the area of conscience I would find it more defensible. If somebody who's a checkout clerk at a supermarket said I am a devoted vegetarian and vegan I don't believe in the use of animals for foods so I'm simply not going to ring up any animal products. Right. And I don't want to be fired from my job. And they don't want to be fired. That's the that's the point with the physicians too. They don't want to be fired. They don't want to be denied promotion. They don't want to be vulnerable to malpractice suits. And here the clerk doesn't want to be fired. And I actually think that's more defensible because it's much easier for somebody to go to the other line or for the company to make sure that they've actually hired a lot of people most of whom will do animal products. And there's really not the same kind of power to financial that there is between a doctor and a patient. So you think there's a social interest in these cases where we as a society have given so much power to certain groups of people part of the contract is okay then you have to do the things that society wants you to do. That's exactly right. And if you really don't want to take on those obligations you should look for a different kind of vocation where you don't find yourself in this kind of of conflict. In other words should your religious restrictions that create moral crises for you be your problem or should they be everybody else's problem. Right because we do want on the other hand to let people have freedom of expression in these sort of narrow sense of expression you know worship in whatever way they want. It gets into not just professionals like doctors or pharmacists but families right parents raising children who don't want to give certain kinds of medical care to their kids and you might think that doctors should be obligated to do the appropriate procedures and yet also believe the parents shouldn't be obligated to have those procedures done to their kids. So you've now touched on two more topics that are central to the way we discuss things in bioethics. You've you've touched on the notion of individual autonomy and capacity to give consent very closely linked. In the case you're describing of parents and medical care we would in bioethics probably find ourselves talking about the parents having the right as autonomous competent individuals to make decisions about their own health care or lack thereof and that when their children come of age their children would have the same privilege. Right. But that while the children are young and therefore really not able to make the decisions for themselves now the question is do parents have unlimited discretion to make decisions for their children or is there some point where we stop and we say you know now it's the society that makes the decision and of course we take children away from abusive parents right and we don't argue that parents have a right as autonomous beings to beat their children now with people who engage in things like faith healing there's no evil motive like there is with beating your child but the result can be the same which is that the child is gravely injured or dies and that is the point at which the state steps in so most places have some kind of statute that tries to lay out a borderline where the parental decisions are now putting the child at high risk of having permanent or serious injury or could lead to death at which point the state takes over. Yeah I think this this gets right into I think that we're fuzzy sometimes we fool ourselves about the relationship between morality and religion and law right like we we tell ourselves well you can have your personal religious beliefs but there is the law that everyone obeys in the country and they should be able to get along but of course we use our personal notions of morality to guide what laws we think there should be right like murder is bad that feeds into passing a law that murdering is bad and that goes back to complete the cycle into the fundamental nature of living in a pluralist society right like we again we pretend that we can all get along even though our fundamental values might be very very different and it seems necessary to me that the ability to obey your own personal fundamental values can only go so far if you do live in a pluralistic society. This your absolute right is one of the great challenges of a country that talks about being a melting pot in fact I think it's more like a stew. Now melting pot suggests that everybody winds up the same right that is not what is happening as somebody who grew up in New York in an intensely ethnic burrow with a little bit of this and a little bit of that I can tell you that it was a stew the Italians the Irish the Eastern European Jews the South Asian Indians every one of those households had a distinctly different culture and yet when we all played together in the street there did there was a kind of common soup that all these little chunks of culture were sitting in and flavored all of them I mean honest goodness I grew up not being completely sure whether a lasagna was a Jewish food or not and that's because of the world that I lived in so if you're going to live in a stew you have to acknowledge there are going to be these differences right so how do you decide what's going to be the common soup the common flavoring that tingees everything you know there are philosophers like John Rawls with whom I understand you had a chance to to study who worked really hard to try and articulate some methodology by which we could arrive at rules for law or governing or common morality and a key thing that he talked about was the idea of so-called publicly accessible reasoning that is you may conclude that murder is wrong because you are a devotee of the ten commandments and the ten commandments say that shot not kill I may come from a totally different culture I don't look to the ten commandments but I have a culture that lives by a golden rule I don't want to be murdered therefore it's wrong for me to murder therefore I conclude murder is wrong and we now converge on a common moral rule and even a legal rule that murder is wrong because we can get there through some common sets of reasoning now if we're if where you're coming from is one where there's no way for you to explain it except by reference to your particular religion there's no non faith-based argument at all that could work for somebody who doesn't share your faith then we have a problem and that would not comfortably fit in our laws because it really is a rule that only makes sense to a subset of the population with a spark cash plus card from capital one you earn unlimited two percent cash back on every purchase plus no preset spinning limit helps your purchasing power adapt to meet your business needs Jorge Gavirio founder of Massienda reinvest his two percent cash back to help grow the business with new products what could the spark cash plus card from capital one do for your business capital one what's in your wallet find out more at capital one dot com slash spark cash plus terms conditions apply well that's interesting because I think that where you ended up was slightly different than where I thought you were going I thought what you were going to say was that it kind of doesn't matter what your justification is if your the practical implementation of that justification agrees from lots of different people fair enough and I did I kind of slid there and I think that both of those are true actually if we can both come up with the same solution from different premises that works if you can step back from your let's say religious premise that this is ordained by a deity and yet you could explain to me who doesn't share your view about that deity why it is nonetheless a bad thing and persuade me then that would be the publicly accessible reasoning the reasoning that all people could somehow get on board with without having to accept where you're coming from in terms of religious faith and both of those things would lead to laws that are going to be manageable across the population so that sounds great to me personally now there will always be exceptions right I mean we can imagine families where in their view they have this religion thing figured out they know what God says and God says certain specific things and the fact that a child might not get a certain medicine and therefore will die is ultimately a good thing because the child will go to heaven as opposed to if we did give them medicine then they would not go to heaven and that's that sounds like an irreconcilable difference with the public demand I think there are those moments I do think there are those moments yes and I think that we I think we accommodate them so long as it is an autonomous rational competent adult who's making the decision for him or herself where we change the rules is not on where your irreconcilable difference affects you and you alone it's where it affects somebody else who in no way is in a position to have welcomed this kind of decision for themselves and that's why we make the distinction and that so the flip side of that at the end of life would lead you to say that people should be able to decide what their end of life is I mean we're very touchy right now right we're in a I've talked about this on other podcasts we're undergoing this transition when it's becoming more common to have death with dignity laws or something like that where people don't need to go through all the possible medical procedures to keep themselves alive or even can essentially commit suicide can essentially end their own lives and this is not something that I think a lot of people are yet happy with but it would go in the direction of that give the person the grown-up autonomy over their own decision and indeed if you look at going back to the Supreme Court you look at the Supreme Court decisions you see that the decisions around things like contraception and abortion included language about liberty that would comfortably encompass the right of the individual to be free of a state law that criminalizes the effort to take a drug that's going to allow you to die comfortably instead of having to starve yourself to death or go for go comforting medical procedures now we have buried in our common law which is not constitutional it's the kind of ordinary daily law that we have going all the way back to England and is handled through things like civil litigation like torts you know pain we have there this notion of bodily autonomy that's why if I touch you in a way that is harmful or offensive without your permission it's a battery and I have to pay you damages if you sue me and on that basis people have long been entitled since the 1970s it's been clear to refuse medical treatments even medical treatments that are needed to keep them alive the death with dignity argument was about whether that also should include not just the right to reject a physical intrusion but to take upon yourself something that will help you die more peacefully and that's active something active and that's where the debate about liberty really went and I've always found it intriguing that the court has not really faced it the way they could and really should because if we're going to talk about a liberty that encompasses your psychological and emotional state you're talking about things like contraception for men their bodies are not implicated they're not the ones going to get pregnant so if you think there's a right for men to be able to obtain contraception without the state throwing them in jail you're saying that right have a men have a right to control their futures in this very important way that would suggest the same thing would be true at the end of life but if I may all of these things go back to the earlier point about power because whether it's modes of conception with gamy donation and surrogate mothers and IVF or it's death with dignity and use of drugs part of the argument simply has been whether human beings ought to have any control over these very fundamental moments in the human existence or whether that ought to be somehow beyond our control and in the hands of and fill in how you think of it your deity, fate, nature, something else right so it sounds like the distinction that you're trying to emphasize here is that we can allow for autonomy of persons for their own well-being but as soon as they are put in a position of power over others they have to obey the rules and you'll notice by the way that in the public health world we are constantly running up against the libertarian objection to public health law so if it's about me having to not pollute the water that you drink we understand that but if it's about why I can't drink raw milk which has a objectively higher risk of giving me a really ugly condition which will have me vomiting and with diarrhea for days any laws that prohibit the sale of that to me are viewed as nanny state right because they are impinging on my autonomy right so we see the same debate playing out over and over and over in the United States I'm kind of on board with the idea that if someone really wants to poison themselves by drinking raw milk they should be able to do that and actually the way I said it is a little bit misleading because there is no law that says you can't drink raw milk the laws are about prohibiting the sale of it but that's kind of and that's a little different that's about whether we can regulate the economy right and it's exactly why in most states where there is some kind of prohibition on the sale of raw milk there's also an exception for the farmers on family for guests on the farm there are people who then bought shares of a farm so that they could be considered the farmer as well in order to be able to have access but it is about trying to make sure that you don't allow a profit to be made off of the distribution of a product that is manifestly high risk you must know just this week in California there was a controversy about cancer warnings on coffee yes you know California loves putting warnings on things and saying they're going to kill you and I think that the breaking point was when it seemed as if you would have to put a warning on coffee that you got at Starbucks saying this might give you cancer and finally people said no no no this is going too far I mean it's already very clear to anyone who lives in California that there's a sign in every establishment saying things you're going to give you cancer and we ignore the sign it becomes useless it becomes counterproductive well yes so there's certainly the over warning problem and all the all the warnings then become a mush there's a second problem though and that is the failure to make a distinction between hazard and risk many substances are a hazard coffee this week also the news glyphosate which is a weed killer that's used in in round-up reddy crops is present in Cheerios and so the headlines were all about how your children are being poisoned in their Cheerios but in fact I think Cheerios are known to be unhealthy for other reasons but hazard is something that has the capacity to cause some kind of harm but the risk is the hazard and the probabilities and so you have to ask what is the exposure that is needed and in the case of coffee and frankly in the case of glyphosate as well the exposure has to be I don't know what the number is many many many many many orders of magnitude greater than anybody consumes in order to actually have this possible effect remember this is only probabilistic that it might in some percentage of situations cause a cancer so this is part of the problem of the over warning if you only talk about the fact that something is capable of causing cancer you know most of the foods we eat would wind up being on that list because if consumed in sufficiently enormous amounts you could distort the human body in ways that then in turn will cause some failure of your immune system or something that eventually that leads to cancer so California and many the other groups that want warnings for anything that ever showed that it could cause cancer in grossly overfed caged rats me to actually add in some mathematics exactly no you're speaking our language here a whole theme of my various podcast episodes is calculating probabilities updating them being good Bayesian evaluating things rationally and trying to make decisions and it's not very automatic right the human brain doesn't work that way we see oh there's something that could be cancerous in here that therefore let's not eat it and that actually it takes me back to what I wanted to pick up a previous thread we talked about how religious beliefs could lead people to object to certain governmental mandates but isn't a lot of that really coming down to just squickiness isn't a lot of what drives people to object to very cutting edge bio procedures whether it's cloning or stem cell research or whatever just the fact that doesn't seem natural to us it seems somehow icky and therefore let's air on the side of not doing it am I oversimplifying people I disagree with or no in fact that that is not everybody who opposes these things there are very distinct different approaches to the objectors to many emerging technologies some are very careful to be talking about downstream consequences and their lack of confidence in institutions or human nature to avoid the extreme unwanted application of these things for others it really is a religious view about the role of humans vis-a-vis a deity and where we should stop having control period but yes there's another group for whom it's unfamiliar it seems to have a lot of power and I've heard that it might be exploited in ways that are unpleasant right so I've heard that you know I've heard that your coffee may cause cancer right so they've heard the hazard but they haven't actually taken in the information about the risk factor right and and in general it's unfamiliar and unfamiliar often leads to what one very prominent bioethicist coming from a fairly conservative end of the field called the wisdom of repugnance so they were trying to elevate this visceral reaction into a principled approach that if people share in a widespread shared repugnance of something it's telling us something deep even if we can't quite articulate it yeah it's not crazy actually you put it there it's not crazy at all but it can also send us off in terrible directions because it was the repugnance with intermarriage between people of different races that led to the anti-misseginational I was the repugnance of people who are darker that led white people to enslaved dark people there are many examples in which this repugnance has been really catastrophically damaging to say nothing of what it did for generations and generations of people who are homosexual in their orientation and transgender people now and transgender people now which is a good example of something which is unfamiliar and I think you're right other people say it's icky my only concern is I really want us to get a different pronoun I don't want to use the word they I really don't know I'm I'm a I'm just my seventh grade English teacher is still within me they it's a plural it is not a singular grade English teacher should read Shakespeare and Jane often they use singular pronoun all the time yeah but I forgive them because I love their writing but but you're right that there is this kind of Iqfactor or actually I coined the phrase yuck factor same concept yeah I think that that is one that is manageable because with familiarity people who are in the yuck factor camp now begin to split into supporters or opponents with a more carefully thought out basis for the opposition it might be religious it might be consequentialist I think that it's going to lead to something bad but the the kind of undifferentiated yuck is now being differentiated into reasoned conversation right so that that makes perfect sense to sort of it's not that well we think it's yucky therefore it's probably wrong but we think it's yucky therefore let's think about it right let's think why exactly do we think it's yucky is it coming from some principled moral stance or is it just our reptilian brain has never seen this before and is reacting badly exactly and so things like test two babies or artificial insemination those were like hot topics of debate a few years ago and now I don't think that there's that much debate left we're kind of on board with that right we are in fact in vitro fertilization which you referred to as test two babies and I'll resist that just because well I use this to give since they've been able to say it continues to give this image of babies in test tubes we was like um in vitro fertilization has now become something that is so familiar because so many people have used it that it actually began to impinge on the abortion debate you know originally IVF was controversial not only because it was unnatural but because for the very first time in human history the human embryo was outside the human body and was subject to manipulation it raised again this power the power to discard the power to manipulate the power to experiment all kinds of things we never had to ask ourselves before are we allowed to do that should we do that and those were influenced in large part also by the abortion debates but now we've had state after state that has tried to pass what's called a personhood amendment for people who oppose abortion rights there've been an effort an effort to pass either a constitutional or legislative provision that says from the first moment of fertilization this entity has the same legal status as a live one baby which would have incredible number of implications for how the embryo has to be managed and protected and guarded and those personhood members have failed every single time even in highly conservative states with a majority of the population opposed to most abortions why because it would have the effect of basically criminalizing in vitro fertilization and there are just too many grandmothers who wouldn't be grandmothers if their daughters hadn't had a chance to use ideas you just realized that your business needed to hire someone yesterday how can you find amazing candidates fast easy just use indeed because when it comes to hiring indeed is all you need indeed sponsor jobs will help you stand out and hire fast with sponsor jobs your post jumps to the top of the page for your relevant candidates so you can reach the people you want faster and it makes a huge difference according to indeed data sponsor jobs posted directly on indeed have 45% more applications than non sponsor jobs there's no need to wait any longer speed up your hiring right now with indeed and listeners of mindscape will get a $75 sponsor job credit to get your jobs more visibility at indeed dot com slash mindscape just go to indeed dot com slash mindscape right now and support our show by saying you heard about indeed on this podcast indeed dot com slash mindscape terms and conditions apply hiring indeed is all you need others arguing against you you're not going to win but isn't it also true that uh over get fertilized all the time but don't get implanted sure and so that now every woman is a murderer right well intent is an important concept both in morality and in law okay right so yes i think that i think that that observation is really important for those who pin everything on the moral status intrinsically due to its own biology of the fertilized egg with the early embryo right to observe that in fact a vast majority of times uh an egg will be fertilized but it's fertilized at the wrong time of the month and so the uterine wall is not ready to capture it and it passes out of our body we don't even realize that we had a fertilized egg within us because it's an ordinary men's cycle um and that even for those that take there are a regrettably high number of miscarriages whose causes by the way are largely unknown because of the restrictions we've placed on ourselves because we can't do research because it's icky because of the restrictions on doing research among other things with human embryos at a more advanced stage um so if your whole point is that it's about the biology is what yields moral significance then the fact that most fertilized eggs you know have this high risk of not ever becoming a developed fetus or baby seems relevant but i think that even though we talk about abortion in terms of the sanctity of the fetus and the right to life of the fetus that buried within it is actually an entirely different thing which is all about intent because the woman who loses the fertilized egg through no action of her own is innocent right but the woman who makes the decision to do exactly the same thing which is lose that fertilized egg is now evil Jezebel because she intentionally thwarted this ongoing process which might or might not result in a human and it's that intent that i think is really important here even people who oppose abortion rights generally often make exceptions for rape or incest because those are presumed to be involuntary experiences for the woman or the girl in the case of incest so in those cases she's innocent right and therefore the abortion is okay even though the sanctity of the fetus ought to be exactly the same if you went all the way then it should have better yeah within the within the movement of people who oppose legal abortion rights there is a kind of split there is a fracture at that point between those for whom it really is about the sanctity of the biological life and where biology determines your philosophical status and those for whom it really is not about the fetus they think it is but it's actually about their evaluation of this woman who went ahead and had sex but doesn't want to accept the risk of pregnancy as a fill in the blank a punishment a deterrent or as her natural fate as a you as a woman in terms of the way they think about men and women yeah i mean i think that religious traditions often fall into this trap but even just people were generally like to judge other people as being bad in past laws not letting them do it right it's it's very very human kind of thing something we need to watch out for in this fear there is a phrase that you hear tossed around all the time there ought to be a law right and uh i don't like it it's really difficult in public conversation it's even difficult in my classroom with law students to make people step back and say okay is it possible i think this is wrong but i don't think that it should be the business of the government to determine whether you can do it right it should be social pressure it should be religious teachings it should be the you know advice of your parents regardless of religion and both liberals and conservatives sometimes are more willing than they should be to pass laws that help their own personal this is absolutely true it is so you're absolutely right about it being so instinctive that if we think something is just terribly wrong that we want some power to stop it and the government and laws and the enforcement power of the government seem like a great way to do that it's certainly more direct um but in fact there is a world of difference between the things that are right and wrong and the things that should be legal and illegal there we make laws about things that are not wrong they're actually fine but they have consequences that we can't accept um you know the knowledge that i have about a particular stock because i'm a stock because i'm on the board of directors might make it possible for me to buy and sell and make money now making money is not wrong and using information is exactly what we celebrate except it's an unfair advantage and it undermines the integrity of the market and the confidence of the non-insiders and so we say that's illegal it's called insider trading now the law does not necessarily correspond point by point with anybody's morality and nor should it right so i had a podcast conversation a couple episodes ago with Karl Zimmer the science writer and we got into the crazy world of gene editing and CRISPR and the future of designer babies so i'm sure i mean i think it's pretty obvious that there are bioethical and legal concerns coming up here what are the issues that you worry about the most in this frontier well let's first make some distinctions in the application areas because they raise very different concerns um for those that are unfamiliar with these things this is another form of genetic engineering so it's a continuation of something we've been doing for a while but it is much more precise much more efficient and interestingly can be done by people with less training in facilities that are less sophisticated so the way youtube decentralized movie making and really transformed a lot of things this decentralizes a key area of science in a very interesting way the democratization of our knowledge about our own gene and the democratization of what we can do with them right instead of having to go to a trained physician who has a sophisticated lab so once again we're talking about power and this gives more power to more people to do more things with more power to predict whether it will work right okay so let's talk about two very distinct areas of application one is what you'd call somatic and the other is germline so germline means eggs and sperm and embryos where if you make a change it's not only going to affect the person who comes from that embryo or those eggs and sperm but their own eggs and sperm will have been affected so the grandchildren great grandchildren all the way down the line will also be affected until that particular trait mutates the way things do in one way they're called germline because the germ cells are the gametes are the eggs and sperm I think of germs is you know causing diseases but yeah no but think about germination in the world of plants right good thank thank you that helps me connect the truth there and so that's that's one area of application that's the far more controversial one the less controversial one is what we call somatic it's where you change cells any kind of cell except the eggs sperm and embryo so if you change some of the cells let's say in my liver I will feel the effects but my children will not okay because it doesn't affect my eggs that is what we call somatic editing and so the advantage there is it only affects the person who's being treated so now we can restrict ourselves we're only going to talk about people who are competent and adult or if it's a child somebody for whom we're doing this for their own welfare like preventing or curing a disease so most people are going to be on board with that most people will absolutely be on board with that and in fact they already are because we're already doing gene therapy to try and deal with cancer and blindness but we have been largely unsuccessful because it's just such an an arduous process and this may be the ticket to making it a less arduous process the one area of controversy that does develop even in somatic editing is in changes that don't cure or prevent a disease but altering already existing trait that we would deem healthy and within the normal range of human capacity so take somebody whose muscle strength is average and if you could edit so that their muscles now became unusually strong that raises controversies because of the perception that somehow this creates an unfair advantage and of course we do that all the time through other mechanisms right whether it's nutrition or it's training so it gets into another entire debate about meritocracy and earning things versus having them given to you and fate because some people are simply born lucky to have stronger muscles right yeah so why are they more deserving than somebody who uses editing to get to the same point or someone who's born wealthier can afford a jet to get where they want to go so that is the so-called enhancement debate right and in many ways it's more about this concern about society and equity than it is about the actual phenomenon of the transformation up to the point where you're talking about a transformation that takes you beyond known human capacities a transformation that gave you something profoundly different allowed you to see into the infrared or the ultraviolet which normal human beings can't do that raises different questions about whether or not we want the power to actually fundamentally alter the parameters of what we call homo sapien so do we that's a very long conversation let me at least address germline first okay the conversation around germline circles back again and again to this issue of human reproduction because it is raising fears about design or babies this again is biologically untenable it's very hard to control traits there are very very few things that are going to be controlled by a single trait things are multi-genic yeah they're multi-genic so it's many genes and the genes are operating against a particular context and background and furthermore we are hardly ever discussing something called epigenetics which is what affects how strongly the genes operate right it's like you and I could play the same keys on the piano but I'm using the pedals differently it sounds very different right the epigenetics is the pedals right and now we're beginning to learn more and more about the effect of the microbiome this incredible number of critters that live inside of us that also determine how our genes express so biologically we can't design our kids we really can't but shouldn't we as philosophers and biologists still ask the question I mean it seems like a technology question whether or not we can or can't and I'm kind of agnostic I don't really know but maybe we're wrong maybe we can maybe you know 50 years from now we figured out how to make everyone look like Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie and is it bad if people want to do that is there is there a principle or is that just a yuck based stance well it's hard to answer something that seems so patently impossible with an answer that is sober and so I will tell you first that I'd rather look like Beyonce I'm outdated in my references you really are that said we make choices all the time to try to influence the probabilities there is something called the sort of mating right we tend to marry or otherwise have you know children with people from a limited range and so that changes the probabilities that our children are going to be taller short uh fatter skinny um brown hairter or or blonde because of this assortive mating right uh and it happens for all kinds of reasons I mean even within a religious group right in my neighborhood which was mostly as I said this this mix of people but in my little part of the neighborhood that was Eastern European Jewish the men were short they were just short my father was five foot three um and if I married within my group my kids were going to be short you know and so that's in a sense designing right if or or I could choose to deliberately try to find a guy's tall because I wanted my children to be taller um you know we do this all the time so part of it is my resistance the idea there's something fundamentally alien about trying to change the probabilities of the outcomes because with genetics it's all about probabilities anyway part of my concern here is that I do think that there are many people whose concerns are just very much consequentialist that is we think that we're likely to make a mistake and the kids going to be hurt by it that's a risk assessment problem that we face all the time and I completely am on board with that we shouldn't be doing this until we have an incredibly high degree of confidence that the outcome is going to be to the benefit of the child and any subsequent descendants which is why germline editing to prevent a devastating often lethal disease seems to me to be a far easier case to make right it expands the child's capacities in a way that guarantees the open future right that uh philosophers like Joel Feinberg have talked about is a kind of moral obligation preventing a disease that one's a closer call but I still think very easy to justify and every time we take a vaccine we are enhancing our cells because we're enhancing our resistance to disease so this is a form of enhancement I think makes sense right again with attention to whether or not there's an unexpected consequence by protecting us against this disease do we suddenly make ourselves vulnerable to a different one that's a very tricky problem with multi-generational effects because you really need to have a multi-generational experiment to see how it plays out and that alone may make it impossible to satisfy these conditions for making it an ethically defensible thing to do others I think though have a have an objection that I think goes more deeply to the notion that we shouldn't tinker with the human species and here I get concerned that people have an outdated notion of what it means to say something is a species okay I think that there is unfortunately in high school education still this uh way of teaching biology and evolutionary theory as if it's all vertical genes are only transmitted vertically and that they go from the past to the future through the parents to the child to the child and that the species is a closed universe of genetic traits when in fact evolution is not a tree with branches and twigs ever separating further out it's this chaotic mishmash of things that are constantly crossing back and forth we have genes within us that come from wildly different species that we've incorporated into our very cells right uh so there's a horizontal movement of genes that blurs the notion of species line and so I think that there is an overly romanticized notion of what it means to be a homo sapien that leads people to then get concerned that we are somehow um undermining the integrity of the concept of homo sapien I don't think you can because I don't think that concept is as pure as people imagine yeah I think that philosophically that's exactly right that we uh shouldn't we should know better by now than to treat things like species or even individuals as you know out there in the universe in viable categories that we can't break down you know they're things that are invented their concepts that are constructed by human beings to help us understand the world a little bit better and as technology evolves then naturally we're going to hit the boundaries of where those ideas become useful I personally think and I said this to Carl also I personally think that fretting about where gene editing is going to go in terms of human enhancement is kind of a waste of time because I think it's going to happen I think that I don't know how well it will happen I don't know you know how effective it will be because like you say there's a huge amount of non-linearity in things we don't understand but I think that people are going to try I think that people are going to try to you know have babies that are 10 feet tall so they can be basketball players and you know maybe so but I think that it's far more likely people are going to try to enhance themselves in ways because it's much more direct if what you want is to be 10 feet tall then actually take a live born child and inject that child with something to try to make the child grow taller which parents do by the way now when they give their kids human growth hormone even though the kids are not human growth hormone deficient right kids are simply at the far lower end of the growth curve and the parents recognize that socially particularly for boys because of the nature of our society that can be very disadvantages in the marriage market even in the employment market so much more efficient if you want to make your kid have a different capacity do it when the kids been born doing it at the embryonic stage is like taking a pellet gun and shooting it out into a park land hoping that something lands in the right place and that it doesn't have all these untoward effects because of other places that had an effect once the kid is born or once you do it to yourself when you're in adult you can be far more targeted and far more confident you'll get what you want okay that's good to keep in mind as we go as we go forward what about we always think about starting with human beings and making them better making them smarter and faster and stronger so what about starting with animals and making them smarter do we need as biopathesis to worry about who counts as a human being what if we take a chimpanzee and make them really smart or dolphin you don't even have to make them you don't even have to change any of their current capacities to face that problem yeah in fact there's us in law there's something called habeas corpus motion it's it's it's a motion to the court to force those who have somebody in custody to show why they're entitled to have somebody in custody okay and that habeas corpus motion has now been brought in several different courts on behalf of chimpanzees that have been owned and kept you know kept in captivity by zoos by circuses and other kinds of displays and so far they have lost in the in the courts but the argument that they're making is that even without any change chimpanzees have an intellectual and emotional life that is complex enough that they're capable of suffering right and that once you're capable of suffering you have a right not to be forced to suffer they may not have a right to go to college because they couldn't actually benefit from it right or to vote or in other words it's an idea that rights are corresponding to those things where the rights could actually be experienced and give value that's why in fact we already acknowledged this I am not allowed under the law by the way to torture my cat because she can suffer I am however allowed to bring her to the veterinarian even when she is young and have her put down so to speak which is killed by right why because of our belief that the cat can experience suffering but has a very limited understanding of future and so there's not necessarily a right to continue your own existence but there is a right not to be miserable in it and so you don't even have to enhance in order to get to this argument about whether or not animals should be treated differently. Do chimpanzees have a notion of the future? Well I think it's a little unclear I am I think the only law professor in America who's ever been on a tour of chimpanzee research stations and has been sprayed head to toe with chimpanzee urine. All right this is a unique experience for law professor yes but it was in the context of the NIH the National Institutes of Health deciding what they wanted to do about the use of chimpanzees and medical experiments whether it should continue with NIH funding and what kind of conditions should they be held in if they were going to be used and the family units are very real the emotional context is very real but the inability to communicate makes it terribly difficult to assess notions of their consciousness and their notion of future a future and I leave it to the psychologists who've come up with some very clever experiments to test whether animals have a sense of self for example to try and help us figure that out. Now could we edit animals to make them more useful to us regardless of whether it makes them more human? Sure the same way we breed animals at the time to be more useful to us and we've bred all kinds of farm animals to be more useful and we've bred pets to be prettier even though in fact some of those breeding methods have led to high degree of genetic misfortune let's just say. Terrible yeah like the hip dysplasia that you see in some breeds of dogs which is a direct consequence of the inbreeding that's done to make the dogs look a certain way. So again the question with editing if we can do it that way why can't we do it this way that's the why not or since it's terrible that we're doing that maybe we should forbid this as a starting point to forbid the other ways we're already doing it those are two good arguments to be having and a lot of it again depends on whether or not what you do is going to enhance the welfare of the subject of your experimentation. When you use an animal or a human being we are animals by the way too but when you use a human animal just for your own purposes like enslavement we've come to recognize that is a wrong that's the manual const notion of not turning people into simple instruments of your own needs and desires right that they are an end in of in and of themselves and if we were to think about animals that way too it would put a natural limit on how much we manipulate them. Well it certainly sounds like as a professional lawyer and bioethicist you're not going to run out of things to do anytime soon. It's not as long as the scientists and the biologists keep doing what they do. I think we're going to do our best so Alta Sharrow thank you so much for being on the podcast. You're very welcome to the pleasure.