 Hello everyone and welcome to the Minescape Podcast. I'm your host, Sean Carroll. Back in the early 1990s, there was an idea going around called the End of History. The Berlin Wall had fallen, the USSR was dissolving. There was a feeling that history had been very interesting, you know, thousands of years of conflict and war and trying out different forms of government and society, but that now, as the 20th century came to a close, we had more or less figured it out. The way to live is in a liberal democracy and liberal democracy was gaining ascendance throughout the world. Even old dictatorships or authoritarian regimes were crumbling under the democratic pressures. As it turns out, the idea of democracy is not necessarily a stable one. You can have a democratic society that gets rid of its democratic institutions for one reason or another and a couple of centuries, which is the time period over which democracy has been ascendant in the Western world, is a short period, historically. Right now, we're in a period where the world is changing rapidly in many ways and you can't just say everything is done politically. We figured it out we're all going to be liberal democrats going forward. Indeed, as many of you might have noticed, just over the past couple years, there has been increasing anti-democratic sentiment around the world. It can be very blatant in some places, some countries have elected through democratic means quite explicitly anti-democratic leaders. Here in the United States, there's certainly been controversies and arguments about whether or not our new Trump administration is not getting in line with the norms of liberal democracy, attacking the media, undercutting our confidence in our electoral processes and so forth. Around the world, strong men and autocratic forces are ascendant and you can have different opinions about this. I think that this is a real problem and if you do think it's a real problem, then I think that it's something that is not just alarmism. I think that if you are of the opinion that this is happening and this is bad, there's more than enough evidence that we should really take this seriously. You might, on the other hand, think that this is just liberals complaining that they lost the election. They're not used to having a strong leader, they have to fight against. It's true, okay, but it's up to you to articulate exactly why it's okay to attack the media in certain ways. What should be the norms that are always respected, no matter who is the boss, no matter which party is in power. This is not an easy thing to do. So it's important that we think about these things and today's guest is Yasha Monk, who is one of the most interesting and articulate people who is thinking seriously and carefully about these issues right now. Yasha Monk is a lecturer on government at Harvard University. He's also a senior fellow in the Political Reform Program at New America. And he's also the executive director at the Tony Blair Institute for Global Change. In his spare time apparently, he writes a weekly column at Slate Online and he also hosts a podcast of his own over there called The Good Fight. His most recent book is The People vs. Democracy. Why our freedom is in danger and how to save it. I strongly recommend reading this book. It's an eye opener, it can be depressing if you take it seriously. And if you don't take it seriously, if you don't disagree with it, then as I said, it's important to explicitly say in as reasonable, calm and persuasive ways you can, why we shouldn't be worried about these things. But one way or another, this is something we all have to be thinking about. So let's go. Did you know Fast Growing Trees is the biggest online nursery in the US, with thousands of different plants and over 2 million happy customers. They have all the plants your yard needs, like fruit trees, privacy trees, flowering trees, shrubs and so much more. Whatever plants you're interested in, Fast Growing Trees has you covered. Find the perfect fit for your climate and space. Fast Growing Trees makes it easy to get your dream yard. Order online and get your plants delivered directly to your door in just a few days without ever leaving home. Their live and thrive guarantee ensures your plants arrive happy and healthy. This spring they have the best deals for your yard up to half off on select plants and other deals. And listeners to our show get 15% off their first purchase, while using the code Mindscape at checkout. That's an additional 15% off at fastgrowingtrees.com using the code Mindscape at checkout. Fast Growing Trees.com code Mindscape. Now's the perfect time to plant. Use Mindscape to save today. Offers value for limited time, terms and conditions may apply. Yasha Monk, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. My pleasure. So I'll start with a little preamble here because I'll admit on the one hand I'm very excited to have you on the podcast, both because I've loved your work on Twitter and in other places since I discovered it and also because you're a fellow podcaster. You're the first guest I've had who is an expert on being on both sides of this microphone. I'm a delayed professional and I'm going to judge you on every transgression. Well, I know that. Yes, that's what I'm looking forward to. I want to report card after it's all said and done. But there's also trepidation because it's politics. And even if it's political science and intellectual scholarship and so forth, there is the nitty gritty, ugly tribalism of politics and what I'm trying to get around in this podcast is exactly that trying to aim for the underlying ideas, the big picture. So there is a big picture that there's certainly we all know here in the United States. There's certain political things going on, but it's not just a random particular event. There's some trends underlying what's going on here in the US and it's going on more broadly, right? The world is seeing, at least it seems, from the news, an upsurge in a kind of populist, nativist, nationalist, isolationist, authoritarian moment. So just to start out, why don't we let's imagine that over the next hour will be digging in to some of the underlying reasons why that's happening. But what's your take right now on sort of the state of the world when it comes to this kind of movement going on? Well, I'm pretty worried about what's going on in the world. I was just writing an article where I started outlining how different some countries in the world looked three years ago. The Huffington Post had just announced a great hilarity that it would cover the presidential campaign by one Donald J. Crump in the entertainment section. Britain, you had not somebody I personally would have voted for, but a very reasonable moderate center right by minister and David Cameron. The idea of Brexit was being pursued by the independence party and a few hardliners in the Tory party, but it really seemed very unlikely. The leadership election in the Labour Party, which seemed to probably go to where to be sensible first. In Germany, Angela Merkel was at the height of her popularity and there wasn't any far-right populist party in the parliament. So today you are seeing not just for a time populist in power in the United States with Donald Trump in places like the Philippines, with Riga Tertor in Poland, Hungary and Italy in a whole bunch of other places, even in the countries that are supposedly working relatively well. And the countries where the populists have not yet taken over, you have seen these radical transformations over political systems. So today in Germany, he alternative for Germany, which is quite extreme, is in the Bundestag. According to some polls, it is now the second biggest party in the country, larger than the so-for-democrats. In Great Britain, you now have a leader of the Labour Party who bears more resemblance to Jill Stein when he does to Bernie Sanders. You have a Prime Minister who is embattled from the far right of her own party, may lose her job any moment now, and you've had two years of the establishment trying to figure out what on earth to do about the population's vote to Brexit and not really making any progress in figuring out what the plan for the country should be. So just as a snapshot of some of the changes in the world, I would say, it doesn't look too good. And fairly recently, the picture you paint is one of rapid change, which might even be extra worrying, right? Yeah, absolutely. So it comes on the heels of a long development when you look at the rise of populist parties and movements. It started in, at least, the 2000s, even earlier than that, and has been rising since. Some 18 years ago, the average virtue of a populist party in continental Europe, for example, was about 7%, now it is more like 27 or 28%, at a very rapid increase. We see them now being in power in a whole set of countries. You can drive from North to South of Europe without ever leaving a country ruled by a populist. That certainly wasn't possible 10 or 15 years ago. And it's become particularly fast in the last few years, in part because the populists are now at levels of strength where they can suddenly form the government. As a physicist, you think about the worst kinds of things over time, I imagine, which is to say, you have systems for Team relatively stable, and you start seeing a certain kind of change in them, but it doesn't seem to worry people don't notice it too much because the system on the whole is still stable. And then eventually, as it comes close to a certain kind of threshold, you see that a small increase has much bigger systemic effects. And I think that's the kind of moment we're now in with populism. Yeah, that's exactly right. The idea of a phase transition where things can be more or less on appearances, fairly stable over long periods of time, then suddenly something happens. My wife, Jennifer Relette, who is a science writer, is actually working on a book on this very topic, exploring the fact that while things can seem to not be changing to our most direct observations, things can be changing underneath the surface that secretly lead up to these apparently radical. And they can be good, you know, public opinion switched about gay marriage here in the United States very quickly, but secretly it was. It was changing all along and it can be for the bad just as well. Well, I hope she's going to add a topic about the cherry type of populism. Oh, yeah, well, so that's a good point because I want to dig in a little bit deeper here. What what is the definition of populism when I was a kid and I heard the word. You know, sense to me like populism means you're popular and if you're in a democracy, you should be popular to be elected, but of course it means something a little bit different than that. Yeah, and you know, I mean, I think that is a real problem with that word on many public appearances where I try to define populism, I try to explain to people what I mean by it, what the purpose of the definition of it is, people then the questions in the question session say, well, what's wrong with populism? But populism, but populism, you know, shouldn't politicians try to be popular? And of course we should. It's a normal part of politics for politicians to say, hey, you know, people are unhappy with a current crop of politicians and I'm going to point out the ways in which they are. Perfect and and and and and and and and and and and I'm going to try and rile up a little bit of emotion against them and say, hey, I'm standing for all of us popular things that they haven't actually thought about. So that's perfectly normal. What's different about populism is the claim that the only real reason why we have problems today is that the existing political elite has grabbed us off serving. The claim that they alone truly stand for the people that what they are the voice of the people everybody who disagrees with them is by nature of that illegitimate because if I stand for people and somebody agrees with me, well, then they are against the people. And then it often goes together with very large extreme promises. So that once populist on power and they can't live up to those promises as our president sometimes likes to say, who knew that things could be so complicated? Who knew that they could be so complicated? I think if he was a student in one of your classes shown, he might. Upon seeing the F on his midterm say who knew that physical piece of complicated. Yeah, but they don't want to actually admit that they told lies and made huge outside promises. They say, well, why haven't I been able to deliver for you because of your position or traitors and they're undermining me because the three press are fake news and they need to be like a professional position. Because because the independent institutions like like judges or the FBI are all biased against me and they now need to have the independence taken away. That's why populism is worried. Right. And so I'm getting the impression that in some sense populism is defined in opposition to this group of elites. And maybe that's an ill-defined group, but it's the populist versus these people who have the power and don't deserve it and need to be brought under control. Is that fair? Yeah, that's right. And you know, that's again, there's an element of that that is normal in democracy, but he say, hey, you know, the people in power right now aren't really serving out of these interests and we need to correct that. And it goes together for populists with a real lack of respect for the basic rules and norms of political system. So the thing was very shocking in the United States in 2016, better presidential candidate would leave and doubt whether he will accept the outcome of the election, but he would not just attack his opponent as having the wrong ideas, or perhaps even not being as Maori upright as he is. And Bill is saying, I'm going to lock her up. Right. Those things are very typical of populist, but unwillingness to accept the kinds of rules we need not because they're important in themselves, so because we somehow have a weird attachment to norms, but because in order for democracy to work, I need to not only be able to elect the guy I want today. I also need to be sure that he's going to respect the rules and the constraints of his power enough so that I have a chance of electing somebody else for years from now. And in many countries, that doesn't happen. This episode of Mindscape is sponsored by Better Health. When it comes to relationships, we often hear about the red flags we should avoid. But what if we focus more on looking for the green flags in friends and partners? If you're not sure what green flags look like, therapy could help you identify them. Actively practice them in your relationships and embody the green flag energy yourself. Whether you're dating, married, building a friendship or just working on yourself, it's time to form relationships that love you back. One of the great things about therapy is by looking inside yourself, you can both learn to take those warning signs seriously, but also learn to be open to new experiences and new things. To know when something might be worth pursuing. Better Health is a fully online service that makes therapy affordable and convenient, serving over 5 million people worldwide. You can easily switch therapists any time at no extra cost. So discover your relationship green flags with Better Health. Visit BetterHelp.com-mindscape today to get 10% off your first month. That's BetterHelp-el-p.com-mindscape. A lot of us start the new year saying that we will learn a new language, but it's hard to actually commit to it. Babble makes it easy to learn one in less time than you think. Babble's quick 10 minute lessons handcrafted by over 200 language experts, get you to begin speaking your new language in three weeks or whatever pace you choose. And because conversing is the key to really understanding each other in new languages, Babble is designed using practical, real world conversations. What I love about Babble is you can either dive in deeply and truly get fluent or you can just master some of the basics before going on a trip. So let's get more of you talking in a new language. Babble is gifting our listeners 60% off subscriptions at Babble.com-mindscape. Get up to 60% off at Babble.com-mindscape. Spelled BA-BBEL.com-mindscape. That's Babble.com-mindscape rules and restrictions may apply. Yeah, I've always thought that the real birth of a democracy is the first time that the party in power faces an election and loses and hands it over. Right? And so you can win an election. That's great. But we assume it's part of having norms and so forth and we'll probably get into that. But we assume that there are rules that everyone agrees to play by. And certainly in addition to attacking the media, attacking the legitimacy of elections is unfortunately common these days. Yeah, no, that's exactly right. You know, the real test of democracy is whether politicians are willing to seed power when they lose. And you know, in many cases we haven't yet seen the test for a populace in part because, and this is another test, they have skewed for playing field so much that your position doesn't have a real chance of winning. So what we're seeing increasingly is that you don't have political systems in which, you know, somebody says, hey, I'm dictated now, it's never going to be an election again. Countries like Russia, like then as well have elections, but their elections in which some of the most promising candidates of your position aren't allowed to run in which we might even be put in jail, in which if you go to a protest or rally for your position candidate, you might be beaten up by the police. Or you might be locked away. All of the main television channels are under control of the regime or of close allies of it. You have changes to the electoral system that are meant to favor the governing party and you take all of those things together and you basically have managed elections in which people can go out to vote, but the opposition doesn't have a fair shot at it. And so what we're seeing in place like hungry is that the countries are rapidly moving towards such a system. And even if despite all of its obstacles, the opposition should somehow win, I have real questions in my mind about whether a victor, for example, would voluntarily step down from power. Well, it's always been in physics terms, as we were talking about before, there's always been an instability in the very idea of democracy. If you're a dictatorship and you know, you just keep the squeeze of power carefully enough, you can go on forever. In a democracy, there's always the worry that the people will democratically elect anti-democratic rulers. And that's an instability. If everyone chooses to be non-democratic, then democracy can't survive. It's sort of the political science equivalent of Karl Popper's question about tolerance, tolerating the intolerant can be a bad thing. So these societies that are democratic base their success on the idea that people buy into the idea of being democratic, which is not just voting for the person you want, but giving up power when you don't want it. Are we seeing the people in these countries become less willing to give up power when they lose? Right. Or to the people I think are more willing and tempted to vote for politicians, to give good signs of not respecting the limits on their power, which is one of the reasons why the title of my book is the people versus democracy. Right. It captures that otherwise paradoxical idea that people vote for a candidate who says, hey, you know what? Just trust me. Leave me over power. Things are going to work out somehow. By the way, that sound you may hear in the background, I believe is don't Trump flying into London overhead. So, you know, leave it to me. I'll fix it. Just give me a little bit more power trust me, right? But then based on to use that power precisely in order to make it impossible to displays a democratically elected president of five minister by democratic means by the way, if you want to hear about scientists ideas of a flaws of democracy, I have the story for you. Oh, yes, please tell me the good science story. So I will not remember details here and I may butcher and even embellish a little bit in the process, but there was a great story came across about a year ago of court girdle, the great logician wanting to take a citizenship. So he had come to the United States, being the Nazis, he was 15th of the 21st and one of his best buddies with our Einstein who was also there at the same time. And you know, he was becoming eligible for citizenship and he had to take citizenship best. And so he came to Einstein who had already gone through a process and said, what should I do to study for this exam? And Einstein said, well, look, you know, they send you leaflet, just read for leaflet, you'll be fine. The girdle was not one to take this kind of thing without the requisite seriousness and start. The decision is trouble. Yeah. Exactly. To to to to he started to. You know, really study a very deeply on the constitution and and the separation of powers and how it all works. And on the day of of the exam, Einstein decided to go to the test with good as moral support. So he seems to have been a little bit of a jackass because on the on the road to the over. He started to ask her well, I sure that you really have prepared well enough for his exam. And so the girl comes in a little bit of a wrap of nerves and recognizing Einstein, they ask her both of them into an office and Einstein is allowed to sit there as a president minister. And you know, the official sort of does a little bit of makes a little small talk of girl and says, right, you know, I see you come from Austria, you know, horrible. What's what's been happening there? It says yes, terrible. It's happening. My country's turned around as well. You know, thankfully now in the United States, something like that could never happen here. And girls are saying, they're actually I have been studying the constitution and there's a deep floor. And Einstein picks him under the table, the shut up. And these are answers a couple of questions. It being completely truthful is not always the best strategy in these situations. I wonder if Gertel was in fact just thinking of the fact that you could vote you the constitution allows itself to be changed. You can change it to be anything you want. And so which brings us to another thing in your book. And I would prefer that, which is it's not just a constitution can be changed, which by the way is very difficult to me. But it's ultimately people have to stand up with it. But if you have a president who does not respect the rightful limits on his authority and he controls a political party, which also happens to have a majority in Congress. And which also happens to have judges in the Supreme Court whose loyalty to a particular ideological movement is more deeply than their loyalty to constitutional values and values of their institution. Then they can in practice get away with all kinds of things that might infuri not be allowed. And that is ultimately what the danger is always be that political forces take over the system. And they simply do things that on a fair reading of a local constitution, they shouldn't be allowed to do. But because there are the people who are actually in the offices of institutions that are meant to stop them. Don't do the job. Have a higher loyalty to a party or a man when the constitution. They get away with doing it themselves. So perhaps this was good. I was thinking sadly, the record of the story does not explain what the actual effort the floor was. So there could be all sorts of flaws that we don't that we don't even see. But yeah, maybe a floor that only girdle was brilliant enough to see. You're putting your finger on, you know, the role of buy-in to the democratic process to the norms that we have. I mean, one of the big things that has been highlighted in the recent years since Trump has been elected is the extent to which we do rely on people behaving well, not simply following the law as it is written, but following the spirit of the law in some sense as well. So is this another new thing or is this just something that they were less artful about taking advantage of before it seems to me that in the past, there was less political polarization, at least here in the US, and there was more belief in the standards of the right thing, even if it doesn't benefit your party. I've been recently rewatching the West Wing. And there's an episode where Republican committee chairman stops one of the people on his committee from questioning a democratic witness because it wasn't on the topic that they were supposed to be investigating, even though it had been devastating to the Democratic party for them to do that. So if you were sitting there thinking there's just no way that that would happen right now, if you can take the advantage you would just win. So it does seem like something has really changed. Well, there's lots of things that happen with West Wing that never happen in real life, one of which is that people always have the perfect retort, you know, the world that everybody had two hours to think of the next move. But no, I think there is a real transformation there, which is caused by a whole set of things. One of them is rising polarization. The public as a whole in the United States is not necessarily more extreme, the political views are more polarized now when they were 20 or 40 or 60 years ago. The political parties are so the most moderate democrat used to be far too conservative than the most moderate republic. That is no longer the case, there is a real gout between them. And we also see by the way, many people just having less of an understanding of the concept. I think for a long time, there was a very deep commitment to the idea of having to transmit political values from one generation to the next. The idea of finding fathers of how important it is to have a constitutional culture. And I think because we start to take out a maximum granted with slightly took so the education for granted. And we know from various parties with people know much, much less now about just the basic aspects of a constitution, the kinds of things we need to pass citizenship test, how many Supreme Court justices are there and so on. And I think that when they did a few decades ago, I also think that there is a strange element of a useful fiction having been exposed. I mean, even two or three years ago, when you go back through what some of the most intelligent commentators were writing. And at the time, some of the smartest people writing about this making for full arguments, they said, look, some electoral Trump is not a ceiling of how much support somebody can get like that can get. People have this deep commitment to the constitution, to these norms. If somebody says these kinds of outrageous things, it tells these kinds of lies, most people are just going to be so turned off by them that they're going to run away from it. And now we see that's not the case and that encourages more and more people to act in the same way because apparently all of those things that we thought we would be be punished for, we're not punished for. Right? It's like, you know, you have an electric fence that bars your road to, you know, the supermarket and you always sort of walk around it. And one day, you know, by mistake, you touch it and you realize, well, you know what, actually, I didn't get a shock from it this time. So perhaps a fight and a war. And once you've done that seven or eight times, you know, there's no longer cost in your mind to touching electric fence, because perhaps there was never a cost to it. But now we know. Yeah. One of the great things in your book is that you closely analyze the phrase liberal democracy. I think a lot of people will just sort of blurt that out as if it's one thing, but there are two words there, liberal and democracy. And you point out that they mean different things and they're both under attack in different ways, although ways that might come together in some way. So why don't you help us understand that? Sure. I mean, the first thing to say is that justice populism isn't popularism, which seems obvious but it's important. Liberal democracy is not the opposite of conservative democracy, right? It's a philosophical term in the sense in which I use liberal, you know, Barack Obama was as much of a liberal as, you know, as George W. Bush or Ron Reagan or Bill Clinton, they all had a basic commitment to those values. So we use this term liberal democracy and we don't often think about what it means and how it is for those two elements, but liberal element, a democratic element may actually be intention of each other. So the way that I understand it, our political system has these two fundamental goals. The first is to allow individual liberty. That's the liberal element. Liberty, right? Classical. Yeah, well, classicalism has certain connotations that about economic policy, for example, which are necessarily in tail. But it is sort of freedom's that individuals enjoy. So that means that I can say what I want, I can work ship as I want or not, worship, I can be in whatever relationship I want to be, I've been a relationship and nobody gets to tell me that. And in order to sustain that, I need both things like freedom of speech and we need to have a separation of powers. Because if the president dislikes what I say, he can't be capable of just throwing me in prison, we need independent institutions to do prosecution. So that offending somebody of political power can be dangerous to us. So that's the first element. And the second element is where we straightforward, especially once you've separated liberal element out, it's a democratic element. It's that, well, you actually need to be able to translate popular views into public policies. Democracy is the rule of a demos rule of a people. So actually what happens politically needs to be dependent on what we as individuals want rather than being determined by a king or a dictator or a priest or a president. My fear is that these two constitutive elements of our political system are coming apart more and more. But for a long time, without political systems, but I've been reasonably good with some obvious shortcomings about respecting and protecting individual rights. But they haven't done a terribly good job of actually being responsive to popular opinion. And now what we're getting is the political system in which, yes, at least at first, some popular views are being translated into public policy. But it is a price of individual rights of the rights of minorities and increasingly are the kinds of separation of powers that we need to sustain in order for the system to be stable over time. With a Spark Cash Plus card from Capital One, you earn unlimited 2% cash back on every purchase. Plus, no preset spinning limit helps your purchasing power adapt to meet your business needs. Jorge Gaviri, founder of Massienda, reinvest his 2% cash back to help grow the business with new products. What could the Spark Cash Plus card from Capital One do for your business? Capital One, what's in your wallet? Find out more at capitalone.com slash Spark Cash Plus, terms and conditions apply. Well, this brings up, yes, so there's two directions to go here. Let's go in both of them. But first, in some sense, you're suggesting that there are countries or supercountry kind of organizations like the European Union that are in fact anti-democratic. That they are doing things behind the scenes that it's even in the United States where we still have elections. There's so much of everyday governmental activity that is done by executive departments, people who are not elected, but have enormous power over people's lives. And there is sort of a legitimate complaint that people have that their views are not being put into public policy. There's this whole invisible structure that is making things happen. And so in some sense, that's a fair critique of the current system. Is that right? Yeah, I mean, I think I wouldn't go so far as to say that it's anti-democratic, which sort of implies a conspiracy against the people or conspiracy against democracy. I think it's a little less exciting than that. And so I would say, and democratic, which sounds similar. But there is different and important respect. It's often a response to quite real requirements. So our economy has become much more complex. The needs of public policy have become more complicated in part because we need much more international cooperation, because it's harder to govern the economy. And so what we've seen over the last 50 or 60 years in virtually every country is the rise of a set of institutions that do constrain popular will in complicated ways. So on the one hand, we just have tolerance, congressmen, the United States, not being responsive enough to what people want because the rising role of money in politics and revolving door between lobbies and legislators and all those kinds of things. And on the other hand, we have the rise of independent agencies like the Environmental Protection Agency or Consumer Protection Bureau. We have a central bank that's both much more powerful and certainly more independent than us. We have a huge expansion of judicial review and the growing importance and politicization of the Supreme Court. We have international trade treaties, lots of international agencies to deal with all kinds of issues. And these things aren't a conspiracy against the people. They are often responding to the fact, for example, that it's really hard to figure out how to keep a power plant safe. And that you need lots of experts to make the decision. And having congress virginity day in day out probably doesn't make a lot of sense. We create an independent agency that can pass a lot of those nuts and bolts, regulations and congress has the authority to abolish with agency, but it's probably not right. But there's a real logic behind this. But cumulatively, it does raise the danger that people look at what's going on and say, you know what, for most of his stuff, I'm never consulted. I don't even understand what it really all means. Congress certainly isn't making with decisions. So how is this really a democracy? I think, I mean, this is, I think it's dawning on me during this conversation. I think it's a very, very important point that even putting aside all the questions about nativism and racism and immigration and so forth. There is a thing that is going on that is purely based on the fact that the world is becoming more complicated, more interconnected technology is advancing. You know, we see this in purely technological realms where there are computer programs that do really, really important functions in the world that nobody understands, right? No one person knows what's going on inside that computer program. And the same thing is true about government. Nobody understands everything that's going on. And maybe you could imagine a nightmare scenario where two things happen simultaneously. One is that people become frustrated that their needs are not being met, that they're not getting ahead. They see the government is sort of big and invisible and elitist and unresponsive and they vote populists into power as a response to that. And at the same time, all this complication gives more ways for the people who are really up in the game, people who are powerful and wealthy and connected to take advantage of it and to increase their own wealth. So we see this combination of populism and growing inequality. And we say that out loud, that's a plausible picture of what we're faced with right now. Yeah, absolutely. And this particular aspect of it, I have to say, is one that I find it most difficult to get my head around because the other stuff is really worrying and scary, but I sort of know, infuriate these what to do in response, right? So, you know, the fact that money plays far too big a role in our politics. Look, that's terrible. And given that the Supreme Court is likely to be dominated by people who don't see that as a problem for foreseeable future, it is in practice hard to know how to fight it. But infuriate I sort of know what to do, right? We need much more robust and pain finance regulations, make it harder for people, you know, to go from Congress to Wall Street and so on and so forth. So I sort of know what the solutions are, even for a struggle to imagine a path that we would implement. On this other end, it is harder because I really do think that two values are in conflict with each other here. And one of those values is responding to popular will and having a sense that there's real democratic accountability. And that is actually achieving the expertise in the coordination we need in order to solve very real problems for people to be pissed off if we don't solve. So let's take, you know, a topic of climate change. You know, in order to deal with climate change adequately, we need to have, you know, nearly 200 countries around the world coordinated. If the United States does a lot of effort to reduce its carbon emissions, that, you know, Russia and China don't at all, which is not going to be able to deal with the problem. But how in order for we go into structure, a decision making process in which we coordinate the actions of 200 countries. And yet ordinary citizens feel like, yeah, you know what? I already had a saying this. Head's going to be incredibly hard. Yeah, and the timescale for human beings to care about what happens in the world is not much longer than a human generation or a human lifetime. So that's going to be a very difficult problem in the best of times. But then we also have, in addition to technology and globalization and connectivity and complexity, we also do have the questions of diversity and immigration and so forth. And there clearly these player role, you know, in the aftermath of Trump's election, there was a debate. Is it are people voting for him because of economic anxiety or because of racism or nativism, and clearly they both play some kind of role. And a line in your book, which I thought was very provocative, you say, neither in North America nor in Western Europe has there ever been a truly equal multi ethnic democracy. So what we're trying to create right now is a historically unique experiment. Is it plausible, even if slightly depressing to think that one of the reasons why democracy has been relatively successful over the past couple of centuries is because it's been kind of a very special kind of democracy. Where there was always one group that was in charge and therefore didn't feel threatened and the attempts to really be democratic, not only among people, but among different kinds of people and different groups is much less stable and harder to maintain. That's a fear. I mean, one of the striking things about political history, you know, well beyond, but well before the prime of a democratic age is that those states that were reasonably democratic. And that's why it's a very important thing to be more homogeneous. That when you think of, you know, the examples of a fried ring multi ethnic state or city before say, you know, 1900, you might think of Vienna in the 19th century, you might think of Istanbul or Baghdad at various points in the Middle Ages, you might think of them in the second or third century. When these places either went democratic or at least when the artist didn't really have voting rights. And in a way, it's obvious when you think about it because it's easier for me to tolerate somebody who might have a slightly different culture from me, a different religion, who perhaps have a different ethnic origin. If I don't feel like they have a voice over my political fate, no, I don't have any power. He doesn't have any power over decisions made by the monarch anyway. So all right. I look at people who are quite different from me and say, oh, these people actually can go and vote and affect what happens to me. It becomes harder. So that's one historical worry that I have. And then you see how deep resentment is especially, and that's increasing the social science and this of people who used to be dominant and are now threatened with dominance. And you know, in Europe, the idea of what it was to be Italian or French or German was always pretty deep mono-ethnic and mono-cultural. Somebody who's descended from a particular ethnic stock. And so suddenly these societies are asked to say, oh, hey, you know what? Somebody who comes from other parts of the world, even if they're born here, but they're a power instead. They can be a member of our society too. And that's real resistance against bad. And the states and in Canada, there's always been a multi-ethnic society, but there's been one is a point out with a very deep racial and religious hierarchy, and which members of a particular group had big advantages over others. And so again, you know, the people who are having some of those un-earned privileges taken away are going to be quite resentful about that. Now, I don't condone that. I have a right to those privileges, but I think it's actually important to take a moment to try and understand where the sentiment comes from. And so, you know, I think it's important to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take a moment to take A moment to be Blind for the first place in Romanian immigrants became more money than you. You knew you could be more money than you. You might be your boss. You could be like reading a comics and get them. You could be an individual person and writing some book in Ghana or God listening to the voice is absolutely amazing! Your first round of self- Méra tr while you talk is amazing! did a study that I read back a couple of years ago, but I'll have to look her up. I forget her name. But it was one of these things. She was ahead of the curve in terms of asking the question, what do the Trump voters really want? And she embedded herself. She was a Berkeley leftist progressive. That's just, she went to like, you know, I think I was thinking about Adi Hochschild. Oh, probably, yes, exactly. And just talk to people and sort of, you know, live their lives and got to know where they were. And she came up with this metaphor. And she then read the metaphor back to them. And they said, yes, that's exactly it. And the metaphor was, you know, you think of yourself as, you know, standing in line in the race to life, you know, and there's better times ahead. And you're walking toward them slowly. You're doing your work. And it's effort, but you're making progress. And then you see off to the side, you know, a whole bunch of new people skipping the line, just being, you know, elevated in front of you, not waiting their turn. And this feels unfair to you. And these are, you know, immigrants or minorities or gays or lesbians or whatever, or even women for that matter. And people said, yes, that's more or less how they feel, even if it's not really an accurate representation. So I mean, I, I want to, you know, give value to that feeling, like how can we give people back the feeling that they are in charge of their destiny? Part, this must have at least some role to be played by inequality and the fact that, you know, more and more wealth is going to the wealthier. But still on a broader scale, we need to be able to make people think that this is, this is their country. They can get ahead. It's their country as well as other people's countries. And that's a good thing rather than a bad thing. I'm not quite sure how to get there in any simple way. Yeah. And here again, I mean, you know, this striking thing. And so we've never quite done that. So, so we should be prepared for, for, for some pain. But what you're describing is exactly right. We need to figure out how we can defend minority groups against frankly, with quite obvious attacks, with the suffering at the moment. And more broadly, with disadvantages that, that they have suffered for a longer time. And at the same time, we need to make sure that the majority group isn't a short of having special privileges. I don't think we can justly assure that. But that they feel like, you know, they are still going to get to the front of a line at some point as well. That because what they have, the aspirations of having to be fulfilled, and that we don't see those as being threatened. Bibles brought a cultural and demographic changes. And doing both of those things at the same time is incredibly hard. But our ability to win the kind of society we want is dependent on that. And I want to add something here which is important, which is that I think sometimes I hear a lot of impatience with that question from people who perhaps are members of minority groups or just more broadly from from the left. And I get that, right? Because, you know, here we are, we are ready suffering from the strong discrimination. We're being attacked right now, and we're supposed to worry about the feelings of those people who have embedded in us anyway. I mean, I absolutely get that reaction. But I do think that there's a slight contradiction in how we sometimes think about that, which is that I hear the same people say, you know, we live in a society in which racism and white supremacy and structural injustice goes incredibly deep. And, you know, the majority group has these incredible reserves of power and influence and so on. And at the same time, we should not give an inch to them. We should be absolutely uncompromising. And I'm not quite sure how we reconcile those two things because if you really think for a majority group has such deep power and influence, then in order to affect any kind of change, you need to make your case to them to some extent, right? Yeah, you need that. If you don't have any someone on board, then you're just going to lose every time. Right? And so I think that the most helpful way of doing this is to actually appeal to the better instincts of perhaps not every single member of a majority group, but but the majority group. And this is by the way what civil rights movement did. It's in many ways what Barack Obama did. And it can be effective. And I'm sure it's frustrating. I'm sure it sometimes means that we can't be quite as blunt at least in certain parts of politics as we would like to be not given to our justified anger, you know, quite as greedy as we would like. But if you actually care about making this country better and winning those political victories, I feel that it's necessary to some extent. Yeah, and I feel you know, it's easy for me to give advice to people who are members of historically discriminated against groups since almost none of the groups that I'm in have faced that. But I also think it's important to distinguish between groups and individuals, right? And I think the fact that there is white privilege and male privilege and cisgender privilege, etc. I think these are very real things. Those don't mean that even if you're a member of all those groups, your life was easy or you haven't struggled. I think that there are real struggles that people go through no matter what groups they're members of. In some sense, everyone struggles, but there are some poor people or people who economics and politics have left behind in a very real way. And there's nothing wrong with taking their concerns seriously. It's kind of crucially important to the bigger democratic project. Well, and right, and I think there's a real problem with distribution here, right? Which is to say that obviously, you know, on average members of historically discriminated groups, by virtue of being members of the Stalk Discriminated Groups, have faced many more obstacles and many more struggles than members from majority groups. And that is a deep injustice, bad as a society we need to reconcile. But obviously, the kinds of people who end up being bespoke people for that position. Also, aren't bespoke people by coincidence, they're so bespoke people because they have had most success in life and perhaps also had some advantages relative to other members of their own group. And so you often end up with a dynamic in which people who actually personally have also discriminated, experienced real discrimination and so on, but have gone to some of the best colleges in the country, makes six figures, salaries and so on, sort of, you know, sit there explaining why it is that most, perhaps all members of a dominant group have these huge privileges and you end up with people who haven't had a great education, perhaps have had real personal tragedies happening to them, perhaps have had abuse of parents or come from households with a deeply dysfunctional sort of listening to this and say, oh, you know, Professor Sohn, so or fellow at Sohn, so institution or columnist and so on, so these people magazine are explaining to me why it is that you're, you know, so disadvantaged and and and that's a real problem in the dynamic, right? Which doesn't invalidate the fact, but of course there are those underlying structural injustices. But but but but I think it means that we need to be a little sensitive of how to communicate that in a way that people are willing to to to have an open mind. Yeah, and again, I feel bad asking people who are members of groups who have been discriminated against to be patient and understanding and empathetic to the people who are members of groups who have been dominating them for hundreds of years, but it's also a good strategy long term. I think I think there's a place for bomb throwing and you know, raising a ruckus is also a place for sitting down and reasoning together and appreciating each other's points of view, becoming less and less carbon. And by the way, I just want to I was going to emphasize two things. A, this is not a moral claim, it's a strategic claim, right? It's just a claim about what to do in order to ensure that people like Donald Trump aren't in a position to do tremendous damage in the highlands, to those groups. And B, I think, you know, we would do well not to talk about, you know, how much of a rocker should you raise and how large would you be about that? I think to me, it's about the manner in which we talk about it, not how much we talk about it or how passionately we talk about it, which is to say that at a moment in which minorities aren't very real attacked, there's no limit to how much we should talk about it. I just think that the strategically productive way of talking about it is to actually say this is the kind of society we want. And here's where that society is, one, which should be appealing to all the market. And why despite the dark chapters in the market history, it actually calls on the best traditions in the market history. And it calls on the ideals of the founding fathers, even if the founding fathers themselves were in many ways for what? And that's something that from, you know, Martin Luther King to Barack Obama, a lot of people in the history of our country have done incredibly successful. So that to me, you know, appears to be the way to actually make, make headwind. Yeah, and I'm going to choose to continue to be optimistic on balance about the force of reason and community and appealing to the better angels of our nature. However, let me also say that I read your book and it's very depressing. There's real prospects of things going badly. I don't want to be alarmist or I don't want to overreact is certainly in my mind very possible that despite everything Donald Trump in the United States and other people in other countries will be moments in history not precursors of an entirely new phase of history. But there's also another possibility that things go just disastrously wrong. You know, if you asked what would it like, what would it be like for a functioning healthy democratic liberal democracy like the United States to turn into an authoritarian dictatorship? Maybe the precursors would look more or less like what we're seeing. So how seriously should we be worried about a true collapse of liberal democracy in a country like the United States? Well, I think there's a way of interrupting a question purely about probabilities and a way of interrupting it about expected values, which is to say that I don't think that the likelihood of liberal democracy collapsing in the United States is over 50%, it's probably quite a bit lower than 50%. But given how disastrous that outcome should be, I think we should be very worried about it. Five percent? I don't know it's hard to put a percentage around it, but you know, the striking thing is that five or ten years ago political scientists thought that it was essentially impossible, that likely zero, that once countries had changed, this is your point from earlier, had changed governments were free in fair elections at least a couple of times. Once they had a GDP per capita of more than about $14,000 in today's terms, they were safe. We really didn't have to worry about them. And we've already seen in countries like Hungary that that's untrue, that you have a full-time populist take over there and in my mind destroy liberal democracy for sure, probably not even preserve illiberal democracy, but a rectal form of competitive authoritarianism. And now we're seeing the President of the United States take the first steps that people like Putin and Russia like Erdogan and Turkey that will show us in Venezuela have taken a few years ago. And because we are a richer country, we're a country with a more vibrant civil society and a very deep constitutional tradition, there's every hope that we're going to be able to stop that, that at step three or step four Donald Trump is not going to be able to perhaps not want to take step five and six and seven as well. But certainly as a scholar of Compound of Politics, the pattern I'm seeing, the direction we're going in, is very concerning indeed. Yeah, as a good Bayesian, I feel it's my responsibility intellectually to actually assign probabilities to everything that I think might happen. But I take your point, which is that we've definitely undergone a change from thinking that that kind of disaster in the United States is simply inconceivable for all practical purposes, to at least thinking that it's conceivable. And if it is rare and it doesn't happen, then you know, there's a silver lining there that we take this more seriously and hopefully we can fix things down the road, the pessimism that I have about that is one of the many ways I was wrong about politics over the last few years was I dramatically underestimated the extent to which serious grown-up members of the Republican Party would resist the worst impulses of a Trump-like administration. And I take it that that's also happening in other countries. There are, you know, you join a group, you do game theory. What is best for my reelection chances? That's just way more important than what's best for the larger country. And that's even more depressing than the fact that one person or another wins an election to me. Yeah, so a few folks here, the first is that you know, as a progen scientist, I've always been quite skeptical of some of my colleagues who talk a rational choice approach to much of a political world. And in particular to this case, right, when we say, look, I mean, basically you can just think what maximizes the politician's chance of reelection. And then from that very simple assumption, you can derive most of that behavior. And I've got, you know, I don't quite buy that. People are more complicated than that. Have some of them are more idealistic than that. Well, I've become much more sympathetic to that approach over the last couple of years. I have to tell you the other thing is that, you know, I used to be the most pessimistic person in the room. I mean, I'm a sort of democracy doom hipster, right? I worried about democracy before. It was cool. And I used to be called a Cassandra a lot of the time as a result. And I always wanted to say to people, but Cassandra was right. Demet, read the story. I didn't think it made me sound like much of a crank. But, but, you know, I was with pessimists in debates about what would happen to the Republican Party, once Donald Trump won repressivity. You know, I thought, you know, the optimists thought, you know what, these people have very different beliefs from from Donald Trump and they have deep commitment to constitutional values. And so there's just going to remain him. I thought, no, that's not true. The base is actually of Trump at this point in them. You know, a couple of them might flip and over time, Donald Trump is going to succeed in replacing the party with his own base. He's going to have Trump as candidates running the primary and there'll be a sort of Republican civil war for six or eight years, but eventually it'll turn into a populist part. When it turns out, speaking of, you know, having updated probabilities, there will both wrong. But what happened is much more extreme than what I predicted. And that's that Republicans just flipped. They said, you know what, Trump is so popular. This is clearly where we are now. Even for many years, I talked about values that, you know, they're very different. I'm just going to go with this now. And so much more quickly, much more far away than pessimists like me had predicted, Donald Trump has wound up being in control of Republican party. And as Bayesian's, I think we should therefore also update our probability of similar shifts happening in other institutions. I'm much more worried now when I was six or seven months ago about the Supreme Court acquiescing with extreme behavior by Donald Trump. Um, yeah. And the evidence is there. Right. So we collect more data. We update our priors. And that's not the, it's not good news for optimism, but there's still, there's still some remaining. Let me just play the devil's advocate here. Part of the pessimism that I have is that I know some pretty smart people in academia and elsewhere, um, who are saying, you know, like, sure Donald Trump is not, you know, going to win any IQ tests. But if we look worldwide, if we look not just at Europe, but if you look at China or Russia, isn't it possible that there's a sense in which a strong, even a strong man government gets more done? I mean, especially looking at China, there are people who say, you know, well, sure, it's not a democracy, human rights are not good. But boy, they can really build bridges really, really well. Isn't there a trade off there that we might think about buying into? What do you say to that argument? Well, a few things. I mean, first of all, the over time systems that work very well, actually very limited number. Um, in China, does work reasonably well economically for now. There's a real question about whether it can transition from being a mid-income economy to a high-income economy. But it's very difficult to emulate China. I like to equip that, you know, China works very well in practice, but it's a mess in fuel. You know, it has a very unique history, but unless you happen to have a communist party kicking around, it's been around for 60 years and still sort of claims to be mowers, but actually is state capitalists. It's very difficult to know how you would even go about emulating China. So let's look at the countries which do, for example, uh, Donald Trump. Let's look at the countries in which a four-town populist have taken over. Countries like Venezuela, countries like Turkey in Russia and Hungary. And they're not doing particularly well economic. They're deeply corrupt. Let's say the other one just made his son-in-law the new finance minister. That would never happen here. It's okay. An imaginable. Do we know who Trump's son-in-law is? Never heard of the guy. Yeah, behind scenes. And this is by the way something when I talk to members of a business community, I try to emphasize to them, you've already seen companies like AT&T, essentially bribes to micro-coen Trump's personal lawyer. You have seen attacks on American companies before the business decisions they took, like howdy-Davidson, threatening tax retaliation and so on. Rule of law is one of the reasons why the American economy has worked incredibly well. You don't want a situation in which your success as a businessman depends on whether or not you're in favor with a regime. And that's not an abstract thought. That is how business runs in many countries in the world. And those countries tend to have much lower growth rates. Okay, good. This is been great. To close, I will play the role of the genie coming out of the bottle and I will give you one wish. But I'm only going to give you a menu. You don't get to make up your wish. And your wish is... Yeah, exactly. It's a multiple choice genie. And so here are your choices with the goal in mind of some combination of making the country more pluralistic and liberal democracies successful. So one option is you could radically improve our educational system, secondary and primary. You could really inculcate values. You could teach kids that diversity is important. And the constitution is important. Rule of law is important. Democracy and all that stuff. That's one option. Another is you could really impose policies that would help fight inequality. You know, redistribute some of the wealth not by, you know, necessarily socializing everything, but just a real tax code that took capital gains and wealth into account and really helped people maybe a basic income or something like that. That is the second option. And the third option is we could make sure... I don't know how this would happen, but we could make sure the media actually told the truth. We could have, you know, different voices in the media, but make sure that there was not any sort of quasi-state-sponsored propaganda machine that gave people the news that they thought they should be hearing. So those are your three choices. Which one of those would you think is the most important? I'm going to be very annoying here and give sort of literalist, natural scientists, perhaps even if I may be so bold answer. I mean, I think a lot of the things you're describing are different parts of a equilibrium. And it's very hard to change one of those who are changing the other. So I think if you had much more economic equality, you also would have a much better education system. And if people were better educated, then they would also be less likely to watch Fox News. And so, you know, I think that these things go together or fall together. Also, there's no such thing as genies. So you could have said that. That would have been inadequate. Nationalty scientific. I'm just the easy opportunity. That would have been a easy way out. All right, Yasha, thanks so much. Even if it's not always making us more optimistic, I think it is important to understand what's going on. That's what really gives me optimism. That there are people like you that are really taking these things seriously, looking at them as carefully and rationally as we can and trying to find a good way forward. And there are, if I'm allowed a closing word, there's things that people can do. I mean, the people who are listening to this podcast, you can, you know, if you have an answer to Sean Jackson question about, you know, whether it's a B or C, then go and work at that. You think it's a go and work at improving education system. If it's B, then go and fight for more incoming growth. If you think it's even go and found your immediate company or do whatever it takes. But, but, you know, I am worried about the future, but I'm not fatalistic because I do think it's subject to human agency. And I like the citizens of China and North Korea and Turkey and Russia. We also have a liberty to go and fight for our political values. So that's what our job is now. Good. You correctly perceive the subtext of the question. Great. All right. Yasha Monk, thank you so much for being on the podcast. Thank you. This is great fun. Thanks. Okay.