 Hello everyone and welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host, Sean Carroll, and like most of you, I am getting older. When I was your age, we didn't even have podcasts. If we wanted to listen to this American life, we had to turn on the radio and listen to it coming over the airwaves, and that's how we liked it. As a physicist, I studied the arrow of time, the fact that the past is different from the future. So of course, there is aging in the sense that we are all older now chronologically than we used to be. But in the world of biology, there's also aging in the sense that our bodies are changing as we get older. In a very uniform, monotonic way, we all had certain qualities when we were babies, we all have certain features and characteristics when we were elderly, and in between we move from one to the other in a more or less predictable fashion. But the interesting thing about aging is that it's not really inevitable. In a sense, aging is a choice. It's not a choice that we make as individual organisms. It's a choice that evolution has made for us. If we want to have evolutionary progress, then you have certain organisms giving birth to others, trying new combinations of DNA, occasional mutations. But then the old ones have to die off. They have to give way to make room for the new generations. Aging serves a purpose biologically. But now that we're able to change things a little bit, now that we're able to manipulate our bodies through medicine and biology, it's come time to ask, we want to keep aging in the same way we always have. Today's guest is Dr. Colleen Murphy. She's a professor of molecular biology at Princeton University. And she studies aging both at the level of organisms and at the molecular level. A favorite organism is sea elegans. This is one of the favorite organisms of all biologists. It's a tiny little roundworm, nematode, sea elegans. And it lives a fairly quick lifespan, so we can play with it. We can mutate it. We can turn on and off different genes inside the roundworm. We can see what the effects of this are on the aging process. And interestingly, it's not that hard to make a nematode live much beyond its ordinary biological lifespan. So what are the consequences of this? What are the implications for human life? But we'll talk about, with Dr. Murphy, is some implications for what you should do to live a little bit longer in the here and now. And a little bit more fantastical imaginative things about whether or not aging is something that can be completely cured in the very far future. In a more down to earth way, what we care about is, given that we're going to age, you and I, we don't have miracle drugs to stop that yet, can we at least have more fulfilling energetic, aware lives when we're elderly people? Do we necessarily have to undergo the usual decay and loss of mental faculties that are associated with being very elderly? Again, the answer is, maybe not. This is a huge direction in which medicine is moving and fundamental science is helping along the way. So let's go. Did you know Fast Growing Trees is the biggest online nursery in the US, with thousands of different plants and over 2 million happy customers? They have all the plants your yard needs, like fruit trees, privacy trees, flowering trees, shrubs and so much more. Whatever plants you're interested in, Fast Growing Trees has you covered. Find the perfect fit for your climate and space. Fast Growing Trees makes it easy to get your dream yard. Order online and get your plants delivered directly to your door in just a few days, without ever leaving home. Their alive and thrive guarantee ensures your plants arrive happy and healthy. This spring they have the best deals for your yard up to half off on select plants and other deals. And listeners to our show get 15% off their first purchase while using the code Mindscape at checkout. That's an additional 15% off at FastGrowingTrees.com using the code Mindscape at checkout. FastGrowingTrees.com code Mindscape. Now's the perfect time to plant. Use Mindscape to save today. FastGrowingTrees offers valid for limited time. Terms and conditions may apply. Okay, calling Murphy. Welcome to the podcast. Thanks. So we're here at a workshop at the Santa Fe Institute on time and aging also. And you're a biologist by training who specializes in aging. Is that a fair assessment? Yeah, that's correct. So how did you get there? How do you choose, as you were just saying before we started recording, a lot of books written on aging are written by people who are themselves aging a little bit. So how does a young researcher decide to pick this? Actually, I just had to when I was a graduate student, I had been doing studies on pre-study state kinetics of myosin, so motor proteins. And I felt like I really understood pretty well how two proteins interact with one another and how they worked. I felt like I wanted to start asking bigger questions. In aging is one of the bigger questions you can ask. How does it work? And pretty much everyone's interested in it. Oh yeah. It happens to all of us. It's a box office topic, right? Yes. Exactly. So even though I was fairly young when I decided to get into the field, I felt like it was an interesting question that at that point, actually, we finally had some really good tools to start addressing those questions. And those tools were genetics. So at that point, it was right when, especially, see elegance geneticists had figured out that there were single gene mutations that could cause doubling of lifespan. So instead of just studying how things got old, you could start asking the question, what's the difference between something that has a normal lifespan and one that lives much longer? And then another critical point was that was right when, well, the see elegance genome had been recently sequenced. Tell us about see elegance. Yeah. Those of us who are not around work. Sorry, we're backed up. The sheenados. No, this is, see elegance is a model organism. So it's a great thing because biologists of all attitudes and angles will study this little beastly to death, right? That's right. So it's one of the major model systems. And it's one of the great advantage of it is that it's very simple. So it's a simple animal. It's still multi cellular. So you're basically, instead of working with a single cell organism like a yeast where you can do a lot of wonderful experiments, now you're working with a real animal that has many tissues and cells. And one of the advantages just from a daily experimental perspective is that when you look through the microscope down in a sea elegance, you can see that it's aging. Right. And it's a little worm about a millimeter. A millimeter? Is that right? Yeah, it's about a millimeter long. It's a small nematode. It lives in rotting fruit. Okay. That's where it, because bacteria will be causing a fruit to rot. And so, sea elegance will be attracted to that spot and it will eat bacteria. Okay. But you grow them in petri dishes or do you just have the vegetables lying around the lab? That would be lovely. Yeah. We just have them in petri dishes on a standard type of bacteria, E. coli. And so that gives us control over its environment. And so while you could criticize it by saying, well, that's not what it does in the natural world. It goes through all these temperature fluctuations and food fluctuations. In fact, what we're modeling, I think, in the lab is an American diet. So these animals are always well fed and in air conditioning, basically. Okay. So they have the potential to lead long, happy sea elegance lives. But that's not an 80 year old lifespan, right? These are rapidly developing creatures. That's right. So these animals go from an egg to an adult in only two days. And then that's when we really start counting for lifespan. So once they become adults who are capable of reproduction, that's sort of when we start the timer. And for that point, they can live an average of two to three weeks. Okay. So any one population of animals, what's remarkably consistent actually is the shape of this curve. So you can have 100 animals. And maybe around day 10, some of the one animal will die. But out of day 30, there'll still be one animal alive. And so that's sort of models what we see in a population where you can have individuals. You have an average lifespan of the population, but you know, some individuals will die 70 and some day they'll die 95. And so that's the kind of thing that we're modeling there. I was very affected actually a few months ago. The New York Times had a webpage and app or whatever it was where you could go in and a standard thing where it computes your life expectancy. So you type in your age and your weight and your activity level. But rather than just telling you the final number, okay, you will, on average, live to be 78 years old, it chose a random number from the distribution and said, okay, in this realization you live to be 58 before you die. And then you do it again. No, this time you live to be 102. And yours, I was struck very much by the fact that sort of implicitly we think, yeah, my lifespan is between 70 and 80, my expected lifespan. That's how many years I have left. And the reality is, no, I might have relatively few years. There's a relatively high probability. And there's another probability I live much longer than that. Is it the similar thing for our little roundworms? Yes, absolutely. So we have, you know, in any one population you have a worm that if you like say on day five, they all look the same. It's hard to know at that day which ones are going to be long lived and which ones are going to be short lived. And so that's actually one of the questions we're trying to figure out. What are the things? There may be, you know, genetic information. In this case, they're isagenic, so they all have the same genome. But there may be, for example, read out in the RNA that they express and with those and make proteins, maybe all those day five animals, if you just were able to survey them, maybe there are some of those genes that get expressed, that predict which ones will be long lived and which ones will be short lived. And that's one of the questions we're interested in. This idea of stochasticity in aging. Yeah. And if, so just to visualize it a little bit, if I was a grad student in your lab, so am I literally there with the traditional little petri dish, a few centimeters across and with an eye dropper and poking things around? Is that what life is like? Basically, yeah, you'd have a glass pipette with a little piece of wire at the end and you'd be moving them around. And in fact, actually, now that I'm on sabbatical, we've been doing a giant experiment with the whole lab. And so I've been in there borrowing people's scopes and moving worms as well. We should, for the listeners out there, not every professor who's a leader of a lab spends my time in the lab, right? In fact, to be honest, yeah, to be honest, I haven't either since I started my lab. Someone has an army that does their things and you're the thought leader here, right? And in fact, usually when I, for example, if someone takes a picture of my lab, I don't let them take a picture of me at the microscope because I find it's very misleading. This is the one exception. I've actually been doing a few experiments, but not many. At most the time, it's the graduate students and postdocs who are really doing the hard work. That's right. And this has just always been funny to me, but in theoretical physics where I do things when people write papers together, the author list is an alphabetical order. And the general world. The general world. The general world. My knowledge is don't understand that, right? So your name as the leader of the lab appears last in the author list, right? And so this is weird, reverse priority thing where you're kind of very important to your name appears last. Yeah. Or ink or pulling them down. And the first author is usually the person who's done most of the actual, you know, the labor and often the writing. And hopefully we've all done some of the intellectual work together. Right. Right. And the grad student in charge of that experiment or the postdoc or something like that. And so they have the Petri dish and then you are looking in real time in a microscope or are you videotaping the... Depends on the experiment. So for our, we have these, it's sad, a little bit laborious, a lot of manual labor involved in some of the experiments because you're actually looking at it and making a judgment of, you know, by touching the worm, is it still alive or not? And then we move it down and then we move the live ones. You can't take its pulse. Right. Exactly. And so, you know, there are ways you can scale that up and lots of labs have. So for example, you can do something where you just take images of plates and we've done that for certain purposes. Yeah, there's other experiments that we take videos of because we want to know the nature of their motility or for example if they're swimming in liquid, there's really nice ways where you take videos of them and then you can analyze what's the shape of their behavior. Actually. It's really nice because we actually discovered recently when we were working on a Parkinson's project that worms that had been predicted. So this is a collaboration between my lab and oligotroy and sky's lab. We're using these networks of genes in dopaminergic neurons in both human neurons and worms. We've got the network that was shared between them and that we knew were expressed in neurons of sea elegance. And then use that information with GWAS studies. So genome-wide association studies of Parkinson's disease to try to get a list of new genes that might play a role in Parkinson's that no one has discovered before. Can sea elegans get Parkinson's disease? Well, that was the question. So we were wondering, could we develop a new model instead of putting back in, for example, alpha-synuclein, which is a protein that's known to accumulate in Parkinson's disease patients? We wondered whether other genes could participate. So that's what we're looking for. Because it turns out Parkinson's is caused, let me restate that. The known causes of Parkinson's are actually much more limited than most people realize. So only about 5 to 30% of Parkinson's patients have Parkinson's because of a known gene. Is Parkinson's something we've identified even in non-human species? Well, not really. So that's what we, so that's what I'm getting to now. We were trying to figure out, could we model Parkinson's disease? And so if you just take it at its most basic level, say it's an age-related motor defect, is there something that we could find in worms? And so that's why we started these assays where we would knock down the genes from this list that were predicted to play some role in Parkinson's disease. And then look at how that changed the worms' swimming behavior. So knock down, you turn off this gene. And so there's a lot of, sorry, this is falling off my... There's a lot of, you know, details about how that's done. We just feed the worms actually bacteria that expresses the RNA of that gene and an oxid down through a process called RNA interference. So we use that and we only did it in adults because we didn't want to mess up the development of the neuron. The first place, we really wanted to model what happens with age if you got rid of a gene. So doing that and then we just guess that if we look at age-related changes in behavior that look different from what just happens when a worm gets old, which is what they slow down their swimming, maybe we'll find something interesting. And that turned out to work remarkably well. So it turns out those worms, for the top set of genes, so we tested 45 genes and the top 20 or so causes weird defect where they would curl up. And we'd never seen that before. So they curl up and uncurl and they get stuck. So there's a whole bunch of genes and you have special-purpose bacteria that are secret spies that go into the worm and turn off these genes. And each one of them individually had the effect that the worm just curled up in a little ball. The top ones did. It's the very top predictions. And so that was, we didn't really know what to look for except for this very generic idea that there should be some age-related motility defect. But it could have been something subtle just by a slowing down, which is what wild type, normal worms do when they age. But they had this really different behavior. And so that led us down this path that became very interesting where we figured out that branch chain amino acid metabolism may play a role in Parkinson's that we hadn't noticed before. And then that causes to go back into eventually looking at what happens if you look at the gene expression in Parkinson's brains. And in several of the areas that are affected by Parkinson's, you see normally people have high levels of this particular gene, branch chain amino, that's B-cat-1, branch chain amino acid transferase. And it's knocked down in Parkinson's patients. So this all worked better than we had anticipated. But this idea that maybe there's something that we haven't seen yet in worms, maybe we should just look and see what happens when we take these predictions from human diseases and go into the worm. This episode of Mindscape is sponsored by BetterHelp. When it comes to relationships, we often hear about the red flags we should avoid. But what if we focus more on looking for the green flags in friends and partners? If you're not sure what green flags look like, therapy could help you identify them. Actively practice them in your relationships and embody the green flag energy yourself. Whether you're dating, married, building a friendship or just working on yourself, it's time to form relationships that love you back. One of the great things about therapy is by looking inside yourself, you can both learn to take those warning signs seriously, but also learn to be open to new experiences and new things. To know when something might be worth pursuing. BetterHelp is a fully online service that makes therapy affordable and convenient, serving over 5 million people worldwide. You can easily switch therapists any time at no extra cost. So discover your relationship green flags with BetterHelp. Visit BetterHelp.com-mindscape today to get 10% off your first month. That's BetterHelp-H-E-L-P.com-mindscape. A lot of us start the new year saying that we will learn a new language, but it's hard to actually commit to it. Vappel makes it easy to learn one in less time than you think. Vappel's quick 10 minute lessons handcrafted by over 200 language experts, get you to begin speaking your new language in three weeks or whatever pace you choose. And because conversing is the key to really understanding each other in new languages, Vappel is designed using practical, real-world conversations. What I love about Vappel is you can either dive in deeply and truly get fluent or you can just master some of the basics before going on a trip. So let's get more of you talking in a new language. Vappel is gifting our listeners 60% off subscriptions at Babel.com-mindscape. Get up to 60% off at Babel.com-mindscape. Spelled BA-BBEL.com-mindscape. That's Babel.com-mindscape rules and restrictions may apply. And is this something obviously one wants to ask? Are there therapies that are suggested or strategies for treating Parkinson's based on this connection with individual genes? That's a great question because what we're trying to figure out now, because this particular gene can feed into a couple of different metabolic pathways, one important thing for us to figure out is what part of that pathway, which one of these is submessing up? Because if you guess wrong, you will cause more problems. So that's what we're currently doing. Can poke around with human beings in quite the same way. Exactly. I think you can mess with the C.L. again. So that's what we're trying to figure out now. And what's interesting about this is, it's not necessarily predicted that this would have had this weird phenotype because when other labs had looked at this particular gene when they were doing longevity studies, it turns out knocking down that same gene that causes this weird curling defect extends lifespan. Oh, okay. So you curl up, but you live longer as a curl up a little around worm. Exactly. So it's kind of a note of caution. Right. So most of us in the longevity field for a long time have done screens to look for things to live long. My lab now hasn't been in particular. We've always been interested in this quality of life effect. But I think that's what's really important is to take these ideas of quality of life with age and ask, is it the same as living a long time? Sure. And so we had originally done work on cognitive aging. And for the exact purpose, this was almost just a surprise that you could knock down something in neurons and cause this phenotype that in the rest of the body cuts a long lifespan. But it's also, you know, oh, yeah, I really want to get that idea out there that it's important for us to look at all these measures of quality of life and not just how long something lives because I think we already know that as humans. None of us want to live a long time in a decrepit state. Yeah. We want to be healthy. And so I think that's actually more important. And it turns out the worms, you can actually use them to study things that we really care about. Yeah. And I definitely want to get into this whole idea of different modes, different, they seem to be from your research, not one, but a set of different ways which in principle life could be extended. And they have different side effects and for better or for worse. And then we can start asking questions about which ones matter. But what you just said, I think, is very important about we're trying to extrapolate lessons to higher organisms by studying these little C elegans. So let's just take into why that's okay. Like, C elegans, one of the things about it, as I understand, is that we have mapped out its entire nervous system. And we have 300 some neurons and we know how every one of them were connected to each other, the connectome of the nematode. And so that's very interesting for people studying the brain in some sense. But there's also, so the human brain has 85 billion neurons. And so it's hard to see how exactly to extrapolate. So both from the nervous system, but also the genetic code, like how similar are the genes in C elegans to the genes in humans. How easily can we say, oh yes, this thing in that DNA strand plays the same role in the worm that this gene and our DNA plays for a person. That's a great question. So it depends on what you're comparing. So if you're at the nucleotide level, I think the estimate is around 60%. Similarity. Similarity. Between C elegans and human beings. That's right. And so it's amazing, right? It is amazing, right? 60% of the same nucleotides in a DNA between you and a little worm. And there's not even that big a difference. And if you just count raw gene number, that difference is not so great. It's around 19,000 for worms and estimates around 24,000 for humans. The number of gene. Number of gene. Now, of course, that's why I'm saying it depends on what you measure. Right. Of course, then you start looking at alternatively spliced genes and then sort of that rapidly. So, um, And a gene just for again, because I'm not a biologist. So we have DNA and there's many, many little base paired nucleotides. We're going to take that as understood. And a gene is somehow we human beings are associating a whole length of DNA, a whole segment of it with some function, with some ability to make some kind of proteins. And we call one such part of the DNA strand a gene. Is that fair? That's fair. Okay. And so we have not that many more genes than the C elegans does. But we have these wonderful ways of splitting up a gene into parts and then rearranging or inserting different parts and using them or not using them. Now, I will say it turns out worms have that same phenomenon. And we have just been doing an experiment where we take, so worms only have a couple major tissues. They have their skin. Mm-hmm. They have muscle, intestine, their nervous system. So this is really major tissues. So my lab figured out how to basically take adult worms apart and do RNA sequencing on those. And so we can ask for those large tissues what exactly is expressed there. Okay. And there's actually a list of genes that are differentially alternatively spliced in each of those tissues as well. So even though we used to think that that was an explanation for why humans were more complicated, in fact worms do this too. So in the sense that there's one gene but it kind of plays slightly different roles depending on which organ it's talking to. Exactly. For example, you can have an important transcription factor that is mostly used for metabolic purposes in the major tissues, but it could be used for a different function in the neurons. And so that's the kind of thing that we're figuring out now. And it's amazingly clever that evolution did all this without any foresight, right? The selection is an amazing thing. But I was going to add to your point about the number. So this came up at a meeting recently where someone was discounting the importance of cialigans based on this argument that there's had so few cells and humans have so many. But fundamentally what those cells do at the cell biological level or at the metabolic level is very well conserved. And so it's just a matter of, you know, worms actually may have a harder job. So they only have 302 neurons. Yet they survey their entire environment and make decisions about where they should go, what they should eat, what they should avoid using only those few neurons. And only about 100 of them are sensory neurons. And so this idea, you know, like if you think about the mouse olfactory bulb, you already have a neuron where there's a one receptor for every one of those neurons. Worms don't do that. They have many receptors for every neuron. So they're actually trying to figure out much more complicated things within each every single neuron before they can make a decision. Now they can't obviously figure out the same level of things, but they do some pretty interesting calculations to try to stay alive. They have to be pretty efficient, in other words, with the use of those neurons. And to what extent do we, well number one, it was amazing to me to learn that it's exactly the same number of neurons in every cialigans. That's very, very specific. Like the DNA has baked into it quite a detailed blueprint for what that nervous system is going to look like. Exactly. And for aging that has some serious implications, which for example, if you think about it, like there's this insulin receptor mutant called DAF2, which lives twice as long as wild type, it doesn't do that by turning over getting rid of damaged cells and growing new ones. It has to do it by keeping those cells healthy the whole lifespan. And it really changes how you think about what you can do in order to live a long time. And for us, there's some parallels in the sense that we have some tissues where you could turn over the cells and replace them. We have other tissues where you can't do that. And so for those latter sets of tissues, that's what DAF2, long-lived animal, is a good model for. So what should you do to keep that cell that you may have your whole life, like a brain cell? What would you have to do to keep that cell alive? And what are the organs and human beings, where we have the same cells from birth to that? I think like muscles and things where you just, there's not a lot of turnover. So there's no way for that cell to sort of leave and die and be replaced. Exactly. It's there since we're born or since early. You should ask someone who's more of a human physiologist. But yeah, for some tissues, you just can't replace them. They're there your whole life, or at least your whole adult life. And for some, you know, there's neuro stem cells, but I believe the rate of turnover is very low. So whereas your tissues, for example, your blood, right? You have, it's constantly making new and exactly. So those, I don't think are worms, at least the major tissues, those aren't a good model. They're not a good model for those kinds of tissues. The skin of the roundworms there forever. Exactly. And that actually, what we found out recently, that's actually not just the skin, it's actually called the hypodermis. It's actually a metabolic tissue. So that's one of the things that we discovered by tracking every RNA that's made in every tissue, that revealed that to us. And we were able to test that and it's found out it's true. But anyway, so worms are good models for certain types of tissues and not good models for others. Since we keep that in mind the whole time when we do these experiments. So let's just allow ourselves, since we brought it up, to say a little bit more about what aging is like in humans, and go back to the C elegans and get lessons for how we can change it. So what do we mean when we say a human is aging, right? I mean, besides the obvious muscle, ACEs and memory loss. But is it a known list of things that everyone agrees this is aging? Or is it something that the aging field has come to? There's a loss of homeostasis. So tissues that are trying to remain constant and not lose ability, that gets lost. Manifests in different ways depending on the tissue. So rise in cardiovascular disease, the rise in things like cognitive decline. And of course we've all seen the more superficial ways you can age. Like skin-reguling. Yeah, right, great here. Yeah. So and it's important to distinction, right? Because you could have the idea, for example, if you go back to a model system, that what you're tweaking makes the animal better. But if it's the equivalent of changing hair from gray back to black, then you're not really changing the entire animal. So we have to keep those kinds of differences, the things that are sort of fundamental to an organism, like keeping the brain functioning, keeping the heart functioning, and separate from things that are maybe not so important, like wrinkling. And where you can't see wrinkling your gray hair in the elegant. You can see wrinkling. Oh, you can see wrinkling. Yeah. All right, very good. So that was my next question. So what do we, what are the characteristics when you're at the microscope? How do you say, oh, this is an older worm. If you didn't know it's a birthday. So that's one of the questions we're asking in the lab, because everybody who's done a lifespan experiment picks up clues. So it's not just that they, so they do some obvious things. They start moving more slowly, and they also sort of lose the shape of their trajectory, basically. So the younger worms are better athletes. Yes. And actually, Monica Drisco's lab, Rutgers, they've done studies where they show that, and if they make the animals exercise by forcing them to swim for a while, they actually live longer. Oh, good. All right. So cardio for the worms is helpful. Exactly. Yeah. So they start to get, there's, yeah, their skin starts to wrinkle. Their muscles get weak, which is why they can't move as well. And so, and actually, again, Monica Drisco's lab years ago, Laura Hurnden did some nice studies where they looked at the whole body different tissues by EM, and they see sarcopenia, so the degradation of muscle tissue, just like in humans. Right. Okay. The neuromuscular junction starts to degrade, and that's actually why they start to slow down first. So Sean Hughes lab showed that years ago. And what we've found is that the thing that precedes all of those is their inability to, they start losing the ability to learn. And more importantly, they start, before that, they lost their ability to long-term memory. So there's a sort of, I don't know if it's a cascade, but you can certainly say there's a different trajectory for different behaviors. So the most complicated thing that we find that the worms do is this long-term memory. Right. They lose that by day four of adulthood. Later, they lose the ability to learn and do short-term memory. And then they lose the ability to smell after that, which is what's required for all of those other activities. And after that, well, after that, they lose the ability to move. So there's a period where they, you know, you can imagine a middle-aged worm that can't remember anymore, maybe can't learn. It can still smell stuff. But it might not be able to. Yeah, and it can move toward it. Yeah, exactly. So, yeah, so it's not like they all crash at the same time. And I think that's sort of what we see in humans, right? Certainly roughly in alleges, yeah. Exactly. I can't run hurdles anymore. Like I did when I was 16. I can still do calculations. I may not be able to do certain things. And there's going to be things in the future that I won't be able to do. Here's a tip for growing your business. Get the VentureX Business card from Capital One and start earning a limited double miles on every purchase. That's right. With unlimited double miles, the more your business spends, the more miles you earn. Plus, the VentureX Business card has no preset spending limit. So your purchasing power can adapt to meet your business needs. The VentureX Business card also includes access to over a thousand airport lounges. Just imagine where the VentureX Business card from Capital One can take your business. Capital One, what's in your wallet? Terms and conditions apply. Find out more at capitalone.com slash VentureX Business. So... So, number one though, CLGINS can learn and have things in long-term memory. How do we know that? So learning, that was established by some other labs early on. And they can do things like negative associations. So if you starve a worm and let it smell a chemical, then later on when it smells that chemical, it will avoid it. So we were interested in asking the question a little bit differently, a more analogous to what we might be interested in when we learn information. So my lab started doing assays where we paired food with a neutral odor, called butanone. And the idea was that even if a worm, we knew they could smell the butanone, but they wouldn't like the smell. They wouldn't go toward that odor until we'd done the training where they pair food with butanone. Oh, okay. So, padlovin is dog. Exactly. It's just padlovinian training. And so that's simple learning. And then we asked the question, how long do they remember that? So after we did the training, we put the worms back onto plates with food but no odor and asked how long do they retain that? And within two hours they've forgotten that. We only train that once. Right, so everyone thinks that sounds like a short time but a couple things. So if you are a worm in the world, maybe it's not worth remembering something longer than that if that food source is not going to be there anymore. And the other thing is I think it might be analogous to, you know, if I gave you a 10 digit number and then I asked you three hours later, you might not remember it. And two hours is a much larger chunk of the worms lifespan than three hours is for us. Exactly. And then, and this was inspired by work that had been done in other organisms like trosophila, we did a space training. So we would train the worms and then give them a rest and train them again. And we found that if we did that and we trained them, for example, seven times, then the next day we could come back and they would still remember. And that turns on a different set of molecules actually. It turns on, you know, the earlier learning I told you about is pretty instantaneous. And it can require protein translation as well. But if we want to do long term memory, that turns on a transcription factor. It gets the signal this is worth remembering if you hit it enough times. And it turns on this transcription factor called CREB. And that turns on a whole set of genes that we later figured out by using the same technique RNAI knocking them down. But if we knock those out, memory is totally wiped out. And are those memories stored in the 300 and 2 neurons? Yeah, so that CREB transcription factor is only active in one pair of neurons called it. So that's basically the worms hippocampus. So you get two neurons to remember things. Exactly. And they must send it, we haven't figured this out entirely, but they must send a signal back to that sensory neuron to tell the worms when they smell that butenone again what they should do that they should still like it. It's amazing the similarities between our 85 billion neuron brain and we can identify structures in the 300 neuron brain with this little worm doing the same thing. So don't be fooled by the 300 to neurons. It almost makes you believe in evolution right? Exactly. We just didn't get things from scratch. Exactly. That core set of proteins and genes that are used by every organism to carry out these tasks. So we have an aging worm. And you said the signs of aging start a few days. Well, certainly they lose their memory at a point when it would be difficult to tell by eye that they're they're aging. Right. So that starts pretty early. So memory is sort of the first thing to go. Yeah. And I think that coincides pretty well with the end of their reproductive time. It makes sense. Why do they need to remember anything? Because they need to figure out where food is. And then they don't really need that. And where's access? Yeah. Well, actually. So for hermaphrodites, they're doing their best to avoid males. They actually will run away from them. Right. Because almost all C. elegans are females. Yeah. So this, yeah, exactly. So say 1000 to one. Hermaphrodites to males. Right. And so they don't really need the males until they do. So the times when they would need them is when they're, you know, it's times when they need some genetic diversity. So in times of stress. And they've figured that out too. When times of stress they start the mothers will lay more male eggs by losing a chromosome. And then those males will mate with their hermaphrodite and 50% of their progeny will now be males. 50% well. Yeah. Because every, because they're basically when they mate, that's the chromosomes will be either XX or XO. So 50% of them will be hermaphrodites and 50% will be males. And so you can get these, you know, bursts of males and hermaphrodites in the population. Exactly. Yeah. So, yeah, I said females, but it's really hermaphrodites. For C. elegans. Right. For C. elegans, the worms that are not males can play the role of male or female. But they are only carrying their own genetic information. Exactly. And so like you say, if you want a little bit of diversity, is there a lot of diversity in the genome of C. elegans? I am not the best person to answer that. There are a lot of people who are asking questions like that. And also asking for like natural isolates of C. elegans, what kind of level of diversity is. I want to say yes, but that's better people can answer that. Okay. All right. So you have all these fromaphrodites, the occasional dude around there. And so you don't need to work hard to find sexual partners. Right. But you do need to work hard to find food. And that's pretty much all that C. elegans care to that. Right. His food. Yeah. That's right. And so you're saying that it makes sense that if you have a reproductive lifespan, which is what about half of the total lifespan? Yeah. Yeah. That once you've reached that point, your faculties begin failing you for various reasons. And memory is one of the first ones to go. Exactly. So, I think that makes sense because those animals don't need to find food anymore, the pressure is not so great. So there's no pressure to keep that maintained. And I think it's actually probably a lot of work because that long-term memory machinery is very complicated. And this was a surprise to me because earlier when I done the work to identify the genes downstream of the longevity pathway, the Daph-2 insulin signaling pathway, we found that there were a hundred of genes turned on. And when I knocked down those using RNAi, each gene that we lost only had about five or maximum 10% effect on lifespan. So that's a very cumulative process. You have to do a bunch of different things. Many, many genes are involved in this. Exactly. It was different when my lab started doing the knockdown of the genes that this CREB transcriptivactor regulates. When we knocked down any of those, they seem to screw up memory. So it's more of a machine where you lose a part and now it all falls apart. And so that, I think, would take a lot more energy and effort to maintain in a pristine state. It's not a collective effort. It's this gizmo that would be working perfectly. Exactly. And so I think that's why it's one of the first things to fall apart. Right. And it's interesting just to think that evolution does not select for longevity. Right? Right. Longevity is backwards, right? Byproduct. Because you want to have kids and then as far as the population is concerned, you're not only not helpful, you're in the way, in some sense. And so the fact that, and maybe this has lessons for human beings, the fact that there is a lifespan and that we're supposed to die, is not a mistake, it's what the organism evolves to do. It might be. Now, I don't know if they're really in the way because old worms don't eat anything. Okay. And they have so many more progeny that probably one adult being around 300 progeny is not going to make much of a dent. So I think it's more that there's no pressure to maintain its life. It's health anymore. Right. And so the only maintenance that it really is invested in is to be able to be reproductive long enough. To get its job done, to make more progeny. And it is subtle because you might imagine that if one particular individual had a genetic code that let it live a long time and have many, many more progeny than its competitors, that would be beneficial to it and its bloodline, as it were. But the population would suffer because the genetic diversity would be diminished by that one dominant. And that's actually, I think that's, well, I think we, that may be what we have as wild type. But basically it got to the maximum number of progeny it could have and lifespan it could have and still do everything. Right. Because the long live mutants, none of them have as many progeny. Okay. So there's a reason there's mutant and wild type. The wild type is one, all these other situations. And it has this flexibility. It can respond to differences in environment. And when we get a mutant in the lab, really what we are looking at is something that's locked into one state. And so in the wild, it wouldn't survive as well because it can't respond properly. Okay. So yeah, so tell us a little bit more. Let's go through the different ways that we can make our C. elegans live longer. So there's this Daff 2, I know plays a big role. So no one knows what Daff 2 is. Yeah, so this is a mutant, it's called Daff 2 because it was found in the very early studies when people were looking at development. But it turns out that you can knock down this gene just in adults. You don't have to screw up development at all and still get this effect of long life. And that's really important and important distinction because the fact that this insulin receptor was found to live long time, I think people discounted it in the aging field longer than they should have because it has this other role in Dauer formation. And it was easy to say, well, that's just a weird worm thing. And Dauer is this weird sort of hibernation stage you can go into. Exactly. So C. elegans have a lot of lovely ways to be able to avoid disappearing. And so in times of really stressful conditions, it will go into this alternative developmental state called Dauer. Now, and that's regulated by temperature and food and crowding conditions. But again, if we go back to Daff 2, you don't have to do that. You don't have to go through that state in order to live a long time. And it was shown by Andy Dillon when he was in Cynthia Kenyon's lab that if you use RNAi to knock down Daff 2, just in adults, those worms will live a long time. And so, and it also doesn't have to be, in that case, it wasn't coupled to reproduction. But in the wild, of course, all these changes that would allow an animal to live a long time or cause it to live a long time, like reducing the amount of food that it has. So dieting works well to extend the life space. Exactly. So both cardio and dieting are perfectly well for C. elegans. And so, but of course, all of those will cause the animal to have fewer progeny. Right. Okay. So you can live longer, but you're less genetically useful. And so the Daff 2, that's a gene. Yes. And you knock it out. And the worm lives longer, but it also has fewer progenies. Yeah. So if you knock it out for its whole life, the mutant has fewer progeny. Okay. And that's also true of worms that are either caloric through restricted or you have a mutant that mimics that state because it can't chew its food properly. Right. Okay. So all of those, so those are two different ways. And then there's something called intermittent fasting, which probably everyone has heard about. Yes. Worms will live longer as well through intermittent fasting. But that turns out to act using that same Daff 2 insulin signaling Foxo transcription factor pathway. So other than not reproducing as much, what is it that Daff 2 does do the worm to make it live longer? Oh, well, that's what we found when we did the... So when I was a postdoc and I built microarrays to try to identify all the genes that were different between the long lived animals and the short lived animals. That's what we figured out. So we identified the set of genes that were different. And it wasn't just oxidative stress reduction. It was a lot of things. So it changed lipid metabolism. It changes... Basically that was... You know, we started looking at produce cases, keeping proteins healthy. Yeah. If you made a list of everything you need to do to make a cell work better or stay healthy without turning over, that's what basically Daff 2 does. It turns on all these genes involved in things like autophagy. But sorry, I'm getting confused. Oh, okay. Turning off Daff 2 makes you longer. Okay, sorry. So this is an interesting... Yeah, it's a little bit harder to explain. So the insulin receptor, you can think of it as when the insulin receptor, the Daff 2 is on high, that signal of high food. Okay. It thinks there's a lot of food around. When though animals think there's a lot of food around, the right thing to do is to have as many progeny as you can. And you don't care how long you live. Okay. So when you get a signal that there's not much food, that means not much insulin. That means less Daff 2 activity. Right. And the response that is turning on a transcription factor called Daff 16, which is in this family of transcription factors called FOXO. And that was found later in mice and now in centenarian studies to also be involved in longevity in mammals. So in some sense, the pace of life slows down. Yes. So you live longer but more slowly and less enjoyably when these conditions are... Less enjoyable. I don't know. Daff 2 animals look awesome. Like I had to pick what I wanted to be. Right. So they don't slow down. They don't... Well, okay. That's interesting. That's an interesting question. So a lot of labs have looked at just how animals move on a plate. Okay. And so if you just do that, Daff 2 animals look like they're less healthy by that definition. But they're not. They're actually super healthy because if you touch them, they can sprint off. I see. So by Daff 2, we mean the ones where Daff 2 is turned off. Yeah. So they're the... Yeah. The mutant. Sorry. It's very cute. Yes. But they're the long-lived animals. Right. So it's not that they can't move. They just choose not to. And my lab figured out why that is. Because we thought those were really weird because people were going around saying, oh, Daff 2 is not healthy. Right. When every metric we could... Every ass I'd be through at them, they did better. And so what we figured out was that Daff 2 animals have a higher level of a receptor called odor 10. And another lab had shown already that odor 10 levels were super low in males. Okay. So the reason this is important is because it got me thinking. And there was a great... This is Doug Portman's lab. And he had a great paper. We showed this difference in males in this particular gene. And when he put more of this odor 10 gene back into males, they made it less well. Okay. And that was because they didn't start... They weren't exploring anymore. So low levels of odor 10 caused an animal to explore more. And high levels think it's food. And so the headline of the... You know, the sort of pop headline was, males choose sex over food. Okay. And that was all through the odor 10 gene. And so what we figured out was Daff 2 has very high levels of this. And they're really choosing food. Right. Okay. And so what we did was we used RNAI again to knock it down. And found out that when you do that, the Daff 2 worms are crawling and they never stop. Wow. They just keep running around. They are totally capable of moving. They just choose not to because they're sitting on food. They know there's food. They're going to eat the food. So anyway, that was... It's an important point in my field because there was a mistaken notion that Daff 2 worms were unhealthy for a while. So they live longer but less healthy. And you're saying that in fact they're perfectly healthy. They think there's lots of food so they don't see the need to exert themselves. Absolutely. That's exactly right. And so I would say that's... So Daff 2 worms are like that. There are other longevity means that are not healthy. And so it is worth thinking about this idea, as we mentioned before, that not everything that lives a long time is going to be healthy. And so we and others did some quality assays. We found that for example, there's long lived mutants that have knocked down their mitochondrial function. Okay. And those are being studied for a lot of good reasons. But if you look at the mutants in C. elegans, they are not healthy. Okay. So they are not a good model. And also you have to knock down the mitochondrial function. Again, this was, again, Andy Dillens' work when he was a postdoc in Cynthia's lab. If you have to knock it down in larval stages to get this result. So but very young, yeah. Yeah. So the human equivalent of these things give teenagers or adolescents a drug that will stunt their growth and make them non-reproductive, but they'll live a long time. Right. So that's not a model of good longevity. It's not a goal, clearly. But so lesser mitochondrial function, less energy is going to our tissues, our muscles, just going to be sluggish. And then we'll live a long time without you being able to move unlike the deaf too. Exactly. So that's why we really like the deaf too model, because it really mimics something that we can sort of identify with. If you're going to anthropomorphize anything, it's that... We are. Yeah. That deaf too, worms are kind of the model of what we'd like to do in humans. So it's worth knowing what they do. And also asking a question, can we have this effect post-repetactively? Right. Because that's a critical point. If everything you have to do, you have to modify while the animal, including us, is reproductive, then it's not going to do us much good when we're trying to get interest in taking a drug for aging. So that's what we need to figure out. Right. You just realized that your business needed to hire someone yesterday. How can you find amazing candidates fast? Easy. Just use indeed. Because when it comes to hiring, indeed is all you need. Indeed's sponsored jobs will help you stand out and hire fast. With sponsored jobs, your post jumps to the top of the page for your relevant candidates. So you can reach the people you want faster. And it makes a huge difference. According to Indeed data, sponsored jobs posted directly on Indeed have 45% more applications than non-sponsored jobs. There's no need to wait any longer. Speed up your hiring right now with Indeed. And listeners of Mindscape will get a $75 sponsor job credit. To get your jobs more visibility at indeed.com slash Mindscape, just go to indeed.com slash Mindscape right now. And support our show by saying you heard about Indeed on this podcast. Indeed.com slash Mindscape terms and conditions apply. Hiring Indeed is all you need. So how much can we extrapolate from the ability to knock out Daff to and have happy, longer lived worms to any lessons for human beings? I think understanding what the molecular components are that change in those long lived animals is really instructive. And then doing the actual experiments to ask the question, well how late can we do that? Right. My lab is not doing work in other organisms right now, but people who work with mice are starting to ask that question, how late can we have an intervention? Because if you have to do it the whole life, that's not practical. But if you can find interventions like a Daff to equivalent knocking down that receptor or something equivalent late in life, then that starts to be something that's useful for asking the question, can we keep people healthier? Right. And then like what I was talking about with Parkinson's, there are things that we would want to knock down or affect to improve cognitive function. And we have to know how is that going to affect longevity and vice versa. If we have a longevity treatment, how is that going to affect cognitive function? Right. So asking those questions first in a really practical organism like say, the elegance is very helpful. So you can sort of untangle all those things. And it seems to take an optimistic lesson from it. There's nothing biologically. Certainly there's nothing in the laws of physics, but even biologically there's nothing wrong with really repairing ourselves to keep them going. It's just if I may extrapolate, so correct me if I'm going crazy. It's just that our biology chooses not to do that because we've outlived our usefulness. I think that's basically right. But we could easily imagine therapies, treatments, whatever, that tell our bodies, no, actually keep those cells healthy for another thousand years. Exactly. Some mild forms of stress, this idea of hormises where you have a mild stress, and that turns on a stress response, and that in the end makes an animal live longer. You know, that's the kind of thing that intermittent fasting or color of extinction, or some of these drugs might be doing. So telling yourselves, there's not enough food, let's turn on the stress response, that actually could be good. Right. Right. Yes. So this is, and I think that this, I've heard this kind of discussion in the context of diets that somehow making your body think that things are going bad is good for it. Because that's when it's self preservation mechanisms kick in a little bit. Like the body gets a little bit complacent if you just feed it healthy food all the time, and that can actually have a bad effect. That's right. So you want more of the niche kind of thing, right? A little, whatever doesn't kill you makes you live longer. And that's actually true for the worms. So you give them a little bit of heat stress, or a little bit of metabolic stress, or don't feed them a little while, and then they will, you just, the trick is you don't want to do it too long. Of course. Right. So none of this gives us worms that live forever. No, but if you add the pathways together, so it was a nice study that again, Cynthia's lab did years ago where they took, I really was germline, so it's worms that have lacked their germline, because that's another mechanism to extend lifespan. And then I think it was they also knocked down the DAF2 receptor. Anyway, they got worms that lived something like 114 days. Oh, wow. As opposed to 14 days. Yes. So, and at the end, the student who was doing the work actually named the worms. Of course. They were down to 40. You could become a 10. Yeah, I'm worried named them, the names of the beetles, and then they started dropping dead. So, yeah. So, and then there's a mutant in that same insulin signaling pathway. There's a gene just, the protein that acts just downstream of DAF2, the receptor, where there are mutations of that. If they can get it through, coax them through development, then those animals live 10 times as long. Wow. So, it just means that they're turning on these repair pathways on high. Right. Now, they probably don't have any progeny. They can't get through developments. They have other problems. But it does suggest that if we knew the molecular tricks to do to the cells, you could do this. Right. Of course, it becomes more complicated with humans with way more tissues. No, of course, but I get the lesson seems to be that there's individual things that point us in the right direction. And interesting combinations of these individual things don't just add. They really reinforce each other in a positive way. Yeah. And I'm excited about the idea of exercise, because that's in humans, it seems like it just helps with everything. So, you could argue there, you might give somebody a drug that it would extend lifespan, but it may not help their cognitive function or vice versa. But there are some things that seem to help everything. And I think that's where we're going to, that seems like a more logical way to go, is to try to find the things that will help the entire system. Right. And there's sort of short term strategies for people alive right now, exercise. So, maybe intermittent fasting is helpful, probably good diet is helpful. Mental activity, is that something? Well, that's interesting. So, my colleague Sam Long has done some work on this, who says that that's all baloney. Yeah, it could be. I'm not sure. Yeah, so these brain games type of thing. It seems more the idea of exercising things that help with cardiovascular activity, that actually helps more. So, there's a analogy that would make you think exercising your brain makes it a stronger muscle, but maybe that's all just nonsense. Right. It turns out it just makes people really good at that type of crossword puzzle. Right. Which in itself, if you're really blind, might be good. Which is fine, right. An actual exercise that might be cardiovascular health will help your cognitive functions a little bit. And as it turns out, some of the, I was just reading about study yesterday, where using muscles to keep not just cardiovascular health, but actual strength, higher is good, because then it turns out those, because of this mitochondrial, we haven't talked about this yet, but the mitochondria actually talk to each other through signals called mitochondria. And so, when there's mitochondrial stress in one place, it can signal to other tissues that there's stress as well, and turn on this response. And so, this idea is that if you keep your muscles healthy, they may actually be sending out more than just, you know, just this cardiovascular activity, maybe actually telling your other cells to improve their mitochondrial function. Oh, okay. Good. So, there's teamwork amongst the different cells, telling them to live a long time. So, have we missed any different mechanisms for making RC elegans live longer? Well, interrupting our reproduction helps them. Don't have kids. Don't intermittent fast and keep exercising. I think that's the main ones, but there are things that we can kind of relate to. Yeah, they are things that we can relate to, and actually it's not just we can sit around waiting for the miracle drug. These are things that we can imagine doing. Yeah, I think you should still help kids. Is there any data on human beings do childless people live longer? So, there's a study that gets quoted most often to this point, and there's a study about Korean unix, and those men live longer than their cohort. Okay. So, men and women? Well, this was only a study at this, you know, this like, palace, you know. I think it sounds like they'll be very hard to control for an enormously large other number of actors in that particular study. I don't know. I don't really buy that one, but it wouldn't seem to be that hard to just ask, you know, demographically do childless people live longer? Well, I don't think it's childless. It's, does your germline not function? Oh, okay. And in that case, like if a germline doesn't function, there could be other sort of diseases or other, you know, problems that it's not. So, I'm not sure that that's actually the right question to ask, but you could ask whether there are certain hormones associated with the germline that are pro-health or anti-health. And so, right now, there's an upper limit to how human beings live. 120 years, something like that. Yeah, the longest living person that we know about lived 122 years. 122 years. And were they with it at the end? I don't know. I mean, the reports make it seem like she was, but I don't actually know. Again, the reliability of that might be, from my view of story, you want to tell that does it sound. Yeah, I, I do know that, you know, there's some debate about what the actual upper limit is. And the study that sort of addresses the problem was that woman was, she knows she's an outlier point and sort of changed the curve. And so, she wasn't there. It would give us the impression that it continues to increase. Right. And all the time, like right now, the oldest living human is usually around 115, 116, something like that. But, you know, it doesn't mean, I mean, there's ever more, super-centonarians. And there's more and more people who live that long. So, it suggests that that won't be the upper limit soon. And also, the, the different things we were talking about in terms of diet and exercise, is it safe to say that they improve the quality of life when we're in our upper years, not just the number of years? Yeah, I would, I would say that really those things do improve quality of life. I do want to make an extinction, a distinction between these super-centonarians and what we're talking about. Right. I think the rest of us are mere mortals, right? We mortals. Exactly. And I think that the centenarians, and certainly the super-centonarians, they may be people who, just through genetic luck, are impervious to all those damages that other people, so, you know, if, you know, if I were to smoke or do all these things, it would probably cause me to live shorter. Definitely would make me live shorter. It's not clear that that's true for the super-centonarians. So, that's the other question asked. Like, what is different about this population? Because the funny thing is I've started collecting these stories about, you know, because people always interview them and ask this question, what do you do that makes you live so long? And they always have an explanation. And for about 70% of the women, the answer is, I stayed away from men. But they always say, you know, there's things like, I drink a glass of whiskey every day or have two boiled eggs. And of course, that's, you know, ludicrous. It's an N.F.1. But I think it doesn't matter what they did. Yeah. Most of them drink and a lot of them smoked because that was the thing. And I think it didn't matter. But for us, the rest of us, we have to take care of our bodies a little bit better. They were born on third-based and think that they had a triple, right? Exactly. And, but from everything that you've been saying, there's things we as individuals can do to live a little bit longer, a little bit healthier, et cetera. But there's also, we can let our imaginations run about therapies and drugs and treatments in the future. I'm not going to say when, maybe you'll say when, but they could extend lifespan more or less indefinitely in principle. There are certainly people who are working on those kinds of things. And they have taken it to the point where they're actually developing drugs to do things like get rid of senescent cells because senescent cells, for example, are very toxic to the rest of the body. So those kinds of drugs like senolytics or activate the kind of metabolism that we're talking about in Daph-2 worms, you know, turning on those pathways, basically tricking the bodies into thinking that you're colorically restricted. Right. And doing all those things. Fix yourself bodies. Exactly. And then there's this idea, right, so that you could take certain drugs that are already being used for other diseases. And those are helping people live longer beyond what they were expecting with just fixing that disease. So that, you know, that's the idea behind MET-formin, for example. Now, I'm not involved in any of those studies. I'm more interested in the question of like, what is quality of life? Can we improve that and can we model it? And can we figure out what the molecular components that help us improve quality of life? And hopefully those things will extrapolate as well. Can we be extrapolating enough to say that the 21st century is the last century that human beings will be dying of old age? Maybe if they're rich enough. Well, that's a whole thing, right? I mean, what if there's a therapy that says, oh, you can live for a thousand years, it costs a million dollars. There's a social problem that comes up very, very strongly right there, right? And I think that is part of the thinking among some of the people who are doing some of the work, not doing the science, but I think we have to get away from that. Because that's already true. You know, if we think about the way people get treated for other diseases like cancer, sadly, because the way our healthcare system still works, you have a better chance of living if you're rich than if you're poor. And so I think that anti-aging drugs or pro-launch-eventy drugs, those would be things that would sort of be the extreme of that situation. Yeah, I think it will become a lot more vivid when people do start, the rich people do start living a lot longer. And that will be something, I don't know, it'll be very interesting. I'm not quite sure what will actually happen. I'm very bad at predicting these political changes. You know, it rattles around in the brain when you're working on some of these things, like what are the ramifications of that? In general, what we really hope, though, is that if you were to find something that every person could take would be relatively inexpensive, and it would just help them avoid something like cardiovascular disease or diabetes or all these metabolic syndromes that people develop in developed countries with aid, that would be something that really would help all of us be healthier and live, you know, maybe not hugely longer but somewhat longer but with higher quality of life. That's really what we're going for. At least those of us who work on the things that we do, I know that that other thought is that you can have somebody live for it. I'm not sure the well-book ever get there and I'm not so sad that that would be the case. Yeah, and I think that's okay. I just wanted to sort of let ourselves go wild, but I think that you're right that it seems sensible, it seems reasonable to imagine that it's not that we'll go exactly as we are now, and then someone will discover a new mortality drug. It's that along the way we'll learn to fix some of the problems, knock out some of the worst things that will make us healthier for longer. Exactly. And I think the biggest area where we need to think about that is cognitive decline. Right, because now people are living long enough that they are developing in dimensions and things that at a rate that people didn't have before simply because they didn't live long enough to get them. And so that's what we really have to figure out now is how to avoid how can we really treat Alzheimer's disease and other things like that. The really impact quality of life in a way that's beyond just, you know, like I run slower. I really want to help people be functional until until the end of their lives. And I think that's really where the major focus is going to be now. But it sounds as if from everything you've said so far that there's grounds for optimism. I mean on some timescale it's always hard to predict how quickly things happen, but these are not intractable problems. They're not. We have to do a better job of identifying the cause of some of those problems. And Alzheimer's is really, I think, the big one because, you know, that's just the longer we have people live. Eventually, if we don't figure out that problem, they could be walking around just fine but getting Alzheimer's. So it's those seem to be the relationship between that longevity and Alzheimer's is not entirely clear to us. And so I think we have to work on that while we work on these other quality of life issues as well. But that's really a big one. And meanwhile, I can't let you quite get away without raising this other issue that you ran into over the course of your investigations about, you know, because you're studying reproduction obviously plays a large role in this lifespan issue. And so what gets passed down to different generations of the worms you're studying and you came across a little bit of a surprise, is that right? Yeah, so I should talk about it and we'll erase it if you don't want me to. Okay, so yeah, so I was I mean, by the way, so it's not that you can't talk about it because it's bad. No, we don't want it to get out there before it's published. Exactly. And also we don't know the whole mechanism yet. Right. So we just know this phenomenon that we discovered recently that when the worms encounter a pathogen, which they actually really initially like, it's like I think it smells like hamburgers or something to them. They love it. They start eating it, but it's bad for them and it makes them sick. And so other people have figured that out already. So Corey Bergman's lab and you and Jean already figured out that when they eat this pseudomonas bacteria that they then feel sick and they later know to avoid it. And so that's the way we consider the mothers doing that. And so learning we've already said that they can learn these things. Yeah, so that's all factory learning. And so what we recently discovered sort of kind of because we were looking for it, but a little bit accidentally that these animals pass that information on down to their progeny. So that they their kids already know to avoid pseudomonas, even though they've never seen it before. And they certainly haven't eaten it and gotten sick from it. And they say like, if my mom had gotten food poisoning and then for them from there on out, I could never eat that food again. Potato salad or something. Was the food poisoning or the negative stimulus before they even had the children? Well, that's what we started asking next because you could have reasoned like so in the case of my mom if she had that a potato salad, I made her sick while she was pregnant with me. And that's kind of one phenomenon that's different from if she ate it and then 20 years later had me. And so we asked that by asking how many generations do these worms know to avoid pseudomonas and so far it's out to the great, great granddaughters. Is it possible they're being taught? Did they go to a little seelegan school or avoid this stuff? I mean, it must be already passed down to them. They're neurons already know to know. They're neurons know. And is it, I think that this leads us to this issue that we have a cartoon of how inheritance works that we get from high school biology. There's a code. There's a DNA. There's a set of base pairs and there's information encoded there. And that's what we passed down. But in fact, where it's increasingly becoming clear that more than that gets passed down, there are other chemicals that go along when you give birth to somebody. And information can somehow be encoded in there. Is that probably what's going on in this? Yeah, we think it's probably modifying that DNA. So it's modifying the DNA directly, you're just. Sorry, let me, we don't think it's modifying the DNA. We think it's modifying the structures that protect the DNA at his stone. And we think that's part of it. And there may be other factors as well. But we still have to figure it out. So we'll, we'll know soon. But there is, you know, there are enzymes that do the job of doing these modifications and undoing them. So the idea is you could rewrite this what's called his stone code. We don't really know yet. And so we'll try to figure that out. But it could be something else. But there are memories being passed down and it's not just the DNA, but you're born knowing something because your great grandma learned it. Yeah, so this is still blowing my mind. And we still have to figure this out if it's true. I think it should. But I think that we're on to something and it would make sense for these worms because if they encounter specific pathogen, it may be worth remembering. I don't know whether you want really weird questions. Why don't they just always avoid it? And so I don't know if this pathogen smells like something else that's normally nutritious for them. But it's there in their environment and they have to know not to eat it or maybe eating a little bit is not terrible. And it's a good reminder that even if you knew the entire genetic code of the organism, you don't know the whole organism. That's right. Because there's more things in life than our DNA. Nature is fascinating. We're still trying to figure out everything out. And on that note, Culling Murphy, thanks so much for coming. Thanks for having me. Yeah.