 Hello everyone and welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host, Sean Carroll. Today we have a special treat. Scott Derrickson is an accomplished movie director, writer and producer responsible for films such as The Exorcism of Emily Rose, Sinister, and most recently The Marvel Movie, Doctor Strange. Scott's also an extremely thoughtful guy with strong ideas about the craft of filmmaking, the history of cinema, and the relationship between movies and other art forms. So we have a wide-ranging conversation which basically falls into two parts. The first thing we did was we sort of deconstructed the making of a big blockbuster superhero movie using Doctor Strange as an example. So we lay out the whole thing from the initial pitch, the meeting where you talk to the studio and see if you're on the same wavelength, through pre-production, shooting, reshoots, and finally post-production. You'll learn, for example, why the cast and crew, especially Benedict Cumberbatch, thought it was really important to shoot on location in Nepal, and why digital photography is okay for most shots in a big movie like this, but why you have to switch to film once you're outside in the sunshine. These are things that is a theoretical physicist, I'm not generally up on, so I really learned a lot from this conversation. Then in the second part, we'll talk more broadly about the idea of cinema and film and what it means, the role of themes and stories in filmmaking. Many of Scott's films have been horror movies, and we talk about the unique role of that particular genre in evoking a certain kind of human reaction, how that relates to the existence of evil and everyday human anxieties, whether or not you have supernatural boogie men in your movie or not. We also come from different perspectives about the fundamental nature of reality. Scott is a Christian, I am a naturalist, and so we talk about how one's worldview influences the story one tries to tell in a movie, and Scott says the answer is a lot. He says it'll be very, very different movie maker if he suddenly converted to atheism tomorrow, but it's unlikely to happen. We also agreed though that the world is more interesting with people coming from different perspectives, so Scott says he doesn't want me to convert to his religious viewpoint, only afterward that I realized that maybe this means I'm gonna be condemned to eternal damnation. Happily, I'm also sure about that, and I don't even believe it myself, so I'm not really worried, but it's one of the things that you have to take into account when you talk about these big picture issues. Anyway, this was truly a great conversation, I'm sure you're gonna enjoy it. Remember that if you're so inclined, you can support Mindscape on Patreon, patreon.com slash Sean M. Carroll. We love our supporters, thanks so much, and whether you're a Patreon pleasure or not, thanks very much for listening, so let's go. You just realized that your business needed to hire someone yesterday. How can you find amazing candidates fast? Easy, just use indeed, because when it comes to hiring, indeed is all you need. Indeed's sponsored jobs will help you stand out and hire fast. With sponsored jobs, your post jumps to the top of the page for your relevant candidates, so you can reach the people you want faster. And it makes a huge difference. According to Indeed data, sponsored jobs posted directly on Indeed have 45% more applications than non-sponsored jobs. There's no need to wait any longer, speed up your hiring right now with Indeed, and listeners of Mindscape will get a $75 sponsored job credit to get your jobs more visibility at indeed.com slash Mindscape. Just go to Indeed.com slash Mindscape right now, and support our show by saying you heard about Indeed on this podcast. Indeed.com slash Mindscape terms and conditions apply. Hiring Indeed is all you need. [♪ OUTRO MUSIC PLAYING [♪ It's Scott Derrickson, welcome to the Mindscape podcast. So good to be here. Thanks. Now I do want to talk about big picture stuff, you know, themes and cinema and all these great things. I know that you have lots of opinions on, but I thought let's set the stage and get into it by being a little bit more down to earth. So you've directed Doctor Strange, a big blockbuster, Marvel movie. When I see movies like this these days, when we all see them, one of the things is at the end of it, the credits are very, very long. Yes. It's a gigantic operation to shepherd something like this from start to finish. So why don't you, for the audience who are not necessarily cinephiles, they just explain like what it's like from the initial pitch for the idea to opening night. I mean, for a movie that size, from the original pitch to opening night, is probably usually about two years, you know, for a movie of that size. And the script process goes on for a good, you know, six to nine months before hard, what they call hard prep, hard pre-production. Begin. So there's always that, you know, six to nine month period where you're getting the scripts written, rewritten, putting it in shape where you're breaking it down and getting it ready to shoot. And then that process for a movie, this size always continues through prep and through production. You never stop rewriting? You never stop rewriting. And by the way, that's, there are plenty of directors who work that way anyway, you know, Stanley Kubrick. I'm reading the book about him in his relationship with Arthur C. Clark. And he was rewriting 2001 all the way through posts. I mean, he was just rewriting. My impression is his relationship with all of the authors he adapted was Tetchy. Well, yes, especially given the fact that he said only bad movies make, or only bad books make good movies. I think that may have been a reason why the relationship was always Tetchy. But it was certainly in this, I highly recommend that book, by the way. Okay. The relationship that the two of them had is so fascinating. And the book is really dense, really well researched. And I know a lot about that movie and I didn't know anything in that book. But anyway, so back to your question. Then you've got three major phases of filmmaking, which is preproduction. I think the longest and most important phase, because that's when you're really designing everything that will become the physical reality of the movie. Well, actually, I don't want to pass too quickly over the pitch. Yeah, sure. Yeah, right. Obviously, Dr. Strange is a pre-existing idea. So it's a different kind of thing. There's all sorts of different ways that a movie can come about. But did you have an angle on the movie and then go to Marvel, or did they come to you and say, hey, do you want to think about this? That's a good question. What they did is they had a pool of directors that in their minds were possibilities. And it was a large pool. I mean, dozens of directors that they liked. And at this point, Marvel was beginning, it's really big expansion, which has taken place in just the last few years. And they had approached me years ago about four, and I just told them I wouldn't know how to make for a superhero. Yeah, not my superhero. Just so you know, and I don't think there's any superhero that I would have felt personally drawn to except for Dr. Strange. So when I heard they were making Dr. Strange, I felt immediately like this is something I could definitely do. And the way the process worked was they brought me in, along with again, dozens of other directors. And they had a short document signed an NDA in Undisclosure Agreement, and you read this document. And I was very impressed with the document because the things that were in there were essentially what they felt should and shouldn't be a Dr. Strange movie. It was very basic. But it lined up perfectly with mine, which they really liked the deep ideas and the philosophical overtones of the Dr. Strange comics. They were aspects of the love crafty and monsters that they weren't interested in, at least in an early film. And I felt like they understood the character, this lonely, isolated character who is different than other superheroes because of his relationship to other dimensions, not in a scientific sense, but in the Marvel comic universe sense. And that they were looking for a way to open up the MCU, the Marvel comic universe, the Marvel Cinematic Universe to a multiverse, where you're actually dealing literally with other dimensions, unlike OzGuard, which is out there in our own universe. Literally somewhere, yeah. Somewhere you can fly there if you've got a means to get there, you can fly there. I was actually part of the science advising for Thor. Oh yeah, which was a huge aspect of that movie. And I think because they did that so well in that movie, I think that they recognized that when it came to Dr. Strange, it was okay to let magic be magic. Exactly, and I think that the part of it was Thor, despite being a god in some sense, like we're gonna portray him as pretty grounded. We think he's a god because he's super powerful, but it has to make sense. And almost intentionally leaving the magic thing for later in the series, and that's where you could do it. Right, because as much as I love and respect science, I don't think that an approach of trying to scientifically validate the mysticism of Dr. Strange would be interesting to me, and would feel like a disrespect to the comics. So in the fact that that's not where they were coming from was great. So I immediately thought, I think I'm the right guy to do this movie. I mean, I felt a real deep conviction about it, and I decided that I would put everything I could into getting that job. And I just decided that I was going to work harder to try to get that job than anything I had ever done before, in terms of efforts to get hired for things. This is obnoxious, but I've said it publicly before. I spent $42,000 of my own money on a presentation. Wow. Which was the eighth of eight meetings that I had. I bet you made it back, didn't you? Well, not only did I make it back, but one of the first things when they hired me is they said we have to buy in that presentation, because we need to own all that material. So that was immediately, that was my first, even before I had a directing deal. I got all that money back. But it was, for me, it was coming from a very personal place. It wasn't so much that I, I mean, it was excited to make a Marvel movie, but I've never been somebody who's been enamored by big budget filmmaking as opposed to small budget filmmaking. They all have their pros and cons as an artist to work on. They all have their pros and cons as films to watch. But in this case, I just felt like this is a movie that I think I could do better than maybe anyone else. I'm the right fit for this. And that became my focus was to show them why I was the right fit. Yeah. And so you did that and they picked you. They did. And so then you can start this wonderful process that you started. And so pre-production, I mean, there was, there's scripts being written and I presume there's a certain Hollywood thing, right? There's some people who get credit for the script, but there's probably more voices that came into actually writing. Yeah, that was it. In this case, there were, you know, the two credited writers were John Spades who wrote the first draft, who was a mutual friend, I believe you know him. And he was one that we picked, you know, based on his original screenplay for Prometheus, which was called I think Alien Engineers was brilliant. You know, that screenplay was so good. And I would just, had been a fan of his original script for passengers was brilliant. And we hired him, so he did the first draft and then myself and Cargo, my writing partner, who's here sitting next to me, just listening in. Just. That's Cargo. Follow my Twitter, is he? We great Twitter feed. He's, he follow Cargo on Twitter. That's, I'm here to pump Cargo's Twitter feed. But yeah, we came in and rewrote for quite a long time. I mean, we must have done, you know, 20 drafts, 25 drafts, something like that. And then there were some other writers who came in and took passes on it to add humor to try fixing some structural problems that we were having Dan Harmon did a quick pass on it, which, which, there wasn't much that he wrote that ended up in the script, but his analysis of where we were having problems and the movie was so spot on. So he was, he was actually a critical component in that movie, you know, eventually working. I'm finishing up, you know, writing a book, a poppy the book on quantum mechanics. And I always send out my books to be read, my drafts by other people. And sometimes they go like, no, chapter three needs to be chapter eight. Like, of course, I think, yeah, exactly. Well, and that was, and so that whole process working with a budget this size is very common. It's not, it's not so common. Sometimes if you're working with a true author, director, you know, they'll do everything on their own. And it works out and sometimes it doesn't. But I don't mind the process of working hand in hand, of rewriting other people's scripts or having my scripts rewritten as long as the people are talented. And while there's like a million things going on, casting, and set design. It all happens all at the same time. And are you kind of the boss or partly the boss of all that? Yeah, it's like, you know, you're the captain of the ship. And so everything goes through you. And everybody has to come to you, you know, for information about what you're looking for and you give that information and there's a tremendous amount of delegating clearly. But you ultimately are responsible as being the only person who's holding it all together in your head. Yeah. And a big part of that process becomes helping, for me, it's too, with Dr. Strange in particular, it was really two things. I mean, one of them was making it really clear to all the major department heads what the target of the movie was, what it was that we were going to be making. And for me, it was an emphasis upon, this is a mind-bending, mind-trip action movie about a soul personality, about one guy overcoming himself, getting past his own self. I mean, at some point at this point, the Marvel Cinematic Universe is mature, right? Like you have to look for ways to distinguish. Yes, and you have to say this is not, this is unlike these other films in this way. But I do like this sensibility, you know, for Marvel, for example, when it came to performances, you know, some Marvel films are more over the top and cartoony or comic book-y, if I could use that phrase. And I, for Dr. Strange, because we were going to be venturing out into such fantastical terrain, I actually wanted the performances to be very realistic, right? You know, so that was part of the casting process, which is why we got such serious actors, you know, to play pretty dramatic roles, Rachel McAdams, until the Swinton and Chutella, I mentioned before, and you know, these Oscar-winning people, and of course Benedict. And probably, you know, that sensibility was something that everyone needs to understand. You know, so as a director, you have to make a certain basic vision of what the movie is going to be clear to everybody so that they understand the sensibility behind it. And I think that's so helpful. And then encourage them, my whole process, for sure, is encourage them to bring me better ideas than mine. Right. And they always do. You know, what do you do a lot of recruiting of actors? I mean, sometimes they want the role really badly, other times they're... Oh yeah, hard to get. No, no, no. In the case of the major roles for Dr. Strange, I mean, we went after every one of those actors, you know, for specific reasons. Benedict was our first choice. We wanted him. And we talked about other possibilities for a very short time. But we, Kevin Feige, who runs Marvel, you really make the movie with him. You know, he's not just a studio head. He's very hands on. He's really in there with you without a lot of middlemen. And he and I quickly agreed that he was the right guy. And I flew to London immediately and met with Benedict. And the timing didn't work out because he was doing Hamlet in London. And so then I had to start looking for other actors. And nothing was... I mean, I met with amazing actors. But in the end, it was just like, it's got to be Benedict. And Kevin, to his credit, you know, went for the second time back to Disney and said, we really want Benedict, so we need to move the release date. So we moved the release date from the summer. That's a huge deal. It's a huge deal because the fall is not as lucrative. It's just not. And so we probably could have made even more money in terms of opening day and that sort of thing. But we wouldn't have made, you know, the movie that we made because it's so centered around Benedict. This episode of Mindscape is sponsored by BetterHelp. When it comes to relationships, we often hear about the red flags we should avoid. But what if we focus more on looking for the green flags in friends and partners? If you're not sure what green flags look like, therapy could help you identify them. Actively practice them in your relationships and embody the green flag energy yourself. Whether you're dating, married, building a friendship or just working on yourself, it's time to form relationships that love you back. One of the great things about therapy is by looking inside yourself, you can both learn to take those warning signs seriously, but also learn to be open to new experiences and new things. To know when something might be worth pursuing. BetterHelp is a fully online service that makes therapy affordable and convenient, serving over 5 million people worldwide. You can easily switch therapists any time at no extra cost. So discover your relationship green flags with BetterHelp. Visit betterhelp.com slash Mindscape today to get 10% off your first month. That's BetterHelpHELP.com slash Mindscape. A lot of us start the new year saying that we will learn a new language, but it's hard to actually commit to it. Vappel makes it easy to learn one in less time than you think. Vappel's quick 10 minute lessons handcrafted by over 200 language experts get you to begin speaking your new language in three weeks or whatever pace you choose. And because conversing is the key to really understanding each other in new languages, Vappel is designed using practical, real world conversations. What I love about Vappel is you can either dive in deeply and truly get fluent or you can just master some of the basics before going on a trip. So let's get more of you talking in a new language. Vappel is gifting our listeners 60% off subscriptions at babble.com slash Mindscape. Get up to 60% off at babble.com slash Mindscape. Spelled B-A-B-B-E-L. .com slash Mindscape. That's babble.com slash Mindscape rules and restrictions may apply. And at the same time, you're deciding what the sets are going to look like. Like I remember, I don't know if you saw this little video you can find on YouTube. The Russo Brothers did a video about Infinity Ward, they just analyzed like a little 30-second scene, right? And it was where Thor appears with the Guardians of the Galaxy. And it's a great scene, but it just impresses on someone like me who is not in the business how much effort goes into those 30 seconds, like with the lighting coming from particular ways and the postures of every actor and which thing you're gonna do. And this is all going in your mind in this production phase, right? Yeah, and the breakdown of all the different elements that have to go into how to shoot those particular sets. And this is why the pre-production phase is the most critical phase, you know, because you've gotta have enough time. First of all, to dream it up and then to thrash it and criticize it in your mind and think about what could be better. I think one of the main reasons why so many big blockbuster movies are not great is because you have enough money to afford your first idea. And your first idea is rarely your best idea. And so it takes a real conscious discipline to come up with these ideas, but then to be very harsh and critical of them. And to their credit, I think it's one of the things that Marvel does better than anybody. You know, they are not ever impressed with their own work. And so everything is always being criticized by everybody all the time, which as a director can become a little painful at times. But it sounds like being a scientist actually is very fitting. No, it's the same idea, which is, you know, if you want to get to the best version of something or to the truth of something or to an ideal of some kind, you're not going to get there without admitting to all your shortcomings and all your failures and all the things that actually don't work and don't quite line up. And it's true of writing as well. You know, the phrase that we would always use in working on Dr. Strange between myself and Cargill and particularly John Spates was, we're doing a lot of hand waving in this scene, you know? And the hand waving of, we're all pretending like this works in a way it actually doesn't work. That's literally what physicists say to each other. You're hand waving this particular question. Yes, and it's the same thing. And because so much of filmmaking, you know, is, like I love the fact that the academy is the academy of arts and sciences, you know, because there's so much of, you know, what you're in service of is art. But so much of the actual making of a movie is science. So much of it is just physical. It's practical. It's, you know, and even down to things, in the case of Dr. Strange, and this gets still to your initial question about communicating with department heads, one of the things that I was adamant about from the beginning that was probably the hardest concept to get across to people was that we were going to have these incredible, fantastical sequences of the, you know, mind trip through, you know, through multi-dimensional, multiple dimensions and New York being turned into this Escherisk puzzle and people fighting in their astral forms, you know, all that. But my mantra was, I want the physical materials of what is on screen, the physical material that the audience is looking at to feel tactile and real. And like something they can relate to. As opposed to say, the emperors, you know, amorphous lightning bolt finger lights, like we don't have a reference for anything that looks like that in our experience. You know, lightning is sharper edge than that. Yeah. So even Tesla light is more defined than that. So I was always coming back to that, like no amorphous light, no, no, I don't want to represent magic as being this, I want it to be, so for example, when they create the mantras, you know, that's very crispy, sparkly material that looks like the sparklers you grew up playing with and looks like fire and look, you feel like you have a sense of what it would feel like to touch that material. Right. So what are the distance between this crazy magic stuff and our human experience to be as short as possible? Exactly. Because I think that as soon as it's not, as soon, if you try to merge, if you try to communicate magic, I felt, and I still feel that if you try to communicate magic with physical representations that have no human context in terms of their tactile, your visual, tactile relationship to them in your own mind, then you're using something unrelatable to try to communicate something unrelatable. And I really feel that the best way to get the audience to feel a sense of awe is if you're showing them something unrelatable, but everything that's actually in the frame has a physical relatability to their experience. Like that was a bit, and that's everything, I mean, it took me, you know, like several minutes just to try to get the concept across to you. And you can see how that's a difficult thing, then, to get across to a farm of, you know, 50 visual effects operators. Well, is it the same thing where you're saying about, you know, the first idea is not the best one, in this CGI ready age, it's maybe too easy to just make some amorphous lightning bolts do all the work. Exactly right. Exactly right. And it was a constant struggle to, you know, reject things. And I think that at times it was very frustrating for the visual effects people, because they aren't, weren't used to that kind of scrutiny. And I was pointing them, I was saying, you know, we were doing these things that are so fantastical and no one's done it before. And there's no precedent for the visual thing that we're doing, but it can't look unreal. It's a tough challenge. Exactly. So it was a ribbed-is right there. But they did really get behind it. Like, I think that once I managed to communicate that at a deep enough level, something sort of kicked in and it was very, it was industrial, industrial, like magic and a company called Luma and a couple others. You know, the head people who were working on the project for those companies became very excited at the prospect, you know, and suddenly realized that they were going to get to create some things that were going to be boundary pushing for them. Right. And that's a message across. And that's what you want. You want them to get excited that they get to be co-creators, that they get to bring, I wanted them to bring me things that superseded my ideas, but I kept kicking them back because it was like, it's not that kind of magic. It's not, you know, I don't, it has to feel physically tactile to the audience. They've got to have a some way of relating to every piece of visual material they're looking at. Okay. And at some point production starts. Yeah. There you are. Where did you start? What was the first thing you did? The first thing we did is Nepal. We shot in Kathmandu, Nepal. And we'd gone there three times. I think we did an early scout there before the big earthquake. And then the earthquake occurred and we did a second scout. And there was a real question about safety, about working there. Because if another quick happened, there were huge piles of rubble everywhere. And some of the sets that we had picked were destroyed. So it was a pretty major decision. And Benedict to his credit sort of led the charge and saying, we have to shoot here now. Like we have to. Like they need it. They need Nepal to be represented. Because tourism, it's a third world country. And tourism is one of their primary sources of income and tourism just vanished after the earthquake. And he really felt like this is a special place. He had history there. He'd been there when he was younger. And he said, we have to shoot here now because it's a moral good. And we'll find a way to make it all safe. And everybody got behind that. It was great. And how long is the actual shooting take overall? With the Marvel movie Shooting Days are usually around 80 to 85 days, which is not much. I mean, I was a little asked, is it feel rushed? Yes. And they have very good reasons for doing it, I think. Because I think that, for example, my first assistant director who had just come off as a specter, the James Bond movie, that movie was 123 Shooting Days. And I made Dr. Strange in like 85. But what it does is when you know that your production time is so compressed, it just makes everybody raise their game. Because when you get the reality of the schedule in front of you and you realize on this week we have to accomplish all of this, everybody just worked, everyone works harder. And I think that there is a lot of truth to, who's Orson Wells, who said the absence of boundaries is the enemy of art. And I really believe that's true, which you need, I think, a measure of pressure and limitation in order to facilitate the highest measure of creativity. I think Robert Frost had the famous quote about, would he ever write free verse? And he says, it's like playing tennis without a net, right? It's not fun anymore. Right, right, exactly. So I think that there's a real method to Marbles approach to that. But they also work with the understanding that there's almost certainly going to be a sizable amount of reshooting. Well, I was gonna ask, so I presume they're doing some special effects work while you're shooting. There must be an enormous amount of effort just to put together what you've shot on a shooting digitally or. Yeah. Actually in Kathmandu, we shot all of that on film. I am a big believer in digital photography. It's certainly not just the future. It's here. It's like what everybody works on with the exception of a few authors like Tarantino and Chris Nolan who can forward to shoot all their films on actual film. But I've yet to see still a daylight exterior look great on digital. I just think daylight exterior have a quality, even the best work that I've seen. Still has a quality that pales so to film. And so we did, I did, was able to convince everybody that we need to shoot Kathmandu. It's an interesting science question because there's no reason in principle why it couldn't look as good. It's just two different ways of recording photons landing on your detector somehow. But yeah, but I think about film, I agree. There's something that makes it feel more real. It makes it feel more real. And I think that it has to do with our experience of the specificities of sunlight. And again, it's like cloud cover. If it's a cloud cover day, like we did digital exteriors on sinister and thank God there was cloud cover when we shot those because they look great. It all looks great. That, the differential between film and digital when it comes to cloud cover days is in my opinion negligible. It's not that important. But daylight experience, when you're dealing with sunlight on people's faces or shooting the actual sky itself, the difference is enormous. I mean, so enormous that for me, it always pulls me out of a movie when I'm looking at digital daylight exteriors. They just don't feel real. And when you start with the reshoots, are the reshoots something, I mean, they're planned in presumably to the schedule. And is it mostly because you say this scene isn't working or we could do it better? What makes you go to a research? Well, what you do is you put the movie together and most of the visual effects are not being done yet because you want to have the movie in relatively good shape before you start building all those visual elements. So the post production process is when you build most of the effects. So there's a lot of green screen in that first cut. And what you really need to do is get it together and get it in front of people quickly. And whether it's first, five people, 10 people, and then get a small little in-house crew of 50 strangers to watch it. And you will learn very soon and painfully. Like it or not? What doesn't work. And what does work and what doesn't work? And you get a good idea of, OK, here's what our problems are. And that begins the process of start. You immediately start to plan, OK, what are we going to need to be different to solve some of these problems? Now occasionally, even a big movie, like a Marvel movie, doesn't need much of that. I believe they only did a few days of reshoots for the Avengers, for the first Avengers. That movie just came in, everything worked. That's rare even for a small independent film. I mean, we did no reshoots on sinister, that we didn't need them. That's rare. It was a $3 million movie. But on Doctor Strange, we definitely did. But we also knew that we would, because we knew that we were struggling with certain things, you know, still in the screenplay, while we were making it. And the surprising thing is what does work that you didn't think would work and what doesn't work that you assumed would work. You know, it's always illuminating. I think filmmaking is a bit like baking, you know, where if you're a chef, and especially if you're a world class chef, you're an expert at understanding, you know, if I put these ingredients together and I put them, you know, but you got to do that. You got to do it. You got to do it the first time, you know, once. And filmmaking is like creating a recipe for the first time. And you know so many things about how it's going to work. But then it goes into the oven. And what comes out is what's going to come out. You know the mean. And when it comes out, it's going to come out and surprise you in some way. It might be way better than you thought. It probably will not be as good as you thought. I've had some dishes in fancy restaurants that clearly should have been tasted before they came out. Yeah. So there's a component of I think you put all the ingredients in. You make all the hard choices. You do try to make in your mind as a director, you've made a perfect film. You've visualized everything. You see it all. But then when the actual thing is there, you have to come to realize the things that don't work. Here's a tip for growing your business. Get the VentureX business card from Capital One and start earning a limited double miles on every purchase. That's right. With unlimited double miles, the more your business spends, the more miles you earn. Plus, the VentureX business card has no preset spending limit. So your purchasing power can adapt to meet your business needs. The VentureX business card also includes access to over 1,000 airport lounges. Just imagine where the VentureX business card from Capital One can take your business. Capital One, what's in your wallet? Terms and conditions apply. Find out more at capitalone.com slash VentureX business. And then how much time is spent between the end of the reshoots and opening nights? We had a very short post-production schedule. Because of the score. Because of Benedict's schedule and having moved it to the fall, we still had a long prep, again, I think was the most important thing, but we had a short post. And the result was a kind of craze panic, because we had to get all those reshoots done and get the visual effects done on time. My visual effects team was so smart, and they hired multiple houses, big houses, to all start work at the same time, which you usually don't really do. You usually rely heavily on a single house, a single visual effects house. So that process, for us, I think was only like four months. Typically, it's going to be more like six or seven months. There is a deadline that is not fungible, right? Like it's staring at you. Oh, yeah. I mean, movies of the size work from their release dates backwards. You start the process reverse engineering from the day the movie's going to come out. Are you fettling with it right up to the last second? The film? Let me put it this way. My final work on Dr. Strange was at around 12.30 or one in the morning. When I finished color timing, which is the last thing you do, you finished the actual color timing of the master print. So that when you watch the finished color timing version, that's the finished movie. The sound is all mixed. You've done all the work there is to do at your finish. That's it. I finished that at 12.30 at night and was on a plane at 6.00 that morning. So 5.5 hours later, I was on a plane to Hong Kong to start the press junket. So yes, I was literally working. Was it on the thumb drive? I mean, where was this movie? Yeah, well, this was all on the Disney lots. And it was all in those studios. And we really did. That's unusual. The degree to which we just needed every last second. And that's when I was working seven days a week in 18 hour days for months. No time for podcasting. No time for podcasting. Yeah. And it's exhausting, but very exhilarating because that post process is the most fun. It's it. Oh, yes. Just editing. All post production is so much fun. Do all directors believe that or do different directors? I think that most directors probably prefer editing to other. I think that's probably the majority of us feel that way. Because you get to see all the work come together. It's another phase of writing. You're still getting to write the movie. And it's it's it's as creative as writing definitely more creative in my opinion than production. But production is the worst. I mean, production is just, you know, grueling. It's just production in the sense of like making sure the craft services gets paid and stuff. Or was it production? Production meaning just working those long hours and the physical debate. I mean, what people really don't understand about making a movie this size is the physical toll that it takes. The physical demand on you is pretty extraordinary. Yeah. You know, I mean, you really do enter. They have people compare it to war, which is the most ridiculous analysis. That's funny. Yeah, yeah. We eat, we eat craft, we catered food and sleep in warm beds every night and we're getting paid huge amounts of money. But other all is just a few cash fees. And nobody dies. But it's just like war. But it is like, it is kind of like joining the army. You know, it is that kind of boot camp, just brutal. This is not for the faint of heart. You know, and you really do have to watch what you eat and drink and manage your sleep habits. And because if you don't, the moving train that you're running in front of will know you over. Well, that's why I can imagine personally writing a movie script someday. I can never even imagine directing a movie. It just sounds like so much stuff is going on. It must take a very special kind of personality to say, like, that's what I wouldn't do. I want to be in a thing where there's so many different failure modes that could go wrong around me. And I want to live with that. Is this what you wanted to do from the start? Yeah, it is. For me, it was, and I think still is, a twofold thing. You know, part of it is just I have a talent for it. I have a knack for it. And I think I felt that was going to be the case when I was even in high school, just putting together little super eight films and stuff like that. I just felt like I had a knack for understanding film language. And I'd watched, I grew up in a family that watched so many movies. So I understood movies in a way that I think people, my age, typically don't, or at least didn't then think, now it's much more common. You know, people are watching so many films growing up. But I think that that, what I love about directing, but the actual experience of directing is to do everything in the service of a piece of artistic entertainment that's going to be seen by millions of people and to feel the responsibility of I get to have a couple hours of their hard earned life, their rest time, their hard earned money is going to be spent on a Friday night to go with their girlfriend or wife or family, whatever, and watch this movie. I want them to have the best time of their week. And that's always there. And I want them to have something human. And I want them to have a human experience and have fun and be amazed by it. And I want them to remember it and possibly watch it again and love it as a part of their life. And so you start with that. And that's the goal. That's what you're in service of. That's a very, there's a real altruistic, I think, truth to that. But then in the action of actually doing it, the satisfaction for me is that it demands usage of every single thing I'm good at. My ability to communicate, my leadership skills, my salesmanship, along with my love for film language, my understanding of cinema history, my ability to write, like all is to be able to utilize and feel like you're in a profession where you are utilizing everything that you are really good at. It's all being utilized at the highest level. That's the ultimate job for anyone. So filling in that sense. It's fulfilling in that sense. Flannery O'Connor was asked, why do you write these quirky little stories about freaks, these short stories about freaks? And her answer was, because I'm good at it. That's not, that should be everybody's answer. That should be everybody's answer to why they do it they do. Because if you're good at it and you love it, that's your calling. That's what you should do. And you have to do it, though, within this framework we call Hollywood, right? Like, I mean, tell us a little bit about your fitting in with the whole Hollywood superstructure. Movies are obviously a big part of it, but business is a big part of it. Yeah. Those are a big part of it and so forth. Well, I think that I've been fortunate, because I've managed to work for a lot of difficult people. And even people who are notoriously difficult within Hollywood, work for the Weinstein's for years. And I think that I survived a lot of the people I worked for in the past and survived in a way a lot of artists didn't. And a lot of good artists didn't. So I think that my survival skills are strong. That was that, but I think that it was also my ability to sell. My dad was a car dealer. And yeah, my dad owned a couple dark car dealerships when I was in high school. He got sick and lost all of his money when I was in college. But I worked as a car salesman for him. And I've always credited my work in as a car salesman. I think my talents as a filmmaker is what it is. But I think that my ability to navigate the waters of Hollywood and to actually put together a career and to keep working has so much to do with my ability to sell. Because you're always selling an idea. You're selling a script, a pitch. You're selling yourself to your crew members. You're selling yourself to the studios to get jobs. You're selling yourself in marketing the movie. I mean, that's such a big part of the job. To be actors to listen to you and you tell them to do something. For sure. And by the way, so much of that is like so much of what makes me an effective director was understanding that when in sales, you come to understand you can't talk to every customer the same way. Your job is to figure out who are they, how do they need to be communicated with? Because that's your job. And actors are the same way. They're all powerfully emotional people, but they all need to be spoken to in different ways, depending on who they are. And so you have to learn to do that. And I think that I think so much of Hollywood success, demands either incredible luck, just unparalleled raw genius or an ability to sell. Right. You're doing those three, would be helpful. Yeah, if you have two of those three, then you're in really good shape. Then you're Stanley Kubrick. Yeah, that's right. So you have done the big blockbuster superhero thing. I actually, before I leave that topic, how hard is it to keep the humanity, the character narrative strength in a movie that is just that big with effects? I'm really glad that you asked that question because I think that it is the greatest challenge of directing a film that big. And I think that it's the number one reason why you see big Hollywood blockbuster movies that don't work. Because a lot of times they've worked in a script phase in a way that they don't work by the time they reach the screen. And so often, what I can feel from those movies is that the director was not able for whatever reason, maybe it was his fault, maybe not, or her fault. But for some reason, that human emotional story was not remaining central during the production because the production was so demanding. And in making Dr. Strange, I was determined that that would not be the way that movie would fail. Right. There were plenty of ways to fail, but I was like, it won't fail that way. So what I literally had to do was I created a document for every shooting day that just had, for every shooting day that I was on the movie, that had the central emotional narrative story points for this character. Because I knew that when I was shooting it, that all of my time would be spent talking to people about practical issues and where the camera goes and how we can get this done in time and all of that. And it's so easy to lose that because you don't have time to be working through that much on a movie of the size. And so every day I would go in and I would remind myself, what is the, I would start by reading at the top of my script, what I just pitched to you. It's a psychotropic, whatever it was, psychotropic mind, you know, mine trip action movie about one man overcoming himself. Just to remind myself, that's what I'm making. And then to really focus on that with the characters and really understand here's the emotional quality of what this guy and the people around him are going through. And I never lost sight of that while making Dr. Strange. And the reason why that's so important is people pay to go see these movies because they see the trailer and they see the spectacle and they love Marvel, whatever. But when they get in there, the reason it works is because of an emotional connection to those actors. It's always the ceiling for how good a movie can be. A movie cannot be better than your lead characters' story and performance. It can't. It's impossible. It doesn't matter how great everything else is. If your lead actors, character, and performance are not emotionally satisfying, the movie's not good. If that is satisfying, it's amazing how many things can not work and the movie will still work for you. And that's why you push back the release date to get the Ninja Comberbot to your movie. Precisely. Because he just had a quality that I felt for this particular character that he would be able to cover the range of emotions and the cockiness and the arrogance and still maintain likeability because he is such a prick in the beginning of the movie as he was in the comics. And he being Steven Strange, not the Ninja Comberbot. Yeah, no, no. He being Steven Strange. That addict is lovely. I love him. He's really a genuinely a great guy. But yeah, so you got to get the right actors and those roles and then you got to stay focused on that. And not not- Do you think in yourself as mostly a storyteller is that your task or is it something broader than that? I think that... I think it's broader than that because I think cinema is broader than that. You know, I do think that a story itself is important because the story says something that only a story can. What makes a good story a good story is that it can't be reduced to something else. It can only what it is communicating can only be communicated through that story. So you have to be a good storyteller. But I think that's, you know, for me, and this is how I feel about movies I watch as well as the movies I make, cinema is something broader than just that. It's a major component, perhaps it's even the spinal column of the animal of a movie. But the flesh and blood of cinema is something to me that is more artful and ineffable. That there's a quality to a dreamlike quality to the cinema experience of submitting yourself to the immersion in this alternate reality. That supersedes the art forms of just music and photography and blocking like theater and the storytelling of literature because it is a combination of all those things and the end result is still greater than the sum of its parts. Are you a fan of live theater also? Not really. You know, and I think that we... I've sensed that by what you're saying. Yeah, no, I really, I'm really very hard on theater, you know, because I find the experience so limiting compared to cinema, I would much like to be a little bit more to cinema, I would much rather watch a mediocre movie than a good play, but a great play, you know, can certainly be an experience that's unlike anything else when I saw Hamilton, you know, for example, it's like, well, this is one of the great works of art in the last 100 years, and I experienced it and understood why. But I think that cinema is a kind of experience that is close to dreamlike magic that we get when it comes to art and entertainment, you know. I think that they're different. I mean, I was just in London a couple of weeks ago and we got to see Ian McKellen as King Lear at the Duke of your theater, right? And so it was an interesting experience, not only because he's fantastic, but because you're familiar with him from movies. Right. And now he's 20 feet away from you being King Lear. And there's things that obviously a live theater performance can cannot do that cinema can, but I think vice versa also, right? And I think that maybe comparing them is wrong. I just thought of it because you were talking about the history a little bit and I think of cinema as coming out of live theater back in the day. For sure. But it's, you know, it's had 100 some years to develop and it's able to do things now that live theater can't even imagine. Yeah, and I think that the theater that I do enjoy tends to be more minimalistic. But I will always enjoy a good Shakespeare play because it's some of the greatest writing in human history and if it's well made and well acted, that's going to be an extraordinary experience, no matter what. So what I don't like is spectacle theater. Yeah. And part of it's one of the reasons why I liked Hamilton, because I loved, I loved just entering in and seeing, oh, this is just an empty stage. You know, the pretty simple backdrop and the experience was the music, the movement, you know, these things that are inherently theatrical when it came to, you know, I mean, people, I'm going to step on toes, but it's like, you know, see the big phantom, you know, chandelier hovering over the audience, I just think it's ridiculous. She's, yeah, I'm like, why, you know, I can pay $8 and, you know, in a movie, in a movie Matt and A and see something a thousand times greater than this, you know, right now. And you think that gives, that that that's an immersive quality of cinema gives it this particular art form a way to get and connect with people's emotions and, you know, sort of a visceral response that other methods do. I do. I do. I think that it is primarily emotional. I think that that, and I think that it is holistically emotional. I think that that's maybe it's hard for me to describe it because I usually don't have to. But there is a soulful, holistic, emotional quality to the cinema experience that I do believe transcends the nature of the experience of any other individual kind of art. And it speaks to our subconscious in a way that other art forms don't. And especially directors who are aware of that and can utilize that well. I just think that it's the greatest art form, you know. And it's the only, only because it's the amalgam of all the other great art forms. It's the amalgam of photography and literature and theater and music. And when all those things come together into something that is pure and creates a pure experience, the emotional power of it can be overwhelming, you know. And for me, even a bad movie has a quality of that that I still prefer to, you know. And the closest thing to it, I think, is probably music, you know, in the way that it can move you and transcend your experience. And I'm an avid reader, so there's no disrespect for literature or formal art. But in this approach, it makes perfect sense when you say that that one of your favorite genres would be the horror movie, right? It's a kind of connection. You don't see that many horror plays, right? It's hard to get scared in a play. Because you need that the intimacy of being lost within your own imagination, within your own fears and certainly horror literature works great. Good horror, a good scary Stephen King book scares you. But not in the same way that a horror movie does. You don't usually read even a great chapter in the shining and physically feel your pulse race. As you do in a good horror film where you get actually really scared. And that's what, and I think that cinema can do that. This is something I'm just going to add in here while we're on the subject. Because we're talking about the nature of movies themselves and what are movies. And I think one of the real clues to what makes movies special is the categorization of movies. Because you've got action movies, horror movies, dramas, comedies, thrillers. And then you've got things like documentaries. But science fiction even. What's that? Rum Combs? Yeah, yeah. But those are still in the comedy section. It's a branch out under the comedy banner. These major categories, they're the same now on Netflix as they always were in Blockbuster. And I had this revelation one day when I was, I think, a film student. And I was going into a Blockbuster video somewhere. And I was looking at the net. And it just thought hit me, who created these categories? Who created these categories? This has been the categories that I've known, movies to be under my whole life. And the more I thought about it, I thought, well, the audience created these categories. The audience by wanting to see these different kinds of movies that separated into these seven or eight major categories. And when I realized this is what they really are, is they're the major categories of human emotion. Fear for horror. Comedy for laughter, joy, drama for sorrow, for deeper feelings. Visceral excitement is action. Anxiety is thriller. And I think science fiction is always built upon a sense of wonder, of wonderment combined usually with some other genre. And I think that this is speaking to these basic human emotions is the nature of cinema. It's just what it does, what movies do. Did you know Fast Growing Trees is the biggest online nursery in the US, with thousands of different plants and over 2 million happy customers. They have all the plants your yard needs, like fruit trees, privacy trees, flowering trees, shrubs and so much more. Whatever plants you're interested in, Fast Growing Trees has you covered. Find the perfect fit for your climate and space. Fast Growing Trees makes it easy to get your dream yard, order online and get your plants delivered directly to your door in just a few days without ever leaving home. Their live and thrive guarantee ensures your plants arrive happy and healthy. This spring, they have the best deals for your yard up to half off on select plants and other deals. And listeners to our show get 15% off their first purchase while using the code Mindscape at checkout. That's an additional 15% off at FastGrowingTrees.com using the code Mindscape at checkout. FastGrowingTrees.com code Mindscape. And as the perfect time to plant, use Mindscape to save today. Offers valid for limited time, terms and conditions may apply. So there's an obvious question I'd like to get your take on. Why do people go to horror movies? Why do people want to be scared? Why do people actually pay money for someone to make you feel unpleasant in some sense? A lot of people don't. And I think that the people who do, they like it for the same reason. They like roller coasters. It's the powerful feeling of fear, which I think is arguably the most powerful human emotion. And to experience the visceral power of that emotion in an environment where you know you're safe, like in a roller coaster. You know you're not going to fly out of the car, but you feel like you're going to fly out of the car. And so you're experiencing the adrenaline rush of that. And then for people who are serious horror fans and people like me who consider it one of the undervalued great forms of movie art, it's that it gets to some of the most important human questions about good and evil, about metaphysics, you know, the questions of the afterlife, and the meaning of existence and how unspoken and unspeakable fears can be tapped into by great horror. Like these are all, these are things that I love. You know, I speak by the waxing poetic about it, you know, because I do, I love it, I love it, and I review it. And I think it's important, but I also completely understand and have no, I have nothing negative to say to some people who just don't like that. And so if somebody doesn't like that experience, they don't like it. And by the way, having spent my entire adult life making horror films, there is no such thing as a horror type. You know, it's like, you know, I've met some of the bravest cops in New York City who are terrified to watch a horror movie and would never do it. Like guys who drag people out of the towers on 9-11, you know, and have risked their lives over and over again, you know, and they're just like, just don't show me any of that stuff, you know, and then I'll meet a little old lady in a flower shop who's, you know, seen every nightmare in Amstreet movie. You know, it just loves them. Something human, but it's hard to predict. Yeah, it is. Very hard to predict. Yeah. But I do want to get into these metaphysical presuppositions. I mean, I think for you, questions of evil and purpose and meaning in life come into why you do horror, but maybe also why you do other movies also. It's why I... And we disagree about the metaphorical presuppositions. We do, yeah, it's one of the things that I'm not. I'm not. That's okay. It's one of the things I've loved about our relationship is that we've spoken about this many times, you know, and we have very differing views of the nature of existence itself, you know, but we've always admired and appreciated the other person's point of view and respect, you know, the fact that both of those views are very personal and powerful to us. As individuals, you know, they inform everything else that we do in our work and the way we think about everything from, you know, practical life politics right down to the meaning of our own life. And for me, I do think that everything that I've done, perhaps the through line and all the work that I've done, including all the script work on things that have not, you know, that I've been produced, is a combination of this sort of love for genre, you know, for horror, thriller action type sci-fi movies, and some kind of crossover into metaphysical questions, you know, questions about the nature of human existence and possibilities of what life could be. And certainly the moral questions that arise is that's one of the interesting things to me about horror is it's almost very difficult to make an amoral horror film, you know, or a non-moral horror film. There's going to be a moral one way or the other easy way. The movie, even if it seems to have no moral center, that becomes a moral point. Well, good and evil are out there, right? Good and evil are out there. And so once you're dealing with horror, you're landing in terrain that is inherently so philosophical, it's inescapable. And I think it's inescapable in a way that it's not in other genres. And so I think that was a big part of the pull, too. That and the fact that there's a lot of room to improve the genre and has been in my life, and I've really watched it happen and watching it happen, you know, there's a... It was a more sophistication now. I think that horror in the 80s, in the 70s and 80s was just slasher movies, like, it's all anybody ever thought about, you know, but with the exception of master works by great non-horror directors, like Kubrick making the shining or Friedkin making the exorcist or something like that. But I think that now it's a genre that has gained a lot of respect for how it comments on the human experience. Yeah, I mean, I remember being... I love Sinistera, and I thought it was extremely scary. And I'm not an aficionado by any means, but since then, the Baba Duke is an amazingly good movie. And just now we started watching the hunting of Hill House. We were just talking about that on the way here, because we saw... Well, and by the way, we saw the billboard, and I asked the cargo. I said, if you heard anything, he said, I hear it's very good. And it's Mike Flanagan. I tweeted about the release of that yesterday, and I haven't seen it yet, but he is such a good director. And he is so talented. And of course, I've read the book, the Shirley Jackson novel is amazing and really scary. Yeah. And which goes back to the original haunting by Robert Wise, which was a great movie. And it's... These kind of tales, regardless of your cosmological view, of regardless of your philosophical presuppositions about the existence of the immaterial world, or the existence of anything in non-material. These movies speak to our fears. They do. And in movies you've made, there's obviously a supernatural element, but the response of the human character is to what they're seeing is what it would be. Right. That's what counts. I would totally feel this way in this circumstance, which I don't believe will ever happen, because I'm an atheist. But if it did, that's how I would feel. That's what matters, right? Well, yeah. And it's funny, because I think that even if you're right, and I'm wrong, about the nature of the universe, the likelihood of something coming along, in the course of history, that undoes all of our safe assumptions about the nature of the world, is going to be frightening. Like that, encountering that will be scary. Exactly. And I think it's... I think one of my favorite things that I remember hearing you talk about is how these big revelations and science are typically non-intuitive. Yeah. And relativity, I mean, what could be more non-intuitive than relativity? And it takes so much effort just to try to conceptualize and understand what that even is. And the fact that somebody figured it out to me is still incredible. I still don't understand how that happened. And honestly, quantum mechanics is 100 times worse. The opening line of my new book is going to... I hope is right now something like, you don't need a PhD in theoretical physics to be afraid of quantum mechanics, but it doesn't hurt. Oh, so that's great. And I think... I just think that it all gets back to the mystery of the unknown. And I think that that's something where you and I have always had an unspoken overlapping respect, which is there's a lot that we know, but there's so much that we don't know. And there's so much that's still out there to surprise us. Yeah, that's great. And that's so much of the human experience, not just in... When it comes to knowledge, and what we know and what we believe about the universe, but that's our day-to-day experience. Life surprises us. And it scares us. And it throws us these curveballs. And I think that this particular realm of visual storytelling is a great way to wreck it with those fears. And you've made a couple movies about exorcisms. And correct me if I'm wrong, but you think that this is a real thing, right? I mean, is it these plausible, let's say? Here's the intersection. It's funny, because I didn't expect you to bring that up, but now that you have it, I'm really glad you did. Because what I can say about it is, again, the primary word I would use... to describe my own feeling about the phenomenon is mystery. There's a great mystery to it. But possession and exorcism is a fact. It's an anthropological reality that exists in all cultures and always have. People get into these crazy mindsets, you know, and start doing these things with certain predictable patterns. And then there's this kind of shock therapy ritual that every culture has developed that is often very effective, you know? And so, for me, that's the starting point. The starting point of what makes it so interesting isn't theological, it's anthropological. Right. You know, that this is a part of... This is something that happens. And in fact, you know, we can deny that in the real world, exorcists go to people's houses because they believe that they are possessed and things happen. Precisely. And I think that... And I've read dozens of books on the subject, including very skeptical books. And I think at the very least, you have to... If you look at credible cases when I say credible, I mean, well researched, you know, well analyzed cases. And certainly when you look at it as a phenomenon globally and historically, I do think there is a trans-state quality of it in the more extreme cases of what I would call a legitimate case is at the very least that. Right. And therein you are entering into something very mysterious about the human mind at the very least. Yeah. And so I found that compelling. And when I first made the exorcism of Emily Rose, I have an open and liberal enough view of scripture, for example, you know, and my own theological views of things. And I'm always challenging myself to question what I believe. One of the reasons I went into that was to see if... Do I believe that there's anything behind this? Do I believe that the devil exists? It's just all just a construct. You know, and in that particular case, what was so fascinating was by the time it was over, I didn't have any more answers than I went into going in because there really didn't seem to be any simple way to explain what happened to that particular girl in that case. No matter what angle I looked at it from, it was just confounding. And that's why it sparked so much interesting conversation. But I will finish by saying that I think that the vast majority of what you see and hear out there are people, you know, attributing to being demon possession and the work of the devil is nonsense. You know, it's like it's the vast majority of it is absolutely ridiculous. You know. And the more extreme cases, you know, I could be wrong. Maybe it's all some kind of psychological translate, you know, but I personally do I believe that there's a spiritual component behind it I do. Yeah. And, you know, there's no question, well, there's very little question, I guess. There's always some question, but it seems to be useful in describing human actions to believe in the existence of evil, something's just our evil. And how... And there's a lot of evil going on in your films. How would your films be different if tomorrow you became a naturalist? Oh, that's a really good question. They... You know, it's obviously not a... It's a really, really good question. I like the question a lot. I mean, they would be completely different because they would be made from a completely different human experience. You know, my spirituality, you know, if I'm honest has been, you know, certainly scrutinized intellectually. I certainly take philosophy very seriously. I've changed a lot of what I believe because of critical thinking and all of that. But if I'm honest, my core belief system is born of my experience. I wasn't raised in a religious home, but it has always been my nature. From the time I was a small child to look around and feel the world as something that is much more than the material in front of me. I've always felt that the world was... That what was real was more than this and maybe what was primary was more than this. You know, something else, not even more, but just something else that I've always experienced the world more immaterially than I have materially. And that's just been my way of experiencing it. And so I connect that part of myself that experiences the world in that mystical kind of way. I relate to cinema as a part of that. I relate to film experiences as a viewer and as an artist. It is very, very connected to that. So I think that when it comes to philosophy, where you would land much more with TUME, I'm going to land much more with crazy Kant. You know? Oh, sorry, that's the deal breaker. I don't know if you can get a lot more after that. But I'm right with him when he says there's two things I'm sure about the stars above me and the moral law within. And so I think that I do think that that belief in a moral law pre-existing within human behavior is something I do believe in. But if I were to become a naturalist and undo even that, I feel like suddenly when you ask me that question, the honest answer is, well, I couldn't make any of the movies that I've made at all, wipe the slate clean. And what would I make? I have to live another life. You know? And if that actually, and by the way, it's possible that something could happen that would make me think that way. And what would the result be? I think that all I could make movies about, if that happened to me at this point in my life, all I could make movies about art is that about the shock value of experiencing life so long and so powerfully for five decades and then to suddenly have the rug pulled out from under you. No, I think that's perfectly fair and vice versa. Like if some of I had a conversion experience tomorrow. Oh my God. What are you going to do? I would not be able to write about quantum mechanics anymore. And it would be the most important thing in your life. And this makes me such a bad Christian too because I hear you say that I'm like, oh, God, I hope that doesn't happen at all. I like you on the way. The world is more interesting with the variety. Exactly. No, we're not trying to convert each other. That's a good thing. But it does. I think that the relationship with mystery is an interesting thing. You brought it up. Mystery is crucially important to all movies, to all storytelling, to human existence, etc., etc. I was really annoyed by the famous JJ Abrams mystery box TED Talk. Did you see this TED Talk? Yeah, I did. I did see it. And maybe I'm being unfair, but part of it seemed to me to be, and maybe we'll disagree about this, that he was saying that mysteries are better, if, are, better, best, only good if you don't even try to solve them in some sense, right? Like, if you assume that they're not solvable and keep them as mysteries. And to me, mysteries are great because they can be solved. I mean, I go through life presuming that, of course, there's a million questions I don't know the answers to, and I will die before I know all the answers to them. But in principle, I could get them, and that's what makes the quest worthwhile. Well, certainly when you're talking about the mysteries of the material world and the mysteries of science, that's a given. What we don't know about dark matter and dark energy and these things, the gravity, these things that science is still chasing, of course, we have to believe that they can be answered, that those mysteries can be in tell. And just as relativity changed our human experience of the world. I'm sure future discoveries and quantum mechanics is already starting to do that as it seeps out into popular culture. It's starting to affect the way that we feel. Most of the lot of times in very sloppy ways and stories, I know. But I think that when you're talking about mystery, the mystery of human experience and the mystery of, say, the mystery of God, of the concept of God, the mystery of meaning. To me, there's always a quest to comprehend it. There's always a quest to get deeper underneath it. That is the point. I don't believe that there's power in just acknowledging, oh, it's a mystery we'll never know. Well, if that's the case, I don't need to think about it. I love, I don't remember where I first heard this, but I've repeated it before. Maybe I said it. I don't really remember. But certainly something I think about a lot, which is that to me, the concept of mystery is not the presence of something meaningless, but the presence of more meaning than we can yet comprehend. There's an awareness of there's more here than we can get our experience or our brains or hearts around. The whole point of evolving as a species, evolving as an individual is to get deeper into that mystery, start to understand it. What is it, what is it, therefore? I think that the important thing to me, though, that is worth protecting, and I didn't particularly agree with JJ's approach on the mystery box either, but what I do believe with respect to mystery is that we have to make a practiced discipline to not think that we understand more than we do. I think that's really important. I think it's important because I've said this many times before, but I think both science and religion have been guilty and have continued to be guilty of sort of sort of propagating the idea that we understand a lot more than we really understand. They both done it in very different ways, but they're broadcasting a sensibility to their constituents that we got the world figured out. One of the terrible things, by the way, that we teach kids science is that we teach us a set of facts that we've learned rather than as a process for making hypotheses and then testing them against reality. That statement alone is something that people don't understand. People don't think of science as a process. They don't. It's not that hard. I think of it as irrevocable fact, that's it. And while sometimes it is refoked, it's like a lot of history. That's the whole history of science has been a process of it sort of undercutting itself as it gets deeper into it's understanding of how complex the world really is. All right, we can move into the lightning round because I know that you have to go to see a horror house, right? Yes, yeah. I'm meeting my kids at Katsuyah and then we're going to go to Warner Brothers Horde tour. Very consistent. Absolutely. A philosophical approach. So, but then very quickly, because I do want to talk about, I mean, you're not just a director, but you're a, you are a lover of cinema and the history of cinema. Yeah. I mean, what is your relationship to that history and what would you recommend to our listeners out there in podcast land like, you know, should they download Kurosawa and Netflix? Such a great question. You know, my relationship to it is that, you know, I first learned, you know, movies from my father primarily because he was a movie lover, but he was straight genre, you know, not horror either, but he just loved action movies. He loved thrillers. And so I grew up seeing tons of movies, American movies, we see two, three movies a day, sometimes in our family. That's great. And so I developed a real love for movies and then of course, when video technology came and I started to rewatch movies all the time. But then when I got to college, I was exposed to international cinema. And it was really my discovery of the art of international cinema that made me really want to be a filmmaker. And because I, the first time that I saw Felini's eight and a half, I just, I actually had a panic attack at the end of the movie. The density of that experience, the dream quality of that film was so overwhelming. I kind of panicked. I had literally left the classroom because I couldn't, I couldn't understand. Emerson experience. I couldn't understand what was happening to me and my brain in this experience. And then as I continued to rewatch it, the layers of meaning and poetry in that movie were so amazing. And I didn't know movies can do this. And so that sent me really down the rabbit hole of exploring all the major movements in world cinema, going for starting with the silent era in American cinema, going all the way through the various major movements. And it was primarily Japanese cinema and European art cinema that, you know, the French New Wave and Italian New Realism. These things really spoke to me. And Kurosawa is a great point for people who have limited exposure to international cinema. Kurosawa was a great starting point because he took, I think, the sensibility of Hollywood movies, the entertainment value of Hollywood movies, and merged it with the artfulness of European movies of his time. He was as much a fan of John Ford as he was, Igumar Bergman. And so there's a quality to his movies that are high art and high entertainment at the same time that you really don't get with many directors ever. And so he's a great starting point. Watch the Google, the 10 best Kurosawa movies and every one of them will be a masterpiece worth watching. But you also have to find the directors that you love. It's like, you know, Goddard, John Goddard is not for everybody. But for those of us who like love those movies or Bergman, like Bergman movies, you, you know, you and I, it's so interesting. Like I would love to watch Bergman film with you because he really believed in a godless universe. He believed in a, in a, in no god or if there is a god, it is certainly silence, it's certainly non-communicative. We are alone, you know. And even though I've never held that view, I experienced his experience of the world through those movies so powerfully. And this is what movies can do, I think again, in ways that other art forms don't, is they can, well, other art forms do the same thing. But for me, movies do it in a way nothing else does. I feel that experience. I feel his human experience through those movies. And, and I am made more human for having felt it and for having understood it and having a related to the truth quality in it because even though I have a system of belief that is different than that, I know what it's like to feel alone in the world. I know what it's like to not feel safe in, in a, in a, in a, in a world. And I know certainly what it's like to be racked with doubt, which a lot of his films were. And I think that something that we both agree on and then probably Bergman would agree with us is that the question of whether or not god exists matters. It's not an element. Exactly. Exactly. And I think that's exactly right. And I think that, that, you know, we live in an age now of just, you know, shouting people are really shouting at each other and, and, and, you know, one of the things I love is being able to have conversations like this and, and, and hear something like that from somebody like you that that question is an important question. It's a profound question. It's, it's one of the essential questions and, and it needs to be reckoned with now and, and that's more important than, to me, hearing that is a much more important voice than anybody advocating why they believe what they believe. You know, the starting point is we all need to deal with certain realities of, we have to answer certain questions if we are to live a full life and enlighten life. We should be, we should have an understanding of what we think the human experience really is. Okay. Two more questions on lightning round. For whatever reason you're told that you can make one more movie ever in your life. What would it be? Hmm. You're allowed to change your mind later, but. Well, uh, I'm doing that. It would be the next movie that I'm going to make, but I can't say anything about it. That's very, that's the correct answer. Okay. That's the correct answer. Okay. Okay. We made everybody happy. You're going to make them move good. Yeah. No, and it's true. You're living the life. I'm not leaving it because I, I made, I made one decision early in my career, you know, to, to take a big studio movie because that's what you do, you know, when you're a young filmmaker, if you get the opportunity, you take it and, and I ended up regretting that decision. And, and since then, I've always operated, uh, under the belief that I, I should make every movie as though it's my last movie. Good. Yeah. Because one day it will be. Exactly. You know, and you know, you never know when that's going to go on. It's going to be in the afterlife. I presume the director is in heaven or hell. I don't know. Maybe they're only producers in heaven. Maybe. I don't know. That's what it is. Home for users and now writers and directors, directors go to limbo. Writers go to heaven. That's correct. All right. And the last one is, uh, you are out there on Twitter, facing people off, saying things, uh, I mean, you don't try to piss people off. I don't think that's your goal, but you're happy to say things truthfully, honestly, right? And, uh, and I'm on Twitter, it's also, uh, where people always debate, you know, it's not Twitter in particular, but just, um, should we all just shut up, right? Like should we protect ourselves? Should we lower the noise level and just not talk? But I find it very stimulating. Uh, you know, I try to put people on my Twitter feed who are rewarding. Yeah. Like people who talk about Twitter is just a, you know, a source of terrible things. I'm like, you get to choose who you follow. Yeah. So, yeah. The relationship with that, sort of, more social aspect. I mean, I, you know, I left, I left Twitter for a couple months, um, just, to, to feel the noise kind of calm down and, and, and to reevaluate my belief in it. And I came back and I came back because I do value it. I do find it to be, uh, rewarding both, uh, you know, by controlling my Twitter feed and who it is that I'm actually going to, uh, listen to and, um, and, and having the lists of people who I, in, in a particular mood, well, I want, I want to, I want to see what this list has to say. Sometimes I just want to hear about the NBA. I don't want to write exactly. But I, but I think as a user, um, you know, it's certainly been in live and, and then I've met a lot of great people as a result of it. You know, I've made a lot of good connections. But I, I love it as, as a, as a, as a, as a form of expression. I'm, you know, I'm, I'm not out there to try to influence anybody or change anybody's mind about anything, you know, um, so I'm not trying to, I don't want to shout into the void about, you know, what I'm angry about and, and I, I've tweeted plenty about Trump. Um, but usually just because it's an expression of, this is how I am feeling today about this lunatic and, yeah, and, and, and I also want to scaling it back on that I'm trying to do less and less of that. But I love it as, as just an, uh, an opportunity to, um, you know, to, uh, express, you know, what I think and feel about things and for me, it's usually cinema, um, and a little bit with politics. But cargo, when I spoke about this last night and cargo has been actively using his Twitter feed to tweet specifically about writing, about the craft of writing. And he was saying to, because I said to him last night, I said, what do you think I should be doing differently with my feet, you know, because I, I am getting a little bored with, with the whole world of it. And he was encouraging me to tweet more about the craft of correcting. Yeah. But, you know, that's really true because no one's doing that. Yeah. And, uh, and I can do that. And I think that that would have, will have value and I think I'll enjoy it. And I love teaching, you know, and, and that's something where I can actually give valuable information that very few people have and nobody on Twitter is really doing that. Well, it makes perfect sense, maybe, but it seems like there's a vibrant screenwriting Twitter in a way that there's not a vibrant director. Absolutely true. Yeah, absolutely true. I think, I think, uh, uh, and I think that's unfortunate. I think it, you know, it should be that way. I think it's like, there should be a better, if I can chime in for a second, you can see Robert Cardinal. You take a medium in which you're supposed to write and then you put writers in it and what do you expect? What? I mean, I'm married to a journalist that you cannot stop on Twitter. Yes. Scientists are much more reluctant. But, uh, all right, that all makes a lot of sense. This is extraordinarily fun and insightful. So Scott Derrickson, thanks so much. Oh, I'm glad you're trying to. Thank you. Yeah. Wow. Wow. Wow. Wow. Wow. Wow. Wow. Wow. Wow. Wow. Wow. Wow. Wow. Wow.