Hello everyone, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host Sean Carroll and these days I've become increasingly interested in the idea of democracy. Democracy, we all know it. Most of us are in favor of it. If you took a poll, most people would say that democracy is a good idea. Many people would say that it's under threat. There are people who are working to undermine democracy. People might not agree on who those people are, okay? Here at Mindscape we're less interested in the political moment of the contemporary time and more interested in the underlying ideas that are used to justify and to push forward or to pull back on an idea like democracy. What is democracy? How does it work? How should it work? Why is it such a good idea? Is it always such a good idea? These are the kinds of things that I'm interested in thinking about. So today we're going to be talking about an aspect of democracy or an idea that is very closely intertwined with the idea of democracy, which is the idea of free speech. Again, if you ask most people they would say yes, free speech. I am in favor of that. It's when the rubber hits the road and when you're getting into individual specific examples that it becomes harder. And actually I think it should become harder. This is one of the things that I would personally want to emphasize here is that the way to go wrong talking and thinking about free speech is to pretend that it's easy. To pretend that it's absolute and there's a clearly right way to think about it and a clearly wrong way to think about it. Think about the following two extreme examples, extreme versions of free speech. Even if you admit that free speech is good, what do you mean by that? So one version might be everyone has the freedom to say whatever they want, but literally nobody else will ever hear them. So that's a kind of free speech. You can say whatever you want, right? But if nobody hears you, what is the point? That's really not quite maybe enough. Whereas on the other side you might say okay, to me free speech means not only can you say whatever you want, but everyone has to hear what you say. And then worse than that, everyone has to agree with me. That's a very extreme form of free speech that probably also nobody would go along with and what we want is somewhere in the middle, but where in the middle? And both of these examples drive home the importance of not only thinking about the person speaking, but of the audience, the people being spoken to. And that's why I really like the kind of analysis provided by today's guest, Teresa Bejohn, who is a political theorist at the University of Oxford in the UK. And someone who's thought deeply about free speech, also in a historical context, not only as a political theorist. So what she points out is that the traditional, if you go all the way back to ancient Athens, there were different Greek words corresponding to different notions of free speech. There was a notion of Isagoria, which was the right of citizens to participate in public debate, which was much more public-facing than this different notion of parisia, which was a license to say what you please, to be frank, to speak your mind, to be politically incorrect if you want to put it that way. And we translate both of these the same way, which leads us to confusion sometimes when we think about what free speech should be. And then she traces it through history and points out the importance in the United States, especially at the very interesting case of the early founding of Rhode Island, which was as you points out, one of the most open tolerant societies in the world at the time, on the importance of civility in the sense of, I should listen to you, not civility in the sense that when I say bad things about you, I should say them in polite terms, but I actually have an obligation as a listener to listen to you. And that's a really high bar when it comes to free speech. So we're not going to answer once and for all in any clear cut way that everyone will agree with, all of the questions you might raise about free speech. But I think that listening to this podcast, listening to Teresa's explanations of these issues gives us a richer feeling for how we should think about these issues, because they're important issues. It's not enough just to say yes, democracy free speech good. We have to be both clear on what we mean, and we have to be able to defend why our particular point of view is the right way to think about these very, very contentious issues. So with that, let's go. Teresa Beigeon, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. Thanks for having me. I need to start with a sort of ironic observation here, because on the one hand, you have pointed out things like the importance when it comes to free speech of, not only letting people talk, but also listening to them, right, actually taking into account what they're saying with some kind of an open mind, but at the same time, in our modern world, the phrase free speech has kind of become a flashpoint and a little marker for where you land in certain culture war disputes. So I'm sure that a lot of listeners, when they tune into this podcast, are going to be first thinking like, what side is she on? Is she on the right one or the wrong one, and then listen to you or discard you on the basis of that without listening very carefully? Have you come across this phenomenon? Absolutely. And indeed, that phenomenon is one of the reasons why I'm so interested in free speech debates today, but also about some of the other things we'll talk about, civility and equality. I think that discussions both in the academy and in the public sphere about all of these topics are becoming increasingly politicized. And so maybe my driving reason for being at this point is trying to say that no, we can talk about them in a way that doesn't just reduce to determining which side am I on and is it the right one. All right, well now that we know what side you're on, people can decide whether they should listen. What's funny, I mean, with the free speech issue, you're absolutely right that it has become politicized and that in particularly in the present debate, there's this sense that, okay, well, free speech as a principle is being weaponized or is being sort of colonized by the right. And therefore, when someone is pleading for the importance of free speech, that's a sort of dog whistle that they're kind of, you know, sort of coming from the right wing. And it's worth noticing just how, you know, it's a kind of polar reversal from how things have been in recent history in the United States where free speech was really the, the ideal of the left. I mean, the whole free speech movement got its start at Berkeley. The idea that suddenly it's the right wing that cares about free speech is pretty historically curious. So another thing that I think is important is to take a sufficiently long view that we can at least, you know, for our own minds, you just just see that there's no natural connection between these principles and one or other side of the political spectrum that there's a kind of contingency here and we should be able to think about what these ideals mean and what they look like in practice apart from their kind of contingent. And the other thing that, you know, speaking of which, I suppose I should say, in reading some of your stuff, I was really struck by the connection between free speech and democracy. I mean, I guess obviously we think of democracy as something that goes hand in hand with free speech, but it seemed that there was a more fundamental underlying commonality of idea there that the idea that people have the right to self govern is inextricably wound up with the idea that people have a voice. And the right to talk is that is that a correct interpolation or am I just seeing things there? That's right. And it's something that's very much on my mind. You know, today we're very concerned with this idea of voice and finding a voice, making it possible for those who have been traditionally excluded to have a voice. And that kind of concern, I think, is really ancient and connected with this intuition that democratic government is the regime that most is best at ensuring a voice to all those governed. And so thinking about democracy as a matter, not just a voting, which is, you know, tends to be the limited sense in which we think of a public voice today. I sort of, I have a voice in so far as I'm able to vote for my representative, but also thinking of democracy as about talk and having a say in just the more sort of quotidian way of just being able to, you know, get my voice heard. Yeah, I mean, it immediately, I guess what struck me about it was how it prefigures this idea that speech is a form of power, right? That speech is not just something that floats out there in the air, separate from the levers of power in our society, that who speaks, who gets listened to, etc, is part of that complex. Absolutely. I mean, it's funny a lot of times in talking about free speech, especially for those coming from the more kind of civil libertarian side who are really committed to individual rights of free speech. Often those free speech fundamentalists, if you will, are accused of being indifferent to power, but I think that sort of that misses the mark. I think that civil libertarians are really sensitive to power dynamics and the power of voice. And are worried about granting a kind of arbitrary power to, you know, the powers that happen to be to decide who speaks and who doesn't. So I think that, right, that original sort of democratic sense of the importance and power of voice is connected. I mean, if we just look at ancient Greek democracy, democracy in Greek, it just comes from the idea of demos, cratos, so people power, right? So in a democracy, it's the demos that is empowered to speak, it's the people. And then you can look at different institutional arrangements that try to make that, you know, try to make it possible for the people to speak. But I think that, you know, for all democracies, ancient modern, that's what we're trying to do. We're trying to find a way of allowing the people to speak in a way that is as equal as possible. Yeah, it sort of distributes power equally. I guess the thing is constantly going on in the back of people's minds when you say, like, what do you say makes perfect sense? Probably most people, if you ask them, should you let the people speak, etc., they'd be all for that. But everyone has in the back of their minds some particular group that they want to be able to speak, right? And applying that universally is a challenge. I just don't think the human mind is really programmed to be able to apply our values universally. I mean, you know, that's a highly controversial thing to say. Many of my colleagues in moral and political philosophy will be very annoyed with me for saying it. But I do just think we're not really built to be able to reason sort of in a principled way all the time, which is why we, you know, try to cultivate and build institutions that can kind of relieve some of that pressure. Right. And I think broadly speaking, what we think of as liberal rights, individual rights are precisely developed in order to sort of alleviate that pressure to sort of save us the trouble of trying to act in a principled way all the time. Sort of, you know, to do that kind of judging for us. But you said, I mean, you framed it positively. You said we usually have a sense of the group we want particularly to hear or they think needs a voice. I would actually be inclined to frame it negatively. I think most of the time people are clearest on who or, you know, the individuals or groups they think should not have a voice. And, you know, I think you know, pick your pick your bet noir here. I mean, fascist, racist, social justice warriors, the woke, et cetera. We have an idea of, you know, the group that needs the volume turned down on them. Well, but, but empirically, we don't, we don't talk that way, right? I mean, we don't go actively, we broadly speaking. It's not the accepted thing to say we should shut these people up so much. Sometimes that happens, but the positive case is sort of the more compelling one. No, I mean, making that up. I mean, I think a lot rests on we there, but if who are we speaking of, I mean, I think you're right. I think that for the most part, people are when they are concerned negatively about the groups that they see as a kind of danger to principles of equality or equal liberty and society. They're concerned in good faith. Yeah, but I, I mean, I found this in my work on civility as well. It's just, I think our brains tend to focus better on the source of threat. Right. Okay. Rather than a kind of, you know, positive ideal. But, you know, we can, we can come to that. You mentioned the ancient Greeks, and I didn't want to zip over them too quickly. I was really fascinated by this distinction that you mentioned between two different kinds of free speech that the Greeks pivot. So why don't you share that with us? It's my dearest wish as an academic to be able to write articles for popular audiences that hinge on making a distinction in ancient Greek. You come to the right podcast anyway that I have that I haven't able to do this. So in ancient Greek, there's a distinction between Paracia on the one hand and Ica Garia on the other. And these are both ideas and practices associated with democratic Athens in particular. So Paracia is the idea of free speech in the sense of speaking freely. We might think of a Frank speech speaking frankly. And it's precisely the idea that you know, you speak your mind without fear or favor whenever, wherever and into whom ever you choose. But Ica Garia is more closely connected with the democratic institutions as they existed in Athens. And it's an idea of the equal right of citizens to address the public assembly. So what partly what interests me is precisely this the process by which what was a clear distinction in ancient Greek. And also I would argue in in later centuries and sort of the reception of the Greek tradition about thinking about freedom and democracy. And that distinction has just been lost in modern in modern English in a modern times. And so what you'll find now in a lot of the Greek sources that I that I use is that where the Greek distinguishes Paracia and and Ica Gria in English, they're just both translated as free speech. So the distinction is erased in the act of translation. And so partly what I was trying to do is to recover the distinction and to show that actually it helps make sense of some of the more fraught kind of culture war style debates were having about free speech today. We're actually just there are two different principles at stake in it and it behooves us to wrap our heads around them is pretty easy as supposed to be construed as something more personal or interpersonal somehow like. And so I would say things that you might find insulting and I got I have the right to do that, whereas is a Gria is more political or am I putting things that I think is no I think that that's right I would just I would make two slight corrections. I think it's not quite right to discuss to discuss paracia in terms of a right. What's really important in this concept and especially in the centuries after classical Athens is the idea that paracias really seen as is a is a license as a kind of privilege. It's a license granted by the powerful to the weak I allow you to speak your mind to me. So I say well I will tolerate your free and frank speech. And you know this this comes into manuals on rhetoric talking about the figure of licentia or license the idea that a speaker might claim a license to say something that the audience may not want to hear. So I think actually it's in the modern and I would say you sort of post first amendment renderings of paracia that we get this idea that you can have a right to speak freely and frankly. But you're absolutely right that it's I agree is really closely connected with political institutions and specifically democratic institutions. I say Gria is a right that is in short equally to those who belong as members to the demos and then who can then you can then attend and participate in debate in the public forum. So it's not you know it doesn't really make sense to discuss I agree outside of or in the absence of those democratic institutions. As we exercise our minds in new and interesting ways remember that it's also important to exercise our bodies. And if you're like me the important thing about exercising is that you need some structure to motivate yourself but you also need the flexibility to do it when you can. For those reasons Peloton is an ideal solution. I've tried out the Peloton bike and it's a wonderful way to be creative with workouts while still being motivated by someone telling you that you can do even more you can keep going and you can try harder. And with the new Peloton bike plus there are new features that empower you to seamlessly add strength training to the routine. You can see things from a new angle with a larger screen that easily rotates. You can increase the challenge level by changing the resistance with a quick touch rather than turning a knob. And you can hear the Peloton instructors loud and clear with an immersive high fidelity sound system. And now new members get to try it for themselves with a 30 day home trial. You can experience everything the new Peloton bike plus has to offer for 30 days. And if you're not interested you get a free pickup and a full refund. Visit one peloton.com for more information. That's o-n-e-p-l-o-t-o-n.com. So how does something like the debates over whether hate speech should be allowed or censored or illegal fit into this is the side that says well I should be able to say what I want even if it's hateful. So I would classify it this way. So you have sort of modern parisi-ass die if you will sort of modern proponents of free and frank speech arguing a kind of it was also often described as free speech absolutism but actually think that that's not not really accurate an accurate description of you. So that kind of free speech fundamentalism that gives priority always to the right of individuals to speak their minds no matter how offensive. That happens to be to the audience. But then on the other side you have people who are really, really worried about the ways in which exercises of parisi-a can not just harm others but cause a specific kind of harm which is a kind of dignitary harm. The idea that hate speech in this example is a kind of assault on the equal status or standing of members of racial gender ethnic minorities and thus, thus the argument would come back. And so I would say the modern defender of isa-geria is more worried about how we secure and maintain this system of kind of equal speakers. And on that view you might then say well parisi-a needs to be restricted so that isa-geria can be protected. Right. Okay. Yeah. I mean there's this famous cartoon that flies around the internet about Karl Popper's paradox of tolerance. Have you seen this? I sure have. I'm sure people are going to bring it up. Right. So that's why I'm pre-empting them. But the idea being that you think that you want to be tolerant of everybody but some people are intrinsically intolerant and tolerating them can be the death of tolerance. And therefore we should all we tolerate some people. I just I just I have to say I'm so pleased you brought it up so that I can so I can complain about it. So again, I will come to this later in the discussion. I guess I talk about this directly in my work on civility and tolerance. But I think it's really it makes a pretty important mistake about what tolerance is and what it means. It's precisely the putting up with something we acknowledge to be an evil. Yeah. And in my view, a tolerant society that as a matter of principle doesn't tolerate the intolerant is not a tolerant society. You know, I think we can make we can have arguments about what we might call militant democracy. The idea that in democracies, there should not be any right to organize as an anti-democratic party. Right. So that we so you don't have a case where you know the Nazis run on a platform of abolishing parliamentary elections and then are elected right. So that kind of case. So I think that you can make sense conceptually of militant democracy. I don't think that militant tolerance actually makes any sense. And I think that the idea is sort of traceable. I mean, forget popper, you can trace it to Herbert Marcosa and the idea of repressive tolerance. Right. We have to repress the enemies of tolerance. And I just I don't I know people really enjoy sharing that, you know, that that cartoon. They think it's a sort of knockdown argument, but I would just sort of beg them to think a little bit more deeply about what that actually means. I mean, I think in my you know, in my book, I talk about, you know, tolerance society cannot pick and choose its materials and remain tolerant for long. And yeah, I would just that that's my view. But I think you're right. It's it's the same idea in debates today about free speech. The idea that some speech needs to be silenced. So as to protect the principle of free speech for all or you know for you know to make the make the right to free speech equal. Yeah, I mean, we have to get into that obviously because that is it is a tricky one and drawing the boundaries between speech that should be allowed and speech. I mean, there's some speech that shouting for fire in a crowded theater, right, which is this classic example of something that you're not allowed to do. So there's a more general principle there. But again, I we when I brought up the hate speech example, that's sort of the free speech. Slogan hearing that goes on on one side that you know I should be able to say hateful things as long as you're not physically harmed. But then there's the other side to map it back onto the is a gory apprezia distinction. There's there's a concern about free speech that says, well, look, you know, I have a point of view. And my point of view is just not being represented in the discourse, right, like, you know, certain kinds of ideas are just not mentioned on TV. It's just not considered respectable, etc. So shouldn't I have a right to be heard in some way? I think that way of framing it is exactly right. I think very often what the sense of righteous indignation that's fueling a lot of this culture war. And I would say that actually on both sides, you have people who feel sincerely and righteously indignant that their views cannot get a hearing. And I have a paper in which I make some of these arguments, the arguments sort of more technically, but I think the basic rest is this. I don't think that you can have an equal enforceable right to be heard. I just don't I think that's a non starter on the level of society as such. I think that you can have that kind of right to a hearing in well defined relatively small scale, like the democratic assembly and Athens, like a faculty meeting, like the, you know, the parliamentary chamber or the, or the senate floor, right, when you have a well defined space of debate, you can say, OK, everybody gets gets a hearing. And so I think that the impulse though to say, well, that has to be realized on the scale of society as such in order for free speech to be sort of meaningful. I understand the impulse, but I just think that it can't actually work on the scale of society. And therefore, the cost of trying to realize it are unacceptable from the point of view of freedom of speech. That sounds reasonable to me, but I'm I hear the worry that, you know, this makes free speech. Let's put it dramatically into a tool of oppression into a tool of maintaining the status quo because you say, well, everyone should be able to speak. Some people had access to microphones and amplification and some people don't. So you're baking in some kind of inequality from the start. Yeah, I'm very sensitive to that response. And I think that it's absolutely right to point out the status quo bias in a lot of, um, Pat liberal defenses of individual rights. So I'm not indifferent to power in this case. I suppose that my, my, my sense always is though, you know, in such arguments, you're effectively calling for the suppression and exclusion of hateful or denigrating views, right? And it's just, but I mean, who are you proposing to have that power to censor? And it's always going to be the powers that be right. It's a very strange face on the one hand that our governors are incompetent evil, et cetera. But on the other hand, that we should empower them even further to suppress views they don't like. So I guess that that is why I, you know, get if your listeners are trying to work at what side I'm on. I mean, it's the small, see small, else civil libertarians aside that simply says, look, absolutely free. The principle of free speech can be weaponized by those who want to just cling very, very tightly to their right to insult other people on the basis of a script of characteristics. Yes, that can and does happen, but that itself doesn't disqualify or somehow, you know, render invalid the importance of free speech. And that in itself is not an argument for why a system wherein we don't value. But that's why I think that the idea of free speech is that it's not a free speech, but it's not a free speech. And I think that the idea of free speech is that it's not a free speech, but it's not a free speech, but it's not a free speech. It's an important worry and I worry it's my concern is that it's a worry that's not necessarily taken seriously by a lot of those who identify as being on the kind of civil libertarian side of the disagreement. Yeah, no, I mean, I take it as my role as the podcast host to try to, you know, bring up the imaginary opponents of these things, but essentially on your side here, I mean, I think that an argument... Oh, no, I've got to change my mind now. You didn't notice that I was on, I tricked you. No, I mean, I think that there's a very sensible argument to be made that sure, if you say on the one hand, everyone has the right to talk, and on the other hand, some people have microphones and some don't, that's an unequal balance there. But nevertheless, we have to maintain that kind of equality of right to talk because eventually that will be a tool for the people who don't have power. Like if you take that away from them, then what is the hope? Yeah, I would, again, I'm a political theorist and a political philosopher, but I really do come to it from the history of political thought, and just thinking about these political questions historically, and the defenders of the right to censor suppress and exclude are often themselves part of or see themselves as allies of the establishment. And I guess one of the interesting things in debates today is that we're in this cultural moment where there are kind of conflicting establishments, right? We might think of the intellectual academia, media establishment as being ranged against the political establishment to take the American case, and I think that that maps well onto the British case as well. And that's a kind of unique historical moment, but I mean, I don't think it's desirable for those establishments, for those rival establishments and their partisans to begin just duking it out as a kind of power conflict opposed from the idea that there are principles that should bind to bind how we conduct our disagreements. And one of those principles being the principle free speech, I mean, in the UK now we have this sort of bizarre situation where the government is now sort of wanting to impose free speech, quote unquote, on the university. And I just need to say, for again, for someone broadly civil libertarian, you know, that's to me that's not a desirable outcome. It's very similar, the same thing in the US. It is, I love your idea of the conflicting establishments because it's very real and it's a wonderful thing because everyone can think of themselves as an oppressed minority, right? Because there's some other establishment that doesn't agree with them. Absolutely. And I just, again, you know, my other dearest wish, since I'm just sharing my dearest wishes with you Sean. My other dearest wishes that people can just take seriously the feeling of righteous indignation on all sides, not grants that all indignations are equally righteous, but grants that everyone experiences their indignation equally right. Right. Right. And I, because I do very often think what we really need to resist is this polarization of every question of principle into are you are you not on the right side. And again, I think you know, just come approaching these questions from the perspective of say the 17th century and debates about religious toleration is really good training for identifying and resisting the sectarian impulse, which I do think is just endemic. And in human psychology and human community, we, we, we like to believe in belong on the basis of our shared beliefs. And that's a kind of, you know, feature and bug of how human beings work. And so what we should be doing, I think is, you know, and I, when I say we, I mean, people like me who are lucky enough to be in the academy, lucky enough to be educators is sort of helping our students cultivate the virtues that allow them to resist that poll. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Good. I mean, and I do, I think I like the fact that you, you come at this from a historical angle, and I definitely want to get much more into the history of Rhode Island than we've ever gotten into before here on landscape. But, but maybe this is the good place since we're already into the conversation. I don't think that I've let you giving you the opportunity sort of in your eyes. Eyes, what is the best justification for free speech? Like what is the argument? It's become such a cliche like in the US and the UK, we, of course, we're pro free speech largely construed, but broadly construed, but there are different possible justifications you could offer for that. And they might not be the same. They might not be equally appropriate. I mean, do you have a favorite reason why we should be small, see small, L civil libertarians in the sense? It's a great question. And it's one I managed not to confront for quite a long time. I knew that as anyone who's ever been a graduate student knows, you spend most of your time deciding who annoys you, who you disagree with before you're in the business of a propering your own positive argument. That doesn't go away when you're much more senior faculty member. But yeah, definitely true. But I knew that I didn't find the kind of million case. So I mean, John Stewart million case for free speech persuasive the idea that free speech is justified as a means to truth production. And so I've been much more drawn to historical justifications of free speech that emphasize the sanctity of individual conscience. So the idea is that all human beings have minds. We have no choice but to make up our minds for ourselves, although we try to free ourselves of that responsibility as much as possible. And that a system of free speech is the one wherein we respect the sort of the fact that people equally have minds. And I think one way of thinking about it, especially in this kind of in the case of current debates is that we're very concerned about the ways in which certain voices can't be heard on the basis of their identity. So right, we're familiar with the ways in which women's voices are discounted racial minorities voices are discounted now increasingly gender gender nonconforming identities are discounted. But what I always come back to is you know, identities don't speak individuals do my script of characteristics don't determine what I'm going to think or say on any given issue. And so we any sort of political legal social systems surrounding speech, I think has to attend to and credit that fact. And society that values that or sort of respect that individual conscience for me is one in which I'd much prefer to live. And then again, we get to the negative case, which is that because in societies that don't we we sort of empower the powers that happen to be to censor on our behalf. But in that kind of case for free speech, I mean that's much closer to the case that someone like John Milton would make. Okay. And something you know in the 1640s, then it is to the case that John Stuart Mill would make in the 1840s. That that case is is an ulcer case and it's you know in the 17th century wasn't explicitly kind of Christian case. It was about the power of the word. It was about the importance of conscience. But I think it's a lot more persuasive or sort of more accurately or effectively captures the kinds of things I care about. Then do some of the more safely secular arguments. Well, I mean, it sounds maybe my understanding history of philosophy is imperfect. I know it is. But it sounds like a kind of Kantian conception rather than more humane conception. I mean giving some giving priority to the autonomy of individuals rather than just sort of like a more let's try everything and see what works kind of thing. I think that's fair. Again, you know, I'm just I'm sort of sat in my my contrarian ways and I really don't like autonomy. Oh, okay, you don't like autonomy. I know what you're saying. Perhaps I should be be be clearer. I don't think that the that I don't believe that persons are autonomous in the way that Kant described them. I don't think they are. I don't think they can be autonomous in the way that that Kant described them in that it's not the power. So for Kant, the justification for the as he would have put it, the public use of one's reason is that we need, you know, we need the freedom to reason publicly in order to be rational. And I think that I see the attraction of that sort of argument, but I I don't actually believe that speech is fundamentally about exchanging reasons. I think speech is about a whole lot more than that. It's about affect. It's about enthusiasm. It's about everything else. And so the kind of the the Christian privileging of the word, if you will sort of seeing the word as something that is all powerful and exists kind of apart from the individuals who receive or speak it. Actually is closer to my view, but I understand, you know, as I'm saying this, you know, again, for your listeners, what side is she on the beginning to sound very, very Protestant. And the funny thing is, of course, that I, you know, I like these religious arguments, but I'm not myself religious. No, no, I think that's wonderful because our culture went through that even for the most secular of us today, right? I mean, the history definitely engaged with that. But I think I think what you just said was very helpful to me, because now I'm seeing more of the distinction you're trying to draw. I mean, Mill and, you know, his, his later avatars, I guess, like Habermost would count. I mean, had this idea of reasoning and talking to each other and sharing ideas. And that's why we couldn't declare certain ideas out of bounds because then we might miss some good ones. And you know, we're, we're handicapping ourselves in search for the truth. Whereas your, you're much more concerned about, it sounds like, let me, let me phrase it and then you can correct me. It sounds like you're more concerned about just the, the idea that people should have the right to spout off and say what they want because they're, their individuals. And even if what they say is nonsense, and it doesn't help us find the truth, they still would have the right to say nonsense. And so, in some sense, peddlers are people too. Yeah, exactly. Is, is my view, the intolerant are people too, hypocrites are people too. I mean, in the, you know, the point is that people are people and people very often suck. Yeah. But it's empirical people who have rights. Yeah, no, I think that that's a helpful way of, of putting it. And here again, I just think historical perspective is crucial. If we're interested in where our, you know, quote, unquote, our modern institutions, our modern commitments come from, there is a really important kind of divergence between the way in which free speech principles and institutions develop in the United States and what will become the United States. So in North America and how they develop in Europe and the European tradition, as you say, we might say, culminating in a homomouse. The European arguments are much more focused on speech as a vehicle for reason and argument. Yeah. And you see this reflected actually in the language in which the demand is expressed. So if we think about, you know, Spinoza, he's talking about the freedom to philosophize. Kant himself is talking again about the, the right to exercise one's reason in public. Mill talks about the liberty of thought and discussion. So it's never about free speech as such. It's always about this category of reason speech. Yeah. There's quite a lot of exclusion of a lot of speech built into that. Whereas in the American case, you know, we were, it's not philosophers who are worried about this and sort of building up institutions, you know, except maybe for Thomas Jefferson. It's a bunch of evangelical Christians. A lot of self-styled profits. And so what they're worried about is how to build an institutional system that protects the right to spread the word. And so the freedom to proselytize as opposed to the freedom to philosophize. And I do think that this accounts, you know, not fully, but to, to a large extent, to the very different cultures around freedom of speech and the greater tolerance for not only pornography, but prophecy that you get in America as opposed to other liberal democracies. Life insurance isn't at the top of your list of priorities right now, but it's something that you can do. It's easy to do with policygenius.com and it will take a load off your minds. You don't have to worry about it anymore. The good news is you can save over $1,500 or more a year by using policy genius to compare life insurance policies from different companies. When you're shopping for a policy that could last a decade or more, these savings really start to add up. Policygenius is an insurance marketplace built and backed by a team of industry experts. It's a very easy process. Step one, you go to policygenius.com. In minutes, you can work out how much coverage you need and compare quotes from top insurers. Step two, you apply for the lowest price. Step three, the policygenius team handles all the paperwork and red tape. Policygenius works for you, not for the insurance company. They even have policies that allow eligible customers to skip the in-person medical exam and do it all over the phone. So if you need life insurance, head to policygenius.com right now to get started. You can save money and feel comfortable that you're making the right choice. Policygenius, when it comes to insurance, it's nice to get it right. And you make a wonderful case for thinking more than we usually do in American history about Roger Williams in the case of Rhode Island. He's a fascinating character, which I had heard his name before, but reading in your stuff about how committed he was to his ideals and those ideals led him to create a space where people who he thought were terrible could never less participate. Yeah, I'm from North Carolina, so we don't really get taught anything about Rhode Island in the American South. But I did, I just became really fascinated with him when I was in grad school and ended up arguing in my first book that Roger Williams, not only his theory, but actually more importantly his practice of civility and tolerance was not only a good model. For thinking about civility tolerance and speech in society today, but also historically important in that that sort of brand of Protestant evangelicalism helps explain American exceptionalism when it comes to freedom of speech and why our approach to freedom of speech is more preseastic, if you will, then that of other modern democracies. And in particular, this notion of civility is one that you examine closely. I think that sort of casually a lot of people are going to think we have to be nice to each other and not insult each other, but that's not what the central point is for you. No, so in my work on civility, which is really, I guess, where all of this began, I was interested to really work out what, what distinguishes civility from other conversational virtues. So as you say, I think in common parlance, we tend to think, oh, well, to be civil means to be nice, it means to be respectful, it means to be polite. But if you think about it for a bit, you very quickly appears that that can't that can't be right because when we're talking about civility, we we are talking about something that is well, I mean, I might say we has three distinguishing features that show it to be peculiar and not not reducible to those other virtues. So the first one is that civility seems to be appropriate to disagreement in particular. So we talk about civility when we're talking about how we should conduct our disagreements. Secondly, civility has a kind of minimal character. So we can talk about being merely civil. So civility is what we need to deal with bad neighbors, expouses, members of the other party. And so it has this kind of low, but low, but solid kind of sense that other virtues like decorum politeness respect, don't. And then thirdly and finally civility comes from the Latin civility, which in turn comes from civility, which means political society or civil society. And so civility seems to be a virtue that should pertain to disagreements between those who stand in a particular kind of relation, either relation of citizen or co members of a single civil society. And so it's sort of working through those features of civility that led me to conclude that a lot of the debates going on at the time when I was writing and publishing my book and also now with the kind of culture where free speech debates we've been talking about. A lot of the debates that claim to be about, you know, freeze those who support free speech versus those who are against free speech are actually debates about different cultures of civility in tolerance society. So how much uncivil talk or how much insults, how much kind of nastiness can a tolerance society put up with. And so it was in that it was trying to reframe debates about speech and tolerance in that way that I then came to sort of single out Roger Williams offering a particular model about how we might think of civility in a tolerance society as being consistent with quite a lot of free and frank speaking, but nevertheless made it possible for a society of proselytizer is to rub along together. Despite their differences. Yeah, so civility in this in this sense is not to be conflated with politeness or decorum, but more. I mean, I want to put words in your mouth, but more just a willingness to keep engaging despite the craziness that these people are saying. Yeah, I mean, so I think in the book, I define mere civility as the as a minimal conformity to culturally contingent norms of respectful behavior. So you'll see, I mean, there is an idea as we abide by or we conform ourselves to norms of respectful behavior, but not because we actually respect or because you know, not because we're sort of sincerely committed to treating others respectfully. And the distinction is important because mere civility then becomes away not only of not only is it consistent with actually feeling disrespect for others, but it can actually become a way of communicating disrespect or contempt for others. So when I treat you with mere civility, Sean, I mean, that that that could be a way of conveying to you exactly what I think about you and your wrong views. Yeah, and so, and I mean, as you say, okay, well, fair enough, right, this is a way of distinguishing it from respect, but sort of what does it really mean in the in the clutch? And I think what you've singled out is exactly right. So, I think that the way of doing this is that the way of doing it is to be able to understand the ability is this willingness and commitment to engaging with our opponents and to continuing to engage and share a life with those we don't respect. And I've put it in the past and I think this captures it pretty well is the idea, you know, it reflects our commitment to share a life even when we don't share a faith. And to working together to make our society more just as opposed to viewing our opponent simply as obstacles to the realization of a just society. And is it safe to say that the idea and what we'll get to how we best justify this approach, but the idea is that we should keep acting respectful even in a complete absence of respect. Yeah, yeah, that's definitely one way, one way of putting it. I mean, one of the things I was reacting against in turning civility was what I saw as a as a surfeit of respect talk in political philosophy and a lot of which was due as you've already noted. To Kant and kind of neo Kantian arguments about the importance of respect, respecting persons, respecting personality and I think I'm not I'm not against respect I suppose I should put that out there, but I think that it doesn't it's not adequate for understanding what's going on with a virtue like civility, which is precisely the one we rely on in the absence of respect. So so far you're against autonomy or against respect. I mean, this is just a messy society that you want to set up. It's pretty harsh out there pretty Hobzian. I mean, I should say, you know, Hobbs does figure in my book and I he's one of my foils. I argue against what I take to be the Hobzian view of civility, which is what I call civil silence, which is basically, you know, in no we can't disagree and so civility is the way we're going to do it. And so civility is there to keep us from, you know, keep controversial topics off the table, keep us from saying anything offensive. It allows us to differ without disagreeing. And I actually think that that is the impulse behind a lot of civility talk today is we want people to just stop being disagreeable already. But but I think so, you know, I'm against Hobzian civility as I understand it, but you're right that my, my affection for Roger Williams style mere civility is based on a fundamentally kind of Hobzian view about what people are like. Psychologically, both individually ending groups. So just to drive this home really, really hard because I think that the people people do get misled by the nomenclature a little bit. The way that it is used in many contemporary contexts civility appears as a cudgel. There's the dark side of civility. It's actually a silencing move, right? Don't talk to me that way. You're not being civil. I don't need to engage with you. Whereas you want to bring up the idea of civility as continuing to engage no matter how insulting other people are. And you know, that's the kind of prerequisite that we need to live in a pluralistic democracy. That's right. I was struck when I was in grad school and when I was writing the book about just how often civility talk was and is used to shut down debate. We talk about civility precisely when we don't want to make an argument about why our opponents are wrong. Instead we want to say, oh, well, they're uncivil. And so I don't have to engage with them at all. There's the expression right that when we accuse someone of in civility, we place them implicitly beyond the pale. Right. I mean, this expression beyond the pale is really telling because it actually comes from the idea of the pale is in Latin. It comes from the idea of like a stake, but the pale was the fence around the kind of city beyond which the barbarians reside. So in Dublin, for instance, you had the pale of Dublin and the barbarous Catholics were beyond the pale. I think that really effectively illustrates kind of what we're doing when we say, oh, well, how can I be? So in so is being uncivil, I don't need to engage with them. But what I also point out is that I'm so accusing somewhat of in civility is a way of putting them beyond the pale saying, you know, exiling them from the community of respect, respectable conversationalists. But similarly, being uncivil to someone does the same thing. It's sort of it says, you're not worth engaging with in a civil fashion. I can't enjoy a life with you. All I can do is is is is expel you from the borders. And in that then, you know, I don't think we can get away from that dynamic. So I, you know, I say suppression and exclusion are always implicit when we're talking about civility. Because we're always also talking about in civility, sort of talking about where we would draw the line. But what then needs to happen is we need to look at different ways of conceiving of civility and then see see where the line is drawn in each case. So in the case of mere civility, I think that's the kind of civility that is compatible with the maximally inclusive and maximally tolerant society that I would like to live in. There are other ways of conceiving of civility. Yeah, and I was going to say the example of Dublin was worth the entire price of admission to me. Like now I know that beyond the pale is just a reference to barbarous Irish Catholics against civilized Anglo Protestants. So that I clarify is a lot, a lot to me. But I mean, I really do want to understand this to me, the single biggest difficulty in trying to come down to figure out what side I am on in many of these debates is this issue of, are there people who are beyond the pale? I mean, are there people? Because I think the answer is yes, but I don't know where to put them. But I think there are people who just aren't worth engaging with. I mean, there are people who disagree with me in maybe a productive way. I mean, my philosophy of inviting people into the podcast is I'll certainly have people I disagree with. But only ones that I think I can get something from. And there are people who I would never have on the podcast because my only job would be like debunk them or make fun of them. And what is the point of that? I think that's right. And certainly I don't think that everyone is equally worth engaging. But by the same token, I don't think that you, Sean, are proposing to sort of draw the limits of society as such based on the limits of whom you would invite onto your podcast. Right. You sort of say, this is a voluntary association. I'm choosing the people with whom I'm going to debate in this context. And what I worry about just generally and public debates about civility is that people are sort of indifferent or maybe insensitive to the ways in which their own judgments of who is and is worth not engaging are partial. And sort of proposing then to think about civility and tolerance generally on the basis of their partial judgments of who is is and is worth not worth engaging. And there again, we go back to just you know it's it's a feature and a bug. This is how human beings think it is the case that any person who talks about civility is implicitly valorizing themselves as an exemplar. Yeah. And the can you know that this includes me and it also includes the people I talk about in my book Roger Williams Thomas Hobbes and I also talk about John Locke. They're all sort of implicitly holding themselves up. But only Williams, I think really adequately accounts for the fact that his own judgments are biased. And as I show in the book what that ends up leading to is is this sort of seemingly paradoxical, but I think it's not paradoxical conclusion that civility demands that we tolerate others in civility. Right. Right. So mere civilities is mostly about being able and willing to put up with with others and you know, but once put in that way it would seem that yes, that's the appropriate way of thinking of civility and a tolerant society. But now just to go back to your initial objection and very good point is also in a tolerant society, I now then need to be free to associate in partial associations with those I choose right I'm not sort of committed to inviting. I'm not saying you know my crack pot conspiracy theorist cousin to my Plato reading group right. But I am committed to not saying that he should be sort of stripped of his rights or or sent to Canada. Yeah, I think that's exactly it is a means of good distinction that you drew because I was a little vague and saying you know some people are not worth talking to. That depends a lot on the context in which we're defining talking to right. So on Twitter, I'm really good at blocking people like I have no patience for putting up with people who are just there to cause trouble. But I don't want those people to be denied the right to vote in my society right like I don't want to voluntarily chat with them, but I think they have a full right to have their voice heard in the polity and that seems to be an important distinction. But still it's still hard because there are some people who maybe shouldn't have the right to vote. I don't know, but where to draw that line. So I was thinking more personally than politically when I said you know where do we draw the line between people where we feel are worth engaging with and people we just want to ignore. I think I mean in just being becoming aware that there's are two different lines I think is really sort of more than half the battle. I think that the Twitter example is really good there because Twitter and other sort of social media are really do occupy this kind of ambiguous space. An ambiguous space in American law and also an ambiguous case space just in in in in our minds. I mean, we were first them quaintly as platforms. It's just the traditional medium of amplifying the the spoken word. But they also function as presses right as publishing. So when we when I tweet it's it's like I'm publishing my view and putting it out there then to be debated and increasingly these these platforms become approximations of the public sphere. But on the other hand, they're also private private companies, but also private associations, right, I mean Twitter can expel and de platform those who violated terms and conditions right. And so I think that the fact that so much of the debate is happening about speech on these platforms just contributes to the further confusion of you know what the limit is. What kind of limit is appropriate for different kinds of for a and it sort of invites us to conflate the limit of our you know Twitter Twitter association with the limit of sort of you know tolerable views to be expressed in American society or British society, etc. I mean, the other thing that social media platforms do and it's something that I come up against I imagine you do to is that they're transnational in a way that's great, but also can be highly misleading. So a lot of time I mean it really has come it has just further exacerbated this this cultural tendency to export all American culture wars to the world. Yes, but also it just it brings us up against the fact that civility is always necessarily a kind of local standard right the standard of civility in American discourse is going to be different than the standard of civility in British discourse but a forum like Twitter doesn't allow us to actually distinguish between those audiences. And so that's why also there are all so many conflicts and disruptions and sort of moments where competing codes of civility clash and that can also lead to this increasing sense of a kind of crisis of civility because we are you know we just we have these amazing megaphone's now that allow us to address audiences we could never even have dreamed. Yeah. So I think it's just very important that we have to be able to have when we often feel like oh you know I'm just complaining to my friends. Well, just to bring this down to sort of real world conflicts here so for example consider the idea of de-platforming speakers at a university right. There's some people have an idea that if one group at my university wants to invite a speaker even though I'm not a member of that group and I don't have anything to do with them I don't like them I don't agree with them I still you know there's some right I'm putting words into their mouth because I don't feel this way myself so I'm probably not making the best case for it but there's some justification for me trying to shut them down right I presume that going along with the civility. And going along with the civility discourse you would be against that kind of shutting down. I think it I think it's complicated I mean not to bury the lead yes I am concerned about no platforming and de-platforming and kind of rising tide of demands to de-platform at universities. However, I do think that universities are importantly distinct from society at large so I do think that universities. I mean of course this is different in the United States when it comes to public universities which are covered by the first amendment but in private universities yeah I mean you can suppress and exclude people on the basis of their speech for the speech that they that you think that they might make that's fine you have the right to do that. Now the question is should you do that and there I think that it is it's a complicated question but we should we should tend towards no and the reason we should tend towards no is because not because we're going to violate the free speech rights of the speaker so let's take the case of I don't know I mean there are lots of controversy over on campus talks given by Charles Murray a couple years ago. It's not because I'm worried about Charles Murray's Charles Murray's free speech rights being infringed I'm worried about the infringement of the free speech rights of the students who invite him right so they're right to sort of hear his argument now. I mean I think it's interesting to think of the right to listen to somebody as an aspect of free speech. Yeah and again it goes back to I agree I mean I think that universities are sites or you should aspire to be sites of I agree you know but sort of within their remit as educational institutions IE so I'm not saying that you know that means students are equal speakers on a par with their professors when it comes to matters of academic expertise. However you know I do think a seminar is one of those places where we're trying to realize the kind of ideal of equal speech where everyone has a voice and feels able to get a hearing right and so I do think that events like public talks on campus or private talks on campus are precisely places where we're training students not only in speaking but in listening and responding then to views that they don't hold I mean so the the the they do you think I mean so the proponents of no or de-platforming have a case the case is that in providing a controversial speaker like Murray or whoever a platform we're sort of endorsing in some way or elevating the content of their views and that in a way that can cause harm or in some way threaten be equal standing of members of our community. I think there are cases where certain speakers should not be invited to campus. Well I think it's important to me to draw this distinction between if someone is invited by the university to see you know give a university sponsored talk or you know receive an honorary degree or something then I have no problem with members of the university community protesting that and trying to stop it where was what I was imagining like some little subgroup of the university you know the college racist association wants to invite Charles Murray then even if I think that racism is bad I think that I should let them do that. Yeah I mean I'm inclined to make the same distinction I do think there's a clear distinction between inviting someone to give a commencement address and allowing the college Republicans to invite him ever they'd like or the you know the local boycott divest and sanction you know movement to invite him ever they'd like I do think however that universities there is a role for virtuous university administrators in this case. Wait what? To help guide student associations to act responsibly in extending invitations to sort of not encourage this kind of F you. Sometimes I think just students inviting speakers to campus and also to engage in you know a crowd management and determining sort of what's the appropriate venue for a speaker etc. I think we often want to turn these cases into hard and fast sort of a conflict over principle when in fact you know actually maybe the principle isn't so controversial it's the question of the particular policies or potential judgments about how we're going to organize specific event. But yeah I'm inclined to go and I guess you know in terms of them is there a kind of cultural problem growing in American campuses I would be less inclined to look at particular cases where student associations have invited a controversial speaker and more to like cases where university administrators have been pressured into rescinding invitations to you know speakers to give a commencement addresses or to receive honorary doctorates. And those sort of incidents I have been on the rise in recent years as well but they don't tend to be as headline grabbing as for instance what happened at Middlebury with Charles Murray. Well I mean there certainly is a tendency or at least a temptation you know students bless their hearts I was a student once over you you know that students like to stir things up a little bit and sometimes they'll invite people just to be provocative. But putting that aside I mean talk about the extent to which there is a positive virtue in seeking out opposing views I mean is that part of this ability paradigm or is it just we should tolerate these these noisy people we disagree with but I think that John Stuart Mill would probably make the case that we should actually make an effort to go listen to them how does that fit into your slightly different point of view. So there's a positive case as well I mean whereas Mill emphasizes the importance of listening to contrary views so as to strengthen one's own argument I mean he has that great line and on Liberty he who knows only his own side of a case knows little of that yeah I always love love drawing students attention to but I'm. As ever you know in my in my preference for 17th century evangelicals and their approach to this it's more an emphasis on you know there's little point it seems to me in discoursing exclusively with people who agree with you already. One reason for that is that you know there's little point in that if you don't already know what you think which hopefully you know I think most students don't I think most adults don't I'm very willing to admit that there are plenty of controversial topics on which people seem to have very strong views but I have no idea what I think and I think that's perfectly appropriate. So there's that consideration but also on the topics in which I do have strong views surely I should want to persuade others that I'm right and they're wrong rather than just having all of those wonderful back slapping conversations with those people who already agree with me about how very wrong those people we never talk to are. So for me I just it seems like what is the point of talk I guess we always come back to that why why bother talking to each other in the first place and I think that there is something missing in the million account about that kind of evangelical impulse the impulse to persuade and to try to bring others round to our way of thinking. Well it also shows that there's a political aspect to this where purity comes in right and I see online you know online is not a accurate reflection of the world but there are people who would argue that you know their favorite candidate shouldn't want the support of certain groups because those groups are bad or they're insufficiently good and my thought is if I'm a political candidate I want everyone literally everybody to vote for me I want the worst people in the world to vote for me. That doesn't mean I endorse their views but I'm happy to take their support. As a political theorist I do again wonder often about people's understanding of how democracy works and the importance of coalition building. I mean so that's that's a glib but there's a serious point there I mean yes we we want to win elections. Yeah right. The point of elections is to win. Are you sure it's not to demonstrate our purity because I've got the impression. Then we do we come to this really sort of perverse state of affairs where actually the point of an election is to lose but to lose for the right reason. And I just I find that difficult to square then with the sort of criterion upon which we are the criteria upon which we're demanding purity i.e. our vision of a just society and surely if we want to make a society more just we've got to win the election in order to do so. I think you're right I mean there is again you know if we think about the advantages of the long view you know puritanism kind of became a bad. Word or sort of a you know puritan is a kind of pejorative contemporary politics but of course I study 17th century Puritan's and I see all the virtues. So to sort of call something Puritan isn't isn't isn't to criticize it in my view. But I do think you know studying Puritanism and the kind of drive for purity within political and social and spiritual movements. You can see its benefits and you can also see its its disadvantages quite clearly and you know I just say that another reason I like Williams maybe maybe you know Williams was a Puritan but he was so Puritan that he realized that everybody else was going to hell which meant that he had to compromise with those people who are going to hell in order to be able to get anything done. You know he has this wonderful line one must go out of the world if one would not keep company with idolaters right so you know in so far as we're stuck in this world. We've really got to make the best of it and do the good we can and we can't do that good without other people. Well that's it makes him so interesting because he did somehow manage to be a successful political leader despite these strong philosophical views which is not the controversial statement. Often times people come back to me and they say you know Rhode Island wasn't a success. I say well what's your criterion of success I mean we wrote island with the last colony to ratify the Constitution. You're saying that like it's a bad thing. But yeah I just say you know the thing about we don't tend to think of Rhode Island when we're thinking about you know really modern societies to hold up as exemplars but that being said I mean it was at the time and for a long time the most tolerant society in the world. It was the only society to my knowledge without you know in in the in certainly in the world of Western Christendom but also beyond without an established church. I mean that's bananas you know very very often Williams is linked with John Locke is though you know Williams just made locks arguments 50 years earlier and with a bunch of unnecessary scriptural quotations but but there's a really important difference in that Williams argued that tolerance required that they're not being established church. Locke was okay with establishment so long as church attendance wasn't mandatory was a mandatory. So I think these kinds of differences which from one perspective are kind of oh well these are small distinctions that are maybe of interest historians I would actually say no they're actually quite significant and understanding those distinctions in sort of historical context can help us make sense of some of the kind of confounding factors to the you know to to our attempts to put our principles into practice. I mean the only other thing to say on the the point about moral purity and politics today I mean if we're worried about free speech the principle free speech as a means to just further entrenching the status quo I mean nothing is better for the status quo than purest and as a man politics. If we're so worried about having only the right people on our side we can be can we can absolutely be assured that things will continue to go as they are. You know I have to say even taking into account your affection for 17th century evangelicals I was impressed by your ability to link the Quakers with contemporary debates over the use of pronouns to talk about different gender identities. You have to share that with our audience and maybe you'll lead us into a little bit of talk about the connection between freedom of speech and civility and equality which is a whole nother bag of worms. Oh brilliant yeah and equality is my my current hobby horse so it's very much on my mind so I mean as you mentioned I wrote this article that was it was published and by the New York Times editorial page about the politics of pronouns using early Quakers as an example. As one does. Yeah as one does well as a group that was really concerned about the ways in which the rules of grammar stood in the way of an egalitarian society and so you know it sounds funny but it's actually really there's a really serious point I mean much like contemporary trans and gender queer activists who you know are arguing for the importance of gender neutral pronouns Quakers thought that the English second person pronoun you know what I mean. The pronoun you was actually a form of and again because we're talking the 17th century I'm going to use their terms but a form of idolatry or devil worship so the reason for this which is not immediately obvious to modern speakers of English is because you is actually the plural. Early modern English there was a singular second person pronoun which was the and a plural second person pronoun which was you and so in the 17th century around the time that the Quakers are becoming active you're seeing this change in English grammar where the is basically being crowded out by you everybody is beginning to use the second person plural and Quakers like George Fox William Penn saw this as a basically as a demand for everyone to have a kind of elevated status much like the queen refers to herself as we exactly the royal we everybody is now demanding that they be acknowledges you and obviously this sounds weird for English speakers but anyone who knows a romance language or or or German or any other language that has a distinction between the plural and the singular where the where the plural you is used in cases of deference will understand the word. And so Quakers instead of just putting up or in shutting up they decided to wage a campaign against the plural you and so the Quakers insisted on using singular pronouns with V and thou with not just other Quakers but with everyone and so if you look at the early reception of Quakers and which was far from welcoming one of the one of the main things that really pissed people off at the time is that they they object to the word. And it's a way to inject to the Quaker use of the as a form of insult or contempt as I mean it wouldn't be a stretch to say to 17th century English speakers to be called the by a Quaker was a kind of hate speech. It sounds completely bizarre to modern ears because we because it's archaic we think of the endow is somehow more formal but they were exactly the opposite they were this sort of familiar casual way of talking. Absolutely and so Roger Williams who I've been extolling for the past hour for his extraordinary tolerance I mean the one group to really test his patience was the Quaker and it was precisely because he thought that their use of V and thou expressed contempt and I guess it you know was a contempt he didn't like because he was perfectly fine with pressing contempt in other ways. But there was a real worry about the Quakers unwillingness to kind of just go with the flow and to abide by the culturally contingent norms of respectful behavior right so the Quakers unwillingness to be merely civil. So that's where you know these two stories connect once more. But anyway so I was just really interested in trying to parse the the egalitarian politics of Quaker pronouns and in the article I I contrast that actually with contemporary activists because from the Quakers perspective what trans activists want or those who speak for them maybe I you know is the more correct correct to say with gender neutral pronouns is basically is the right for everyone to be able to choose their own pronouns. And for the Quakers that wouldn't be kind of claim to equality at all it would actually be a kind of claim to distinction. Yeah right it be a way of saying well everyone's entitled to pick their own title and so the Quaker view is instead that equality demands that everybody just be you know treated as contemptible and sort of leveled down right we might distinguish here between leveling up versions of equality where everyone's treated as an aristocrat and leveling down versions where everyone's treated as a commoner. And the Quakers are firmly in the leveling down camp and so that that that comparison I think is is is a helpful one for seeing you know here's a contemporary issue that's really controversial. Tempers intentions run high on this question of gender neutral pronouns but if we consider it with historical perspective we can actually see well here is a conflict not about whether or not we care about equality but rather about what equality demands of us in our interactions and I think that's really helpful yeah for kind of reframing this controversial topic in such a way that people can actually see okay well maybe people on the other side have a point. I don't have to agree with it but they have a point and in recognizing they have a point I can therefore engage well okay so what's the right answer. Well I'm in the process of writing this this new book which is tentatively entitled first among equals and it's about the theory and practice of equality in the 17th century and what that you know what that can help us understand about. The theory and practice of equality today but I suppose one answer is that egalitarian politics is ever a mixture of leveling up and leveling down and attempts to focus exclusively on one poll will fail because they're both really important. The second answer is that as ever there's a cultural difference and here I'm really inspired by work by James Q Whitman on who's a legal historian. Yale and he's written a book called Harsh Justice which was really interested in why the American Justice system is so much more brutal than European systems and systems of punishment and Jim's answer is that well look I mean American equality was always about treating everyone equally badly. In Europe in these formally aristocratic societies equality became a business of bringing everyone up to the level of aristocrats. The best example of this is the use of the guillotine in the French Revolution because beheading was the form of capital punishment reserved for aristocrats whereas commoners would be hanged. So the French Revolution was in a egalitarian movement and one of the ways that this manifested was by saying well no everybody gets to have their head caught. Okay yes that's a leveling down I suppose. No no no that's not leveling up I'm sorry it's leveling up yeah. The pro-crustian bed of leveling up. I think everywhere is in the American case you know all criminals could be subjected to corporal punishment and that was to treat them as slaves. So anyway so I'm interested to in kind of differences of cultures that we might describe as broadly egalitarian and sort of how that issues and kind of social and cultural norms. But I'm also I guess the main upshot of my work on equality at the moment is I is that I think that equality is perhaps less important normatively than we tend to think it is in contemporary politics. And so a lot of times that when people are talking about equality I think they're actually not so concerned about equality they're concerned about other things. And so one of the things I'd like to do in sort of thinking more about equality is try to parse you know what is it that we're actually sort of talking about when we're talking about equality. Well this is actually what I wanted to ask you about this because it's not clear to me whether we should be thinking about maybe this goes back to Milton versus Mill again. Is equality something that we should take as a metaphysical principle the people are created equal or is it just the most convenient pragmatic way to act in a democracy right to sort of give people equal claim on various rights and resources even though we don't actually think of them as equal to us. Yeah so you can talk about the difference between Mill and Milton but you also think we might also think about the difference between Hobbes and Kant again I mean for Hobbes the idea that people are equal is essentially a pragmatic belief so we agreed to treat others as though they were are equals even though they are in fact not equal. Because that's what makes a stable and peaceful society possible as opposed to the kind of Kantian view which says that well treating people with equal dignity is a reflection of their basic equality. And that it's fundamentally grounded and kind of facts about us as moral persons and I guess my own view I mean this won't surprise you based on the discussion we've been having is I do inclined to the Hobbes and view that human beings are not in fact equal along any of the dimensions that we might point to although they're you know they're long standing debates and moral political philosophy about how we how we should understand that. That claim and you know it's a it's a complicated issue but that we are the more pressing political concern is you know how what what should a society that resolves to treat people as equals look like right so what's demanded. But that sort of view that says that you know it's less important to justify basic equality than it is to actually think about what you know what what treating people as equals means would be strongly objected to by someone like Jeremy Waldron who would say that no you know that amounts to just sort of arbitrarily saying that you know what people are equal because we say so and that's a very sort of weak grounding for something so important so you know I'm very I'm very sensitive to and I take seriously. The other side but I guess one thing that becomes really clear again when we treat these questions historically is that you know the the belief for the dogma that human beings are somehow equal by nature is actually that important for egalitarian politics and you know I say that because. We tend to think about natural equality is something that was discovered or invented in the 17th century or kind of thereabouts you know suddenly everybody realized oh right we were created equal and then this is consequences and you know we better get on that. You know it's just not what happened at all I mean the idea that human beings were equal by nature was a philosophical and a theological commonplace for millennia. It just wasn't seen as having social and political consequences and so the interesting question for me is why suddenly you know in and around the 17th century does this idea of natural quality equality suddenly begin to have consequences that we might recognize as a egalitarian and and. I you know I just I'm really interested to sort of unpick the just so historical stories that so often inform a lot of the moral and political philosophical discussion of basic equality. You know that assumes that oh well you know modernity is defined by its natural equality in a way that like a pre-modernity wasn't and it's just that's just factually wrong right. And so you know I think there's a benefit that comes from correcting the record in any case. Well I mean maybe maybe to close here we can bring it to back up to the present day you know having having enjoyed the 17th century in similar debates for a while so I'm trying to you know take what you've said about civility and free speech and put it in the context of the contemporary debate over cancel culture for example right I mean if I think of just to take it. I think of just take one very specific example. J.K. Rowling has gotten a lot of pushback for saying things that are interpreted in certain circles as being anti trans and anti transgender people and on the one hand you could say well. J.K. Rowling has the right to say whatever she wants you know that has nothing to do with you buying her books or anything like that she has the right to say all these things on the other hand you can say well these people have the right to criticize her and ask other people not to buy her books and sort of is that actually a happy medium or is there some decline of western civilization going on here because J.K. Rowling cannot tweet about what she wants. J.K. Rowling has the right to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to say that she wants to speak out and you know that the fact that she wants to speak out I do think that there is a kind of cultural problem. I don't think it's recent. I think it's been coming on for ages. It's very much implicit in the kind of, you know, the stuff that I was writing about civility in the 2010s and earlier. And it's this sort of intolerance for views or the people who happen to hold those views that we consider to be intolerable. And I do think that there is this kind of push to redefine the meaning of tolerance to something more like a tolerance society is one wherein everybody accepts and includes everybody else. And for reasons we've already discussed, I just don't think that can fly. I think that might be an accepting society, but an accepting society isn't a tolerant one. And I was, you know, bemused by a lot of the pushback against rallying and against the Harper's letter, which she signed and other signs sort of saying, oh, well, you know, one, there is no such thing as cancel culture, which was one response to if there is cancel culture, it is in no way infringing the freedom of speech of the people who are complaining about it. And three, if it is infringing the freedom of speech of those complaining about it, well, that's a good thing. Right. So obviously these three responses are not themselves compatible. We're saying all three. But I do, yeah, I just think, well, yes, of course, there's a concern about freedom of speech there. It's a concern about a culture turning against parasyia. And of course, it's the people who are most powerful within that system, people who have a huge platform like rallying who feel able to speak out against it. Right. So my concern is those who don't share that power, who don't share that privilege and who nevertheless see what happens to someone like, though, someone like rallying or you know, you know, you know, you know, you pick, whoever you're sort of sacrificial lamb of the moment is see what happens when someone says something that others object to and conclude quite rightly that it's not worth taking the risk for themselves. And I approach these issues again from the perspective of someone trying to teach young people to think and argue and disagree with each other. And I see it in my students, this sort of, we do a free speech unit and this sort of unwillingness. Even in that seminar discussion, right, which of course was taking place on Zoom because, you know, this is the end of time. Yeah. Is unwillingness to sort of, you know, say things that they were afraid their peers would think of as being sort of, you know, unacceptable. And already, you know, we already sort of are so sensitive to what other people think of us. Of course, this kind of culture will have a, will have a chilling effect. And of course, you know, J.K. Rowling deciding to sue someone for libel will have a chilling effect. And, you know, my, my wish would be just that, you know, people remembered that freedom of speech was more, was about more than simply legal rights before, before things got so out of hand. I mean, I guess I, I, I, again, I'm broadly sympathetic to everything you're saying here, but to sort of channel the, the concerns that immediately pop up. I mean, there, I mean, we haven't gotten this on the table yet, so it's important to get it that the people who complain about J.K. Rowling are not necessarily saying, look, I have an intellectual disagreement with you. They're saying, look, I am a member of a group that is underpowered, discriminated against, silenced in society, and you are denying my right to exist. And so they would, they would say, this is, this is beyond the pale. This is, this is something that I can object to this kind of speech existing, not just to the, the content of what you're saying. So that is, that is very much the case that's made. And again, I take seriously the claim there, which I see as a claim to Isegeria. But I come back to sort of what should be given priority in the public sphere of a tolerant society. And to me, the priority has to go to parisia precisely because my commitment to allowing J.K. Rowling to speak her mind is not because I value the contents of her mind. It's because I value the contents of the minds of those people who haven't hitherto had a voice. And I do, I mean, you're right to push me on this because I do simply reject and do so seriously. And I hope respectfully, but I do, I do reject the claim that anything that J.K. Rowling might say about trans women, denies their right to exist. Okay. I think that you might say, okay, there are certain speech acts. I can engage, I can, I can utter the phrase trans women don't have the right to exist, right? But even my uttering that precise phrase would not deny them the right to exist precisely because my speech isn't authoritative in that way. And it's not the authoritative precisely because we live in a society wherein no one person's speech has given that authority. And I think here, you know, we come specifically to the issue about Rowling, which has to do with the powerful position she occupies as a kind of venerated figure among young people, many of whom feel themselves to be outsiders and outcasts because of being the creator of the Harry Potter universe. And there, I would just say, well, the right thing to do then is, or one thing to do, and I think a good thing to do is take advantage of the wonderful invention that is fanfiction and do what you will with her characters. Yeah. Right? You know, claim it for yourself and use your own voice. I just, I do, again, I spent a lot of time as someone who kind of grew up being sort of free speech fundamentalist, not thinking very deeply about these issues at all. I've learned so much by reading and engaging with the arguments of people who criticize that view. And so I would say that, you know, I've become much more reflective in the holding of my views. But what I do see in the debate about free speech and cancel culture on the internet and write in this specific moment is a lot of trans women speaking up for themselves. Yes. I just think a lot of cisgendered, usually white, usually men, people speaking up on behalf of those they take to be disenfranchised or marginalized. And I would just sort of really encourage everybody to reflect really hard on when we claim to be speaking for someone else. Because again, it goes back to my point, which is that individuals, you know, identities don't speak individuals do. And so yes, I think many trans women are justifiably hurt or upset, frustrated and aggrieved by things that J.K. Rowling has said. But I would say that's, you know, not all trans women are. And that should be the discussion we're having. I mean, this reification of gender and racial identities in this moment, again, I think is politically necessary sometimes, but shouldn't itself be the end goal. And maybe the point to end on is actually something that was there and what you said earlier about civility, the challenge to the listener, right? The fact that being this kind of participant in a democratic wild and woolly civil disagreement kind of society is tough. It means we're going to have to hear things we don't like. And it's our responsibility to sort of deal with that in some way other than silencing. And I would just, you know, I acknowledge that the burdens of that dealing with or the burdens of putting up with unpleasant, uncivil or even hateful speech are unequally distributed. That's absolutely right. It's the members of racial minorities, gender minorities, other disaffected, other alienated marginalized groups are called upon to tolerate more. And I just sort of take that as given. And I take that as undesirable and I think it is in many ways unjust. Recognizing that fact, though, is not itself then sort of reputation of a denial of the importance of free speech or saying that an alternative system would be better, would distribute the burdens more equally. It might, but again, I think that we have a lot of historical data to suggest that it would not. Right. And so the question then is, well, how can we make the best of the system that we have? And I think that the answer there has to do with the cultural institutions. It has to do with associational freedom. And yes, it has to do with a culture of speaking one's mind and of developing the virtues that allow us to do that in an engaged way, but also to listen in return. And I just sort of remind readers and listeners, I mean, you know, what people said at the time of Roger Williams wrote Island, they called it Rogues Island, they called it the Luttrein of New England. Nobody, not even Roger Williams thought that this was a pretty, a pretty, you know, a particularly nice place to live. Right. But the business of toleration isn't pretty. It's difficult and it requires the managing of things that are and will remain disagreeable. And there is this sort of orientation, not just in politics generally, but in political theory and political philosophy, specifically, which seems to say, well, you know, some of these problems can be transcended or dissolved. And I just think that that's not right. Some of these problems are permanent and we just have to rub along and sort of make the best of it. The business of toleration is not pretty. I like that. That's a very good motto to end on. And what's important here is that now we know what side you're on. So we've, we've, we've, we've, we've, we've, we've, I know he's cautious. It wasn't, you know, the good, I suppose, is that the, is that the Grouchon Mark's line, you know, I would never be a club, I would never be a member of a club that would have me as a member. Um, if a second, the second that, uh, that I, I find myself on a side is the second I have to think really hard and, uh, and, and reconsider my position. So I just, you know, I'm lucky enough to have the, have the job and position, um, that I do that allows me to do that. And I, and I don't take it for granted. It's something to aspire to. So Theresa Bejohn, thanks so much for being on the Mindscape podcast. Thank you very much for having me. It was really, really enjoyed it.
