Hello everyone, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host Sean Carroll and welcome to 2020. Hope everyone's having a good new year so far. I'd like to start a tradition of starting off each calendar year with a bang podcast-wise. Last year to begin 2019 we had Sir Roger Penrose, one of the world's most famous scientists in the public sphere but also someone who's enormously respected by his professional colleagues. So this year 2020 we're going to start off with Daniel Dennett, who is a philosopher who is as well known as any philosopher is in the modern age among the general public and also once again extraordinarily respected among his professional colleagues. I in particular have enormous respect for what Dan has done and part of it is just that our attitudes are very similar, our approaches to what we do are very similar. If it would not be completely wrong to say that when I am in a more philosophical mode I'm trying to do for physics what Dan has been trying to do for biology and neuroscience and consciousness over the course of his career. As we'll talk about in the podcast we go it's a long podcast, it's a long episode, we cover an enormous amount of ground so individual topics are breathed through very quickly but there's a theme, there's a framework that ties it all together which is this idea of taking what science teaches us about the world and connecting it to the world of our everyday experience. You know for whatever science teaches us it is very often going to be the case that even though it comes ultimately from our experience of the world the ultimate theories that we end up building might seem very different, very surprising, even disconcerting. The big bang cosmology, quantum mechanics, Darwinian evolution are things that you wouldn't have just guessed just on the basis of your everyday experience without enormous amounts of observation and experimentation into realms that you don't see in your everyday life. And therefore the theoretical frameworks you develop don't sound or feel much like our everyday world. This is especially noticeable when it comes to things like consciousness, free will, the nature of human beings. So what Dan Dennett has devoted his career to are taking discoveries from science, whether it's neuroscience or biology or what have you, computer science, artificial intelligence and teasing out their philosophical implications. He is one of the world's leading philosophical naturalists, not a naturalist in the sense of going out into the forest and poking around the trees and the animals, but a naturalist in the sense of not being a super naturalist, an ontology that says there is only the natural world. So how do you then explain things like purposes and meanings and other things that we human beings naturally associate with our lives here in the world? That's what Dan has been trying to figure out for the course of his whole career. And so we have a wonderful discussion back and forth where we both ask each other questions because he's thought very, very deeply about the nature of existence, the world we live in, the nature of thought, how we conceptualize what's going on. And questions that are very important to me like emergence and intentionality, how it's okay to talk about things like purposes and choices in a world that is ultimately governed by the laws of physics. So I already said previously, and I think maybe not only to Patreon subscribers, but this is probably my favorite podcast interview that I've ever done. And I think that you're going to enjoy it just as much. Remember we have a web page, preposterousuniverse.com slash podcast where you can find show notes, transcripts, a very episode, and you can also find a link to support mindscape if you like on Patreon. And Patreon supporters get benefits like monthly ask me anything episodes and episodes that are completely ad free. So this is going to be very, very fun episode. I hope you enjoyed as much as I did. Let's go. Dan Dan, welcome to the mindscape podcast. So I would do. You had a little thing that you said when I was in the room one time that I'm sure you've said many, many times, but I really struck a chord with me talking about Wilfred Sellers and the manifest image and the scientific image and how you thought of your task as a philosopher to reconcile these. Why don't you tell us? I'll begin setting this stage by telling us what these are. Oh, good. Glad you asked. Wilfred Sellers, great American philosopher, said the Java philosophy was to explain how things in the broadest sense of the term hang together in the broadest sense of the term. Well, that sounds sort of trivial. How things hang together? Well, but what he had in mind is this. There's all the things of the everyday world. Colors and sounds and haircuts and pains and dollars and home runs. Those are all things. Then in the scientific world, there's electrons and quarks and fields and molecules. How do we relate the things of our everyday sort of pre-scientific world to the things that science has discovered? And what 100 years and more have shown is there's no simple answer. What's my winded sellers say this in 1961 or two? What I mean when I say 100 years, I mean, let's say since Einstein, that's when the world really starts to look weird from the scientific point of view. And you have people saying, really, it's all just atoms in the void and there's no such thing as solidity and there's no such things as colors. And after all, atoms aren't colored and the world's right of atoms. It's just atoms in empty space and we can go on from there. So at one extreme, you have people who have insisted that the scientific image, that's the gold standard, that's what sets what's real. That's reality. That's reality. Everything else is illusion. But as a cartoon, I like, puts it reality maybe, the world we live in maybe in illusion, but it's the only place you can get a good cup of coffee. So it's not very helpful to be told that not only do dollars in home runs not exist, the color zone exists and pain doesn't exist and solidity doesn't exist. So we have to negotiate between the two worlds. That's what philosophy is for. And I think, yeah, I agree. That's about as good a definition of philosophy as I can think of. But you're adding a little bit, right? Someone could buy into sellers' formulation while still denying that the manifest image is capturing something real, right? Oh, yeah. Yeah, I mean, sellers' image leaves all the options open. Yeah. It leaves open both the hardcore scientific realist who says everything else is just illusion. Eliminativism is philosophy. We do go the other extreme and say the electrons and quarks and all that's just a useful fiction. What's really real is tables and chairs and people and ideas and love and so forth. And so those are the two extremes. And then there's all kinds of positions in the middle. And my view, which might seem to be giving up, especially to philosophers, is to think we have to learn how to get back and forth between these two images, the manifest image and the scientific image. But the way we do that is not by strict definitions that are counter-example proof. The way we do it is with diplomatic and pedagogical ways of easing the passage. And we just, an old example, voices, our voices real. Okay. What's a voice? What's it made of? Is it a bodily part? Is it biological material? But you can record a voice. You can recognize a voice. It has causal power in the world. It has. All right. Voices, if you say what category of thing they are, you run out of, it seems to be almost in a category by itself. Well, all right. Fine. We don't need a voice throat problem to go with a mind-body problem. Right. We may not know how to answer the question of what voices are, but we're not mystified. We're not puzzled. We're not enbaffled. It's just a curious fact about the way language and our perception of the world, our pre-scientific perception of the world, carbs things up. And the auto-layering gologists and the other biologists and the acoustic engineers can tell us all about voices without we don't ever have to settle that issue. Right. I labeled this view in my book, The Big Picture, poetic naturalism being the motto being that there's only one world in the natural world, but there are many ways of talking about it. And those ways all can capture some elements of reality and it's silly to call them illusions just because they're not the most fundamental thing. I think that's good. And yeah, I think that, so yeah, I haven't read your book yet. Yeah. No, but I think that's about right. Yeah, it's about right. The idea was not supposed to be anything original. It's just a label to help people understand because there are people who want to, who are a limit-tivist, who want to say that some of these higher level structures shouldn't count as real. Yeah. And I've been battling against that view for decades. So I'm sure we'll get there, but just to label, put things on the table so before we get there. So therefore you will think of things as such as consciousness and free will as real. Yeah. For exactly this kind of reason. Real, but they're not what you think they are. Not what we think they are, right? Yeah. I mean, that's my motto. X is real, but it's not what you think it is. Good. So you wrote a paper a while ago called Real Patterns. And I want to talk about that a little bit. I don't know if you even are aware that this has become an important fun topic in quantum mechanics. No. Yeah. David Wallace, who is one of the leading theorists of the Everett or many worlds interpretation, which I'm also a partisan of, leans on your paper and your notion of real patterns very heavily in his book, The Emergent Multiverse. Oh, great. Trying to explain how the classical world, you know, forget about tables and chairs, but even, you know, electrons with positions and atoms and things like that are somehow not there in the most fundamental formulation of quantum mechanics, but they describe the pattern and therefore they're real. Yeah. Wonderful. I'm delighted. Yeah. Can you give the sales pitch for what your view is there in that real patterns paper, what you're trying to get across? The main idea of the paper is that if we think about information, we think about information theory. We recognize that, well, to put it in sort of everyday terms, how big a file do you need to capture this particular phenomenon? Yeah. And if you have a checkerboard, which is just 64 squares and some are black and some are white, pretty easy. You can give a very limited description of that pattern and write it on the back of an envelope. If you've got a color picture of confetti and you have to describe it in detail, you've got a much bigger file. That's why some pictures on your phone or bigger have used more megabytes than other pictures. It all depends on how much complexity there is in the picture. And if there's no pattern in the picture at all, if it's just random, oddly enough, that's one that takes the most information to record because you have to record every pixel. You can't say, well, there's a region of deep blue over here and there's a region of red over here. Those are nice, concise ways of taking advantage of the pattern in the phenomenon. So the idea of real patterns is, take any phenomenon and are there patterns in it? Well, what's a pattern? A pattern is a summary of a concision, something that permits you to generalize so that you're better than a coin flip about what the next little bit of it is. If you've got any predictive edge at all on the data set that you're looking at, you've got a pattern. Right. And it's not necessarily, well, I put it this way, we should be happily surprised when there are such patterns in some sense, right? I mean, if you, but what the patterns enable you to do is to ignore certain pieces of information like you said. Nature has devolution, natural selection has designed organisms to be ruthless pattern finders to ignore almost all the information that's officially available at their surfaces and just focus in on what matters to them. Those are the patterns that if they can latch onto those, they can feed themselves and avoid getting eaten and live long happy lives and make and all the rest. So the idea of a pattern is, I think, a very useful and deep idea and it can be given a nice clear mathematical formulation and it's the key. What science does is finds pattern, but it's also what the manifest image does. We take for granted all the patterns that we see. In fact, we do more than that. We overinterpret them. That is, if we see two things that look the same shade of green to us, we think, well, deep, deep down, they're all the same. No, they might be green for entirely different reasons. They might be so-called metamers and they only look the same color to us because we're, you might say green, green color blind. I'd like to talk about the Great Courses Plus, a streaming service where you can learn from courses taught by the Great Courses. Some of the best professors out there can teach you lectures on everything from science, to business, history, to personal development. There's something no matter what you want. One course I can recommend is Physics and our universe, how it all works. Now, this sounds like something I could have taught myself. I did not, but it's a wonderful overview of all of physics all at once. So from subatomic particles, quarks and leptons, to stars, galaxies, and the entire universe itself, the course covers how our understanding of physics has changed over time and points towards what we're going to be learning in the future. So set a goal to learn more this year by signing up for the Great Courses Plus today. Mindscape listeners get an amazing deal, a full month of unlimited access for free. But to get that month, you must sign up using this special URL, theGreatCoursesPlus.com-mindscape. That's THGGreatCoursesPlusPLUS.com-mindscape. Start learning today. I did a podcast with Melanie Mitchell, who's a computer scientist. Oh, yeah, I know, I know. About the struggle of artificial intelligence to capture common sense. And would it be off-base to think that some of this struggle has to do with the fact that AIs, even very advanced to deep learning networks and so forth, are not as good at finding the patterns as human intelligence is at the current state of the art? Ah, good. Let's see. I think that's true, except for the fact that if you crank your deep learning system long enough, it'll find patterns where there aren't any patterns. I mean, deep learning systems algorithms are very good at squeezing pattern out of apparently random data. I mean, that's how the neuroscientists, they train up a categorizer on this FMRI data about what's going on in people's heads. And they discover they can make a prediction about what person's going to do 10 seconds later. Yeah, they can. And that shows that it's a real pattern. But a lot of the patterns they find by these methods aren't real. That is, they don't predict the things. Well, that's the thing. I'm wondering if, because what the AIs, what the deep learning networks are so good at, is manipulating huge amounts of data that they don't need to be as tricky as human beings aren't to find the patterns that let you know predictions with fewer. That's right. So, of course, we pay a price for that. It's a miracle. And the price we pay for that is that we have a lot of false positives. We see a lot more pattern in the world than it is really there. We see similarities that are only similar in that they have the same effect on us. But they're otherwise as different as can be. Well, what does the word real and the phrase real patterns have the same meaning as the word real when we're just talking about, you know, baseballs being real? Well, that was the idea. I mean, I wanted to say, if we have the concept of a pattern, we do have some pretty good tests as well. There is real. That is to put it bluntly. Can you make money betting on it? If you can, it's predictive, it's real. And that's a touchstone of reality that seems to hold up very well. So maybe patterns are the thing that's most obviously where we can make a real and non-real distinction. And that everything, every other distinction between real and unreal, real and fictional, real and bogus is somehow dependent on that. So if there's a room and there's this huge number of atoms in the room, and of course, if you were infinitely smart and I gave you the location of all the atoms and their velocities, you could predict anything, you could be the pluses demon. But the patterns, the other structures are the idea that I could give you much less information than that. I could say there's a baseball and it's headed toward a window. And then you could infer an enormous amount from that. Exactly. And then the baseballs are real and some say. That's right. Years ago I concocted an example to show the power of this, where we have a visiting Martian who's sort of Laplacia and demon and he's in somebody's house and the phone rings and the lady picks up the phone and says, yes, dear, you're bringing the boss home for dinner. You get a bottle of wine on your way home, see you in half an hour, hang on. So now both the woman and the Martian predict that within 30 minutes, two people are going to walk in the door, one of them holding a glass bottle filled with an alcoholic beverage. But the Laplacian demon has had to trace out the whole trajectory of the stop signs and the lights and the pain of the wine, every photon and to the Laplacian, this is a miraculous prediction. Where did she find, how did she do this without all that information? Well, very similar. She understood what was really sad. So let's take this point of view that patterns at the higher level, that capture some influence, some predictability of the world and apply it to the difficult cases, where we have things like people and agents. And another phrase that you popularized way back in the day is the intentional stance. So one of the sets of controversial concepts, which we might ask, are these real, or do they have some special status, are things like intentions, reasons why aboutness, why is it painting about something like that? So how do those boundary contentious words fit into this picture? Oh, they fit in beautifully. The intentional stance patterns are just one particular set of patterns, and they're the set of patterns that have to do with living agents. And non-living agents, that living agents have made, I don't think there's any other living agents. And what's the simplest one? Well, when I first started writing about the intentional stance, I chose a thermostat. And then you can consider the thermostat as a little agent that can be instructed to keep the temperature a certain way. It senses the temperature, and when the temperature falls below the set, it has a desire to raise the temperature. Treat a thermostat as an agent surrogate it. You could have a person standing there, throwing logs on the fire, but you can replace it with this dead simple thing, and you can explain it to a child, say, without going into the mechanics. And there are a hundred different ways you can interpret that. In other words, you can explain it in terms of its purpose. Of its purpose? Rather than its. Exactly. It's considered a little homunculus, a little agent, and it has one desire only, and that is to maintain the temperature, but it has a way of sensing the temperature and responding to changes by making an appropriate move. By the way, this is the way that one gets taught about transistors in physics class, as if there's a little man in there, a transistor man who decides how much current a letter is. Well, it turns out that this tactic, the strategy of adopting the intentional stance, works through biology, it works not just for brains and for higher organisms, it works for bacteria, it works for archaea, it works for single-celled organisms. The question is does it work for things as it were smaller and simpler than that? Well, I like to say we're robots made of robots made of robots made of robots made of robots, and once you get down subcellular, you get down to the kinescence, the motor proteins, and tubulin and things like that, and or think of a ribosome, fantastic little machines. You can treat them from the intentional stance. They have a job to do. They have a job to do, they know how to do it, and one of the things that I particularly like about motor proteins is that it now turns out, basically they're sailing. They're using the storm of the water molecules inside the sail, and they have sort of ratchets in their feet, so they're actually selectively using the energy in the random bombardment of the water molecules as a source of power. And it reminds me of Ricky Skag's Great Line. I can't control the wind, but I can trim the sail. And that's your basic agent, and it's just a protein. Right, right. It's a little Maxwell demon. It is. It is. It is. It is in less just 15 or 20 years. This has become another hot topic in physics, understanding these non-equilibrium fluctuations in very, very tiny things. And I think that it's probably still underappreciated in my personal world how much this transition from the world of individual particles, where it would make no sense to adopt the potential stance, to the macroscopic world, is driven by entropy in the arrow of time. I think it's actually. I think I'm not 100% sure of this, but I think the key element to being an agent is having a history, a history that makes a difference. That is something can happen to it. The changes it, and the changes it, again, it has a sort of memory. Yeah, I think I'm just... Interesting thing about electrons, they don't pick up scars or dirt or anything. You can't, an electron over a billion years doesn't change at all, and that's a huge difference. Now, we had a wonderful argument in Santa Fe at the Santa Fe Institute with David Woltpert and his colleagues. And one of our big issues was whether tornadoes count as agents. And I'm trying to predict which slider you want. I can't do it. I was against it. Yeah, okay. Because I didn't think that the tornado could actually exploit information as... You know, the way of thermostat. It's a complex system, but it's driving agency or intention to it. It doesn't seem to help. But it was a very illuminating discussion. So, either if you want to look at the boundaries, you want to look at things like tornadoes or motor proteins. Right. But in the biology, in the living world, everything bigger than a motor protein is a designed thing and it has purposes. It's got parts that have jobs to do. Yeah, I think participating in the arrow of time is probably a necessary precondition for being ination of the sense. Yeah. The thing about electron is, like you said, they don't have scars. They don't change over time, really. But more complicated things have different access to the past versus the future. They have memories of the past. They can do what they can do with predict the future. And that's when it becomes... That's when purposes and things like that have become necessary. So I presume what you're going to say then is, ascribing intentionality or purposes to things, there's a reason why we do that. A reason we have reasons. It makes sense for ribosomes. So it makes sense in exactly the same way for human beings, not in a different way. Yeah, absolutely. And I think it's interesting to think about the history of this. Before there was language, you didn't have any agents that were comparing notes that were arguing that were explaining. Which brought into the world, into onto our earth something that, well, for insolvers, called the space of reasons. And this is the space of reasons is where human persuasion and explanation and querying and challenging happens. The wise. And the... The arrival, the emergence of the space of reasons, that has to have an evolutionary history too. And there's only in one species. So that's why I'm interested so much in the evolution of language and in evolution of human minds, which are profoundly different from even chimpanzee minds or dolphin minds or whale minds. Take your favorite birds. Take your favorite species. Human minds are really different. And they're different precisely because they are obliged to articulate reasons. And they learn how to do this. And it's an imperfect business and some are better than others. But it's the fundamental basis for morality. If you are responsible, it's because you respond to reason. You can't argue a bear out of what it's doing, but you can. You know, human being has to be persuadable. So you can train or teach a dolphin or a dog or whatever, but you don't give it a reason why. It's just that's pure stimulus and response. And recently in my work, I've had lots of examples of what I call free-floating rationales. This is where we see a phenomenon. The reasons are clear, but they're not the reasons of the organisms involved. So the starting or proncing gazelles that throwing these great extravagant leaps and running away from the lions say, what are they doing? And it's a tremendous waste of energy and makes it dangerous. What they're doing is they're showing off. They are signaling to the lions. Don't bother trying to catch me. I can throw these big expensive dangerous leaps and still outrun you. Who after my cousin over there, he can't do it. And the lions believe them. And the evidence for this is pretty clear. I was going to ask, you know, there is a testable. There is a testable hypothesis. This is a testable and tested hypothesis. And sure enough, the lions discriminate and they don't go for the ones that are starting. Now I'm giving you the rational explanation. The lions are, in effect, wise to take this information as being offered to them. It benefits both the speedy gazelle and the lion doesn't have to work as hard to get his supper. And there's lots and lots of cases of this. But don't think that the lion understands this or that the gazelle understands this. This is a rationale that has been uncovered by natural selection. Because there's no why it wants to make those leaps. It does the same for the lion. The lion doesn't know why it doesn't care for those jumpy ones. They don't have to know. So they are the beneficiaries of a rational system that they don't have to understand it. And that's more or less exactly the same sense in which AlphaGo doesn't know why it puts a certain token on the door board and so on. That's right. It couldn't tell you why. And so does the ribosomes and every one of yourselves. There's a rationale for every part of the job. I mean, if you look at the machinery, elegant, elegant engineering, but the ribosome doesn't know. And in fact, no agent figured that out in advance about winning molecular biologists, the chemists. They worked it out for the first time, what the rationale is. But the rationale is secure as anything. And in some sense, because we're among philosophers here, the fact that we human beings can attach reasons to this in this sense has to do with some sort of counterfactual thought experiment. If the gazelles were not leaping in that way, then we know that the lines would chase them. Even the gazelles don't know that. Right. No, it's the intentional stance. It's like an instinct. I think we're probably, though, it's a Baldwin effect. I think that first that came on the scene, in its articulate form with human beings discovering they could talk about the reasons why things were happening. But we're very, very good at it. And in fact, if you want to see it as an instinct, you can go back and see the early animations of simple triangles and circles moving around on the screen. But everybody looks at it and says, oh, the big circles trying to catch the little circle. Everybody instantly sees intentionality in purpose in these cases. Infants, quite young infants, are puzzled by violations of the apparent agency in very, very simple displays. But in circles and triangles, isn't that kind of an edge case here because we're saying that the ascribing of intentions to human beings or to the behavior of the gazelles is real and true, whereas presumably is not real and true in the case of circles and triangles? Well, hang on. Let's see, whose experiments am I thinking of? I can't think of his name right now, German psychologists. When he made the films to show to people as a... He deliberately set out to create these intentional patterns. I see. Come, he... There was an intention working kind of stuff. He wanted to create... He wanted to show that just by... And in fact, he tested this by having sort of randomly moving circles and triangles and people did not attribute intentionality to those. That was just noise. So there was. And in the same way, natural selection has enforced the patterns that we see in the jumping gisels and the lions. That's not just random. So we can see intention where there's none. We're very good at that. It's called paranoia. Thomas Finchian has some levels about this. Yes. Yes. I mean, so you can see it emerging, I guess. You don't use the word emergence that much, but are you happy with the word? Emergence is a word that I don't use much because it has a sorted history and philosophy where emergence comes to mean... Inexplicable. And so... This is just used all the time, but I'm more if I'm my philosophy colleagues. In fact, when John Holland wrote his book, Emergence, I said, John, John, you've got to put a forward in where you say, what you don't mean. And I mean, that's a completely approved of John Holland's work on Emergence. Because it does not mean that this is an inexplicable pattern, precisely not. In fact, I like to illustrate Emergence with John Horton Conway's life world and the amazing patterns that emerge there. And say, look, that's the Emergence. And that's completely explainable and predictable. There's no question mark anywhere in that system, but it creates stunning emergent effects. Yeah, and you could talk this higher level vocabulary. Absolutely, that's it. That's what Emergence gets you. I want to pause for a moment to talk about policy genius. A wonderful tool that helps you decide what kind of insurance to get, whether it's life insurance, home insurance, auto insurance, etc. You know, we just started 2020. We're going to look forward to a whole bunch of jokes forthcoming about 2020 hindsight. Because, of course, it's easier to explain what did happen then to correctly predict what's going to happen. That's what good insurance is all about. It's helping ameliorate the fact that you can't predict exactly what's going to happen. What you can try to do is by the right kind of insurance. And so policy genius makes this a breeze. In minutes, you can compare quotes from a large number of top insurance companies to find your best price. You could save $1,500 or more a year by using policy genius to compare life insurance policies. And then once you apply, policy genius will handle all the paperwork and red tape. They take the angst out of finding the right insurance policy. So even though predicting the future is very hard, don't get discouraged to get life insurance. It takes just a few minutes to find your best price by applying it policygenius.com. Policy genius, it's better to get the future right. With that definition of emergence on the table, I mean, it seems to make sense that patterns are real. We're going to, you know, as a scribe reality to these higher level things that give us some way of capturing what's going on. Purposes and intentions are in that bucket. Like they serve a purpose. Like that is really why that helps us understand what's going on. Absolutely. So now we get to consciousness. Yes. Maybe I'll just let you fit it in. And it emerges in this innocence sense. And the idea that it's one thing that everything in the universe is either conscious or not that it's the light is on or the light is off. That is, I think, a fundamental error. But it's very widespread. It's just amazing how many really deep and clever thinkers can't get it out of their heads that consciousness is all or nothing. And I think no, no, it's emergent. And in fact, what that means is that the search for the simplest form of consciousness. And that's a snipunt. It's a wild goose chase. Because it emerges. And yes, starfish have some of the aspects of consciousness, so do trees. And bacteria. And as you... But not electrons. But not electrons. And we can argue about motor proteins. But once you admit that it's nothing mystical, something that builds up. And the question, where do you draw the line is an ill-motivated question. That's like, where do you draw the line between night and day? Do you have a simple definition of what consciousness is that you prefer? No. It's... You did write a book called Consciousness Explained. I did, and I... But I think that that's... In one regard, that's the way science proceeds, too. The scientists don't sit around wasting hours and hours and hours trying to define time, energy. They get on with the theory. Once they've got a really good theory, it'll be obvious what time or energy is. And I think that's the same with consciousness. Okay. But that's something in mind. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. A human consciousness is much different from the consciousness of any other species. And the reason it's hard to see this is... Well, there's many reasons. One is that consciousness has a moral dimension. And we want to be kind to animals. And the very idea, so we say, well, yes, dogs are conscious, but not the way we are. And people immediately, they get their backs up in the effort. He's about ready to talk about mistreating animals and it not matter. No, no, no. Because I think the properties of human consciousness that we share with dogs and mammals and birds are just under green with reptiles and fish. Those have moral significance. So let's see if we can take moral significance as itself a graded notion. It's interesting. British law, octopus vulgaris, protected. It's an honorary vertebrate. You can't, it's against the law to throw alive octopus on a hot grill. When did this become against law in the UK? There are, oh, sometime in the last 20, 30 years. But it's just, it's just, it's that one, it's not all cephalopods, it probably should be. Squid, you want to, you want to throw a squid on a live grill? You can. But the point is you are allowed to boil a lobster. But you are allowed, you can't do it for the lobster. The British law says vertebrates, yeah, is a, is a come off. Right, okay. And so I think you can, you can, you can, sir, okay in general for these tricky questions, right? I mean, people say, well, if you draw the line here, then they, they argue about either side, but you gotta draw it somewhere. Sometimes the law has to draw. Yeah, exactly. And what we should recognize is the law draws lines that are reasonable to the vast majority of people. And we can, we can talk about exceptions. It is an interesting case. The, the, the wonderfulness of octopus, the, the amount of conversion evolution between octopus and say human beings, as enough to sort of push them, push them over the line. And I think, you know, I, I approve. I, I say yes indeed. So, but if we put the moral issue behind us, well, no, before we put the moral issue behind us, we should know that almost nobody wants to hold any non human species responsible, morally responsible for their behavior. That's key. Yeah. They may be, as one says, moral patients, but they're not moral agents. A bear that kills a tourist is not committed murder. Just not. Because they don't have the mental wherewithal. They don't have the kind of free will that we have. We couldn't have offered them a reason not to do that. That's right. We can't expect them to appreciate the societal norms that we've set up and so forth. So even, so don't look in the bear's brain and the human brain for the fact that one of them is in deterministic and the other one is deterministic. Determinism has nothing to do with the issue. It has to do with, it has to do with self control and with degrees of freedom and the, and degrees of freedom is a term that I've been using more and more recently. And really seeing it come more out of engineering than, than out of physics and thinking, a degree of freedom is an opportunity for control. And you can clamp a degree of freedom and then you don't have to control it. You can just walk it down in one way or another. How many degrees of freedom do we have? Millions, billions because we can think about so many things. We have orders of magnitude, more degrees of freedom than a bear does. That means the problem with roughly the same number of cells and so forth, right? Or complexities of a tire. That means that the options that the bear has are a vanishing subset of the options that we have. And learning to control our perusal of those options, that's not a science, it's an art. And it's what we try to train our kids to grow up so that when we launch them and they are no longer in our control, that they will be able to control themselves in ways that we'll leave them to have happy and productive lives. And if they can't, they're going to get in trouble. And we have to have that set of troubles moving out there for those who can't control themselves. Well, you've used the word agent a few times and I use it all the time, but we haven't described what that word means. I mean, it's clearly a relationship between agency responsibility consciousness. Yeah. So, you mean, the example definition of agent, if not a consciousness? Well, again, the thing is that agents come in all sizes and shapes too. And a few minutes ago, we were talking about bacteria as agents and viruses as agents. So that's not the sense of agent. We want something, we want a moral agent. You want to talk about a moral agent is not just a locus of self control with purposes and an ability to fend for itself, prolong its existence and improve its enhance its circumstances. That's a pretty good definition of an agent, something that can fend off the second law of thermodynamics, fend off dissolution that would other, you know, mountains aren't agents because erosion just, they can't protect themselves or move or anything. But you can see why tornadoes aren't an interesting edge case. Exactly. That's why tornadoes aren't edge case. But at the most sophisticated, if we climb that ladder, and I think a pretty good scale would be how many degrees of freedom are available for control? And when it gets up into the billions as it does for even young children, now we're talking about potential moral agents. And a moral agent is simply a human being at the moment. We don't have any other we could, but we don't. A human being that is mature enough and has nothing to do with how old they are except coincidentally. mature enough to control the degrees of freedom that matter when they matter and to be able to foresee and understand the outcomes of possible actions and act accordingly. So that gives us a pretty good, I call it a, a memory of the moral agents. Good. I think that does make sense to me, but it deviated us from our task, which was you were explaining the salient features of human consciousness. That's right. So one of the curious features of the way the science is proceeded here is that many theories of consciousness only attempt half a theory. And this is the inbound path or the upward path. And we get, we get from the photon striking the retina and the sound waves and up and up through the nervous system, up through the various cortical areas. And then, to our consciousness happens. That's the end of the theory. And wait a minute, I want to ask what I call the hard question and then what happens. What makes, whatever you say, amounts to consciousness. What makes that consciousness, what does it enable, what does becoming conscious of this or that enable the agent, whose consciousness it is, to do? Or disable that agent from doing. What effects does it have on those multiple degrees of freedom? And the answer is almost anything can happen. But we need to have the neuroscientific theory of how that can be true and how the various sequely, the various outcomes can spell themselves out. I mean, it's, some people's theories of consciousness are a little bit like somebody who mounts a close circuit TV camera on the hood of his car and puts a receiver under the hood. So the car can see where it's going. And I mean, no, what's going to consume that information? It's Ruth Milliken talks about the consumers of representations. And in theory, scientific theories of consciousness, there has been a systematic neglect of the consumers. Sorry, the consumers are, the consumers are ultimately neural structures that respond to representations spread all over the brain in ways that give rise to the ability of people to report and reflect on and remember, it is a tremendous difference between sensing something and noticing that you're sensing something and noticing that you're noticing that you're sensing something. The first time I ever was familiar with your work was the collection you had with Douglas Hotshotter called The Minds Eye. And I'm not sure that at that young age when I came across it, I absorbed very much. But the one idea that kept coming through was this recursive self-awareness idea. Absolutely. Absolutely. And that has something to do with what it means to be conscious. The recursion, and Doug is the micehow there. Exactly. His book, I Am A Strange Loop, is a, is a, really a retelling of what he did in his earlier work in Gertel-Esserbach. And, uh, amazing thing about Gertel-Esserbach is that it was a bestseller, a true surprise there. And a lot of people read it, but a lot of people didn't understand it. No. And so he, I read the dialogues when I was a kid. It took me a long time because I'm ready to write about a rest of it. So I Am A Strange Loop is, in a way, Doug's attempt to do what Hume did, Hume wrote, the treatise on human nature, which he said fell deadborn from the press. And then he had to write the inquiry so that people would understand what he was saying in the treatise. Doug had to write, I Am A Strange Loop. So absolutely right. Re-cursion. It's this capacity for indefinite reflection and reflection on reflection. Because whenever you can reflect in this way, in effect, you create a new object to think about. We, let's take a frog. The frog has a fairly complicated life. And it's faced at every moment with a number of opportunities. And it survives if it makes good decisions at those opportunities. Those are degrees of freedom and it controls them as best it can. Frogs are agents. They fend for themselves. Yeah. But they don't know they have opportunities. There's no sign that they can think about their opportunities as opportunities. The reason this, I think quite obvious fact, is hidden from us, is what I sometimes call the Beatrix Potter Syndrome. Whenever we see a clever animal or an animal doing something that is appropriate and reasonable, I find it almost irresistible to attribute to the animal the understanding that we have of what it's doing. And the fact is that very often it's, it's clueless. It's the beneficiary of a very good system. It doesn't have to understand. And that's even true of a lot of human behavior. One of my favorite examples is Christ's theory of meaning. According to Paul Christ, the late, great Paul Christ, when you and I converse, when an utterer I make, give you a speech act, when I utter a speech act, I intend to, to form a belief based on my speech act. But I also intend to recognize that I have that intention. So we get third order. I intend you to believe that I intend to be on both sides. You've got, you've got reflexivity act. And Christ's theory, there was something clearly wonderful about this theory. But as a theory of human everyday psychology, it's nuts. Kids have deep and wonderful conversations with their parents and their peers long before they have the capacity to reflect in this way. What you have to understand is that Christ wasn't wide. He was uncovering the free floating rationales of human communication. He was doing the same thing that the, that the ethanologists are doing when they figure out what this starting is all about. He's finding the rationales. This is why communication has the forms it does. This is why it works and these are the conditions. And various individuals can be more or less virtuosic in their sensitivity to this. You wouldn't want to be constantly thinking about recognizing the intentions of this person who was being, if you did, you couldn't pay attention to what they were saying. This idea of the frog not worrying too much about its decision making is fascinating. I did a podcast with Malcolm McIver, who is a neuroscientist and mechanical engineer in Northwestern. And he is, is trying to explore the idea that one of the major transitions that led to consciousness was when fish climbed up on land. The idea being that a fish swimming around at a few meters per second is underwater and can only see a few meters in front of it. All of its evolutionary pressures are to make decisions very rapidly. Once you climb up on land and you can see for kilometers, there's a new space of possibilities that opens up, namely imagine different possible things to do and contemplate which one would be best. And so he says that climbing up onto land enabled the evolution of imagination, which was a crucial step along the road to consciousness. Oh, that's nice. I'm not sure I believe it, but it's a nice variation on a theme that I'm very fond of, which, and Andrew Parker's idea about the Cambrian explosion. And Parker hypothesizes that the shallow ocean became transparent in a way it hadn't been before. And this suddenly permitted distal perception and permitted eyesight and that the book is called in the blink of an eye. And he argues that the arms race of predator and prey, locomotion, camouflage, armor, this all was generated by a growing transparency. And it's not the only theory out there. But it's one that I think has got to be an element of truth in it. And I've been arguing that what we're facing right now is the second great transparency. And that's the electronic transparency. And everybody's not worried. And so they should be about privacy. We can we can now see farther and we can see into things we could never see into before, but we can also be watched. And our sensory capacities for better for worse. And so we're now all to invert the image we're all now living in a fishbowl. Okay, but wait a minute. I wanted you used a phrase that was you did not use the phrase the hard problem, but you used the phrase the hard question. Good, but there was at least a family resemblance between the distinction you're drawing between this sort of bottom up theories of consciousness and top down. And the child versus distinction between the problems and the hard problem. And it's not coincidental. So I asked the hard question before David raised the hard problem, which I've been throwing pales of cold water on for decades now. And I think that the hard problem, the child is problem is precisely the fix you get yourself into. If you stop and don't try to answer the hard question, if you don't ask the hard question, then what happens? Then you're left with this gobsmacking jaw dropping, mind-deadening mystery. For the audience, just very briefly, let's tell them what the hard question is that you have in the hard problem that's always like Sam Pesonis. David introduces the hard problem by contrasting it with the easy problems. The easy problem says how does your brain discriminate things? How does it move your tongue in language? How does it do all the cognition that you engage in? How does it recognize things and have memory and all the rest? Those are the easy problems. So what's the hard problem? He by the way recognizes they're not actually easy. They're not. Yes, he does. But the hard problem is the problem is why is it like anything at all to be mean? What's red? What's my experience of red or pain? And these are so-called qualia. It's a philosophers term comes from the Latin. It just means quality, property, really. The qualia are a term of art in philosophy. And I think it's a bad one. It's an artifact of bad theorizing, which has led to hundreds of careers of misguided thinking about mind and consciousness. And a lot of scientists have been seduced by it. So they think that philosophers have this idea of qualia. And that's where the going really gets tough. It's explaining qualia. Those subjective problems. That's the hard problem. How do we explain qualia? And trauma has been arguing for this for decades. And recently he's written a paper on the meta problem. And a meta problem is why do we have a hard problem? And to which part of my response is, what do you mean we? Dogs don't have a hard problem. That doesn't mean they're not conscious. It means they're not reflexively, ruminatively, theoretically conscious of their consciousness. That's only for us. And that's the hard problem arises as an artifact of the fact that we're reflective. And in our reflections, we focus on what is otherwise a stunning embarrassment. When we look inside to see what's going on, mainly we can't tell. Now, I mean, well, let's think about seeing for a moment. Yeah. I look out the window and I see a bird house on a stake between two trees. How do I know I see it? Well, you know, if I close my eyes, I can't see it in the mirror. All right. So I now know light has to bounce off. And the photons have to come into my eye and blah, blah, blah, written gangly on cells, lateral, genic, nucleus over. But that's nothing to which I have direct access. That's something I had to learn from books. That's third person knowledge of the process. My first person knowledge is very limited. I tell you this a bird house out there. How do you know? I can see it. What do you mean? Well, my eyes are open and there it is. Well, how do you know that you're seeing a bird house? Well, because it looks like a bird house. But how do you know it looks like a bird house? What's going on? And it's like, I don't know. It just looks like a bird. I can describe it in more detail if you want. Now, nobody is freaked out, apparently, by the fact that neuroscientists can come in and figure out all these amazing details about what happens between the eyeball and the lips, let's say. But mainly between the eyeball and your experience. That's only half the story. The other half of the story is, and what happens? Between experience and your ability to talk about it and answer all these questions. Well, just as much neuroscience that has to go into that, as you have to go into the first part. Now, if you stop with experience, then you simply, like declaring victory halfway through the battle, now you've got the whole rest of a theory. You don't have a theory of consciousness until you've explained what happens next. I like to point out that if you have a theory of consciousness that still has a witness in it, you've only got half a theory. So you want to turn experience into something going on in the brain and the neurons, and that would be unnecessary. And all the reactions to these things. Yeah. A good theory of consciousness when we finally have one. It will be like live nets as milk. We'll walk around and be like a deserted factory. There's nobody home. There's no agents. It's all just machinery. That a theory of consciousness simply has to have that form. And people who resist that, like tumors, they've got a heart problem. In fact, they've got a systematically impossible problem. And I at least am saying, I'll show you how to get out of the heart problem, namely by asking and then answering the hard question. And then what happens? And when I weigh of doing it now, I've hit on this with the philosopher Keith Frankish. Have you ever piloted a drone, a little, so you've had the remote unit in your hands and you're making the drone go where it's going. You're looking at the little screen and using the joysticks and all that. All right, think of that. That remote controller for the drone, that's the Cartesian theater outside. It's a control room for the drone. So now, supposedly we're doing a man to pay the drone. In other words, all the control decisions that you doing while you're piloting the drone, we're going to upload those, put them onboard the drone. It's already got a lot of self control already onboard. But we want to get every last bit of decision making and discrimination and noticing and so forth. And control, we want to move it all into the drone. To do that, we'll be asking and answering the hard question. Because notice, by the way, the first thing you do once you start doing that is you have to throw away the screen. Who needs the screen? You don't need the screen. You've already got all the spatial information in just the form you want it for uploading. Namely, you've got it into bit strings that can be computed. You've got just the medium you need. Now, that may not be the brain's medium. But at least you've got it into the medium that you're going to have to get it into for controlling the drone in various ways. And in our thought experiment, a very extended thought experiment, unpublished. We're just working on it. We gradually see, we point out the importance of, instead of just rewiring it when it comes back from each mission or reprogramming it, we want to be able to inform it, suggest it, things to it, talk with it. We want it to be in this space of reasons. Give it reasons, yeah. And so we want to install language. But we don't want to install language, the old fashioned girl, a fashioned AI way, by designing it and simply putting it in. We want it to learn in negotiation with us. We want it to be able to have its own way of making points. And as we think about the task of helping a drone create a language that it can use to communicate with us. And we'd like it to be as close to sight to English as we can get it, and teach the drone English. But we want to teach, we want to draw into learning, not just be wired up for English at birth. This will give us models. And we want to teach the drone English, of answers to all the hard questions. And it might not be the correct answer for our brain. It might not be, but at least, but at least, exactly. And I think that's the way AI has always been. It gives you an existence proof. This may not be the way we do it, but it's a way of doing this job. And the idea that it's magic, or beyond human can, we know it's not beyond human can because we found a way of doing it. So it's very hard to even ask the hard questions. First of all, we have no personal private knowledge about how we do it. Suppose I ask you to imagine three cows standing in the field, and the one on the left is brown, and the other two are mottled. You can do it. I do it. Yep, yeah. How? I don't know. You don't know? You heard my request, and you were able to act on it. Now, an interesting thing about just a simple case like that, another example. I want you to imagine putting a plastic bucket over your head and climbing hand over hand up a rope. Now, I deliberately chose items that would not be alien to say a chimpanzee in a zoo. Can the chimpanzee stimulate its own brain? Can it, could it, we can't ask it? Yeah. Can it ask itself? Can it, does it have the layer of control over its own cognitive processes so that, as it sat there not otherwise, occupied, it could manipulate those familiar items of its experience? Good question. I don't know the answer. But I suspect the answer is no. And I suspect the answer is no, because you can't do that wordlessly until you can do it interactively with language. Without language, I don't think you have the systems and your cognitive system for self-stimulation, for self-probing that we have. We are in, we are virtue also self-probers of our own brain. It's interesting. I want to pause just to say, we've been going on for a little over an hour now. I'm very happy to keep going. I have a lot to ask about, but I don't want to impose on you too much. I mean, I still got some water. Cool. All right. I'm having a great time, boy. Good, excellent. It's very interesting, you say exactly that, because I once asked Stephen Pinker, what is the role that language plays in consciousness? And he says none whatsoever. He said it's a completely different thing. Yeah. Yes, I know. I know Steve's view well. And I think Steve is tremendously smart. Much smarter than some of his critics take him to be. But I think he's wrong about this. Got it. OK. I didn't know whether like all the experts had a good view. No, no, no. I'm pretty much out on a limb here. In claiming it, as I did in consciousness, explained that human language doesn't just let us talk about what we're conscious of. Human language allows us to be conscious of things that we otherwise wouldn't be conscious of. Things that bears and dogs and fish and birds are not conscious of the way we are. Right. And I think once you appreciate, or if you appreciate, if you believe that recursion and self-representation think that are crucial, then obviously language is a hugely useful tool. Indeed. I think that language is here. This is a strange inversion of, say, Tom Sisi. Tom Sisi has the, I think, bizarre view that recursion is a sort of shazam gift of natural selection, this giant leap. Once you have recursion, then everything else falls into place. And it is the basis for language. And there's a sense in which I think he's almost right, but I think it's the other way around. I think it's language that doesn't make any heavy use of recursion in its controls. Gradually creates, in us, the capacity to create recursive levels in our own brains. And it goes back to the thing I was giving some examples of a few minutes ago. I can ask you, OK, now I want you to imagine a blue triangle. And you can do that. And not perfectly. But Daniel Dorr has a book called The Instruction of Imagination, which is a wonderfully unchansky and look at language. And I think he's got a lot of this right. What language permits is the development of a sort of a place to stand, our comedies, and give me a place to stand, and I'll move the world with a lever. Language gives us places to stand in our own cognition, which permit us then to self-stimulate, to probe, to explore our own brains. And that's what creates recursion. And that's what creates the creatures of recursion, which are things like qualia. It creates a whole menagerie of properties that are not real properties. They are properties that are the effects. Well, no, it's hard to say this. They are subjective in the sense that the appreciation of the property is what brings it into existence. I see. Yeah. Now, I think I probably agree with you too much about all these issues. But let me for purposes of podcast conversation try to channel the skeptics. They place a huge amount of emphasis on the distinction between an external third person view and the internal first perspective. Chalmers go so far as to imagine the possibility of a peasombie that could act exactly like you do, but have no inner conscious experience. It always seems like a bit of a conversation stopper to me, that idea that you need to speak the language of first person subjective experience even to have this conversation. Because we're all different. I mean, yeah. Yeah. This is on the one hand, I think the idea of a philosophical zombie is just an embarrassment. Somebody, one philosopher once said to me, then if I understand you right, if I want to talk about philosophical zombies, I should probably put a paper bag over my head. I said, yeah. Well, I do think that they're not possible. Or not conceivable. I think that there's a way of, I think, really showing that this is whatever it was trying to do, it doesn't do a real job. And it creates just a distracting monster that should be ignored. But then let's look at the job it was trying to do. And you had a pretty good version of it just now when you said it looks as if we need, we can't just stay with the third person point of view. We need the first person point of view. And so let's agree that what's really amazing is that you have your point of view. And I have my point of view. And we know that. And we can spend all day comparing our points of view. And that's a phenomenon that we want to explain. Notice, by the way, let's imagine some Martian scientists, or alien, utterly alien intelligences. They got a lot of good science, though. And they come to our planet. And let's suppose that they, if we can imagine this, and we can't. But let's start with the idea. We can imagine they have no idea of consciousness or quality at all. Martian zombies. Martian zombies. They're Martian zombies. But they're not just by being a Martian zombie, philosophical zombies that are earthlings. No, all about consciousness. Because they have to get by on the world's old so well. But these are aliens. And they come in. They study us. Are they going to discover the first person point of view? Of course they are. How? By reading our novels, by hearing how we talk to each other, we have filled the world with public third person accessible representations of our own first person subjectivity. Stream of consciousness, novels. And this is all available. This is data, hard data, to the Martian zombies. They can go and hunt through our libraries and watch our television shows and just overhear conversations. And they'll have a very, they'll soon learn. If they learn the rules of baseball and how the stock market works, they're also going to learn that we all have a first person point of view. I did try unsuccessfully to convince Chalamur's that the philosophical zombie argument was a great argument for physicalism, because if you really believe that the zombie would act exactly as the same collection of atoms that had consciousness would, you could ask it what it was experiencing. And it would say, oh, I'm experiencing pain or bread or whatever. But by hypothesis, it's not. So it's lying. And therefore, you don't know if you're experiencing those things either, because that's exactly what you would do. But he didn't buy that. Well, I don't know. I've tried the same argument on them. I mean, I think in the end, for David and for say, Galen Strausson, another philosopher, they're just so sure that their intuition about their first person point of view is right that they can't even hypothetically for the sake of argument. They can't abandon that intuition. And I appreciate that inability, or it's more of a reluctance than an inability, I feel the same way when physicists start asking me to set aside some of my intuitions about space and time and so forth. And I say, I hear you. I can't. I hear you. But something in me does, I don't know, if I try to abandon that intuition, I don't know what to trust. Yeah. Well, it calls up the reliability of usefulness of introspection generally. I mean, introspection is where we get a lot of these ideas of our experiences. Should we be generally skeptical of introspection? We learned something from it. We learned something from it. But yes, we should be skeptical. First of all, let's start small and build up. I love to point out to my students and others all the ways in which their consciousness isn't the way they think it is. For instance, it seems that our color vision goes right way out to the edge of our vision. It seems that we have high resolution vision out to the side. We don't. I love to point out that lots of things that are surprising. I can demonstrate to them. I think, who knew that? Well, you didn't. So forget about the so-called incorrigibility of first person acquaintance. That's just a mistake. That doesn't mean that we're not reliable informants to ourselves and others about many features. But forget about this Cartesian idea that on the inside, we are the masters of what's going on. So you're saying that even when we experience the outside world, there's a lot of stitching and jiggly pokery that comes together to give us this image we have. So why shouldn't the same thing be true about our introspection? Well, no. I think that, yes, I think that we have very clear cases where people misinterrespect, if you like. And that raises the possibility, which I think every theorist is really sort of honor bound to take seriously, that they're deepest intuitions. They're most cherished intuitions about what their first person experience might be mistaken. Well, now you may think, well, I can see where Dendrit is going here. He's going to the idea that we're all zombies, but that we have these strong intuitions that we're not. And innocence, I think that's right. That is innocence. That is, when we have a proper theory of consciousness, we look around inside. We're not going to find any selves in there. We're not going to find any witnesses in there. So as far as we can tell, when we have that theory, it will be a theory which does not distinguish zombies from conscious beings. Now, is that a failing or that's where it should be? I think that's where it should be. So in a sense, the distinction between a zombie, a philosophical zombie, and a conscious being, we've got to abandon that. But then we have plenty of room to distinguish people's being conscious of this or that, being unconscious of this or that, being not just in a coma, but not cognizant of various things that are going on around them. Things happening beneath their notice, things that are subliminal, things that are unconsciously being that we can have that wealth of cognitive science and psychology, which has been building up for more than 100 years, is available. And that's all untouched by this. The one thing you have to give up is this idea that you know that you're not a philosophical zombie. No. That's just an artifact of bad theorizing. So just to be super clear, to get the lingo right, you are not claiming that consciousness is an illusion. It's real in the same sense that the patterns that we talked about are real. I mean, we, our, these concepts of experiences play a useful role in how we explain what we go through. Well, I'm glad you asked that question. Yeah, or because I like the term illusion. OK. And I think it's a generational thing. I think that the younger generation has no trouble with illusion as a positive term, as in the user illusion. Consciousness is a user illusion. In fact, the man of us image is a user illusion. It's nature's way of simplifying the world for us. In the same way that software engineers have brilliantly created these metaphorical icons and sound effects. And think of how badly you would misunderstand the computer. If you tried to figure out how computers work by simply extrapolating from the user illusion. Yeah. Take literally the files on your desk now. That's right. The user illusion is a brilliantly designed, the user illusion of a laptop or a smartphone, is brilliantly designed to exploit your perceptual and locomotory and hand and dexterity powers and your audition to your hearing to permit you to perform things you want to do ignorant of the details of how it's going on. Same thing is true in your brain. The one difference is that there's no screen because there's no eyeball in there. So if you want to know who is the victim of the illusion, no, who's the beneficiary of the user illusion? But now I'm a little confused because we agreed that elements of the manifest image are often times real. Well, they're real illusions. OK, they're real illusions. Well, I mean, they're maybe the vocabulary that's not up to the task. So consciousness is both real and an illusion. Yeah. Yeah. And that's trick is a better word than illusion. Maybe trick is better word than illusion. Well, yeah, for years I've been saying consciousness is a bag of tricks. So it's a whole lot of different tricks. It's not one big, glum thing metaphysical trick. It's a whole lot of engineering tricks. And those engineering tricks create an agent that has instant, reliable, dexterous, fluent use of a huge array of representations. The agent, one doesn't need to know how those representations are created, or in this case, even where they are, or whether they have the properties they seem to have. Here's a way of thinking about it. Think of stage magic. Often, I like to use examples from stage magic. There's a sort of honor code among magicians. You're supposed to show something, a show not tell. You haven't done a trick if you've simply bribed the audience. Or we can test our intuitions here. What would you think of a magician that used mass hypnosis? And simply could hypnotize a whole audience and then have flaming elephants dancing on their toes. And no display at all. Nothing on this stage. The magician is all alone. But everybody is just going, ooh, and we'd say, well, that's a sort of cheat. You'd tell you count. That doesn't really count. Well, why not? So instead of hypnosis, let's do it scientifically. Having hypnosis is perfectly real for me. But let's say that you've got a magician who says, I now ask people to wear a special headset to my magic shows. And this is a headset, which simply keeps it dead simple. Just beams directly to occipital cortex v1, the sort of first major waste station for all visual information. And it can simply create hallucinations there. And bypassing the eyeballs. Photons, eyeballs, no longer part. But everything else, say from the optic nerve, maybe what he's doing is he's simply captured the optic nerve with his device. Everything from the optic nerve in is as it would be if there was a flaming elephant standing on his trunk. Would that be magic? But at least we now have people that were darned toot and sure that they had seen an elephant standing on its trunk on the stage. Question. Would they have qualia? No, we're thrown away the screen. There's no more room. They think they have qualia. They think they've seen the elephant, but they haven't seen it. They think they've had the experience of seeing the elephant. That's right. Well, they have had the experience of seeing an elephant. It's a bogus experience because there was no elephant out there. If we take the whole phenomenon from the light hitting whatever's on the stage up through the eyes and through to the conviction center, to what people will swear on a Bible they saw, at every point we could, in principle, intervene and lay out the food for the consumers at the next level. And it might be very, very light. And if it was very, very light, you might get some very anomalous things like, this is weird. I could, for a moment there, I could have sworn that there was an elephant on this stage. It just sort of hit me, but no details. I mean, we do have experiences like that. Sure. So there's a sense in which consciousness is real, there's also a sense in which it's an illusion. And in particular, there's the theorist's solution. OK, what's that? The theorist's solution is what the theorist may have and the dog doesn't. The dog doesn't think it has qualia. Right. The theorist does. That's just false. That's just an artifact of that theory. So would we take the same angle on free will that there's an aspect of it that's real aspect of which is an illusion? Yes, no. Of course. That's a philosopher's favorite answer to every question. Yes. The traditional idea of free will, where somehow our bodies or our brains are shielded from causation. That's crap. Yeah. It's just got to be false. We're not laws unto ourselves. We're not laws. There's no miracles happening like that. So if that's what you think free will has to be, if you think free will is incompatible with, say, determinism, then there's no free will. Then free will isn't real. It's an illusion. But I would prefer to say free will is perfectly real. It's just isn't what you think it is. Yeah. Which you did predict ahead of time that you've written, say. So good. But it is. So in the sense in which it's real has something you do with the fact that it plays this explanatory role in the manifestant dish, not just an explanatory role, it plays a huge role in people's lives. As I was saying before, since our society has the concept of free will, I signed the mortgage papers for this house. I was asked if I was giving my signing this of my own free will. Oh, yes. Yes, I am. The node agent have any idea of what he's talking to? No, but notary was reading this off a piece of paper. I was only too happy to answer. But some people don't have free will. Some people are incapacitated. Some people aren't in control. So there's a very real difference. And it makes a huge difference in life. I like to put it this way. Consider back to our drone. Suppose we throw away the controller and just let it be its own self-control to automacing. Pretty dangerous. Well, you think that's dangerous. Think how dangerous we are. Imperically, we're pretty darn dangerous, yes. And, apparently, we have millions of degrees of freedom. And we're not in anybody's control, but our own. Or we can try to control you. Parents, I like the idea that parents eventually have to launch their children. And once they've launched them, they're no longer guided missiles. They're now autonomous. And how do we dare let people do this? We dare let people do this because we trust that people will have done their best to turn their offspring into self-controlled response of the launch of agents. And that's what free will is. And there's no metaphysical bright line. But there are lots of legal bright lines. And they're negotiable and invasible. And there's a sort of arms race going on, where as we discover one loophole or another, we either exempt or not various people from responsibility or diminish their responsibility. Well, it's the legal, responsible moral questions that make this very vivid. And absolutely. And I know that you said things. I want to take this opportunity to clarify as much as we can. You've sort of hinted at the idea that even though we sophisticated scientists and philosophers know that there are laws of physics and we all obey them, we should let the people have their free will, in some sense, because it makes them act more morally. That may or may not be true. For me, personally, that fact has nothing to do with why I think that it's sensible to talk about free will. My reason for talking about free will is just the answer you just gave, which is that it does play this role in helping explain what goes on. Well, I think I don't think that the idea that we have free will is a sort of holy myth that we should preserve. For the good of Hoyt-Polei, no, no, no. We all need it. I think it's extremely paternalistic, patronizing, to say, well, why don't we the illusion of free will, but everyday folks, they need it. No, I think that's, first of all, I think that's just obnoxious. Right. We all go through life, gauging our opportunities, making choices, taking them as seriously as we do, which is sometimes not seriously enough and sometimes too serious. And trying to persuade others. It's no secret that this pattern of activity, including mental activity, including hamlet-like thinking and mulling and musing and worrying, no secret why it exists. It's what makes civilization possible. And I, for one, would rather live in a civilized world. But so that's a very crucial distinction, I think, that has the danger of slipping by there. It's not that we need to tell people they have free will to make them civilized. It's that we have to appreciate that we have free will so that we create civilization. Yes, absolutely right. Yes, got it. OK, that's very good. But that does mean that the free will skeptics, including some of my best friends. Some of my best friends, yeah. So one of my best friends. They're really engaging in a sort of an anti-social behavior. It's a sort of cognitive and realism. I try to shock them on that term. I have a little thought experiment about that. It's possible if you have an obsessive-compulsive disorder to have a little device installed in your brain that will help control it and prevent it. So that's the fact so far. Now we're going to have a little science fiction. So this chap has obsessive-compulsive disorder. And he goes to his local neurosurgeon and asks for the installation. And she installs it. And then after he wakes up after the operation, she says, now you're free to go. Oh, and by the way, we're in radio control here. We monitor you 24-7. And if you ever are about to commit some terrible act, we intervene, of course. Have a nice life. I think that's a black mirror episode. Do you have watched black mirror? No, I know. I think if you have any inclination whatsoever, that especially the first few seasons of black mirror are made for you, you should watch all of them. Because they're all thought experiments about how technology is controlling our brain and getting into our lives. OK, so I wonder if black mirror has a sequel that I have. So this fellow goes off. And reassured that he's got this safety net, he becomes a little bit slovenly in his decision-making. And he makes him bad decisions pretty soon. He ends up in court. And the judge confronts him and asks him what about this. He says, well, no. I don't have any free will. I'm controlled. It's debate law. I just obey the law of the physics and the neurosurgeons. I'm their puppet. And the judge calls in. neurosurgeon says, did you tell this man that when you put this device in, henceforth, that he would be a sort of electronically controlled puppet? And she says, yeah, yeah, he says it's not true. He says, no. Of course not. We're just messing with his brain. Now, she did something evil. Well, if she in her white coat, her scientist white coat is doing something evil for that guy, what about you folks out there in science land who are going around telling everybody that free will is an illusion that they don't, that they're all really just puppets. Why isn't that the same sort of anti-social behavior that this neurosurgeon, this imaginary neurosurgeon, this engaged in? I like that. OK, very good. I will remember that. Not how the Black Mirror episode ended, but still a good one. Good. I think to wrap up, let's deviate a little bit from, you've had a long career with many greatest heads. I think we fit some of them here. But there's a worldview that you're sketching out that is very coherent and fits together in various ways. Laws of physics, Darwinian evolution, intentional stances, real patterns. What are the implications of that? We've begun to touch on this, but for morality, for ethics, for how we should live our lives. Is there a meta-ethical conclusion that comes from this, or even ethical conclusions? Well, yes, I think there is. And part of it is, again, another aspect to my work, where we haven't mentioned is it means we don't need religion. Religion was maybe a good scaffold on which to build civilization. Maybe the myths of religion kept people in line and cooperating, because they were worried about big roller-walk watching them. Maybe I'm quite content with hypotheses, not provable, but they might be true, and say that civilization depended on religion. I don't think it does that anymore. I think we can grow up and simply abandon the myths. But when we do that, we want to be sure that we don't destroy or discard some of the valuable things that came along with that. The one that most concerns me is one that you can get at with the line of Robert Frost. He says, home is where when you have to go there, they have to take you in. Now, in that sense, there's a lot of people that are homeless. And don't trust the state to take care of them. One of the things that religions have done over the decades, over the millennia, is taking in and providing a sense of meaning and love for people who otherwise would not have that. And those of us who are fortunate enough to live exciting lives should recognize that this is a social service. To call it that is to underplay its significance by orders of magnitude. This is a life-healing, life-protecting, life-improving feature of the world that we don't want to throw away. The question is, how do you save it without also saving the sort of brute irrationality or a rationality, the valorization of unreason and superstition? I think it's possible to domesticate religions a little further. They've been domesticated a lot. But I think we can go a little farther and keep ceremony, keep community, keep music and art and celebration intact, and leave out the myths. But that's a tall order, but I see progress all around. And I do share the concern that a lot of people have that while the fastest growing group in the world is the nuns, the NONES, those that have no religion at all, if they have no community, if they have no allegiance, if they have no... If there's nothing that they think of that's bigger than they are to guide their lives, then we're in trouble. It just shouldn't be religion. So I think morality is a human social construct. And... Not more realist. And again, it's really just isn't what you think it is. It's not given by God, it isn't deducible from a set of axioms. It's a certain sense, political and rational creation of, ideally, an informed community of people. So something that we exercise our free will to create. Yeah, we can imagine as a sort of grounding myth. The philosophers like to do this sort of thing. You all come, everybody come. You're all welcome. You've got to obey some rules, some rules of discourse. And whatever your current beliefs are about what's right and what's wrong, share them with us. If there's something that your group thinks is really, really wrong, and the rest of us haven't seen that yet, that might be feeding meat, or it might be... Well, any of the things that religions have taboos about... Don't just play the faith card and say, well, I'm an exos and exos, think this is a sin. No, your task is to convince the rest of us that you're right. Give us reasons. Give us reasons. If you can persuade us that there's a case to be made, we'll listen. But if you play the faith card, if you say, this is beyond reason, this is simply who I am, I can do no other. Basically, what you're doing when you say that is you're saying, I'm just qualified from this discussion. I'm disabled. My irrationality prevents me from playing the role that's available to me here. And I think if we imagine morality as whatever emerges from that in the ideal circumstance, that's the kind of human construction it is. Well, I think I've done a terrible job at playing the devil's advocate here, because I agree with you too much. But, Dan, Dan, thanks very much for being on the podcast. It was very educational. Well, thank you, Sean. You asked all the right questions.
