 But as I was looking at all these players doing the task, I was like, some hit it. Like, if you think of a flyball that comes down, like way when it comes down, and others hit it like on the way still up, as it was like entering this zone where they could intercept it. And so I was looking at this and I thought that's just interesting. I think that whole circle idea I don't like anymore because it, to me, it sort of implies sequentially, it's sequentially, like it implies this. And I think it's a coordination. I think we're constantly coordinating these processes. This is Bern inspired. Hey everyone, I'm Paul. Yolanda Fuchen is a post post doctoral researcher or soon to be anyway. She just is completing her first post doctoral position and we'll be starting a new one. Yolanda is interested in how we move our eyes and how we move our hands together to accomplish naturalistic tasks. Hand-eye coordination is one of those things that sounds simple and that we do all the time. For example, to make meals for our children day in and day out and day in and day out. But hand-eye coordination becomes way less seemingly simple as soon as you learn that we make various kinds of eye movements, slow tracking eye movements, fast jumpy eye movements, tiny jittery eye movements, and that we make various kinds of hand movements. There's lots of degrees of freedom for how we move our limbs and joints and fingers through the world to accomplish tasks. And of course, we use various strategies to accomplish various tasks. And therefore, like just about everything in the brain sciences, it's something that we don't have a perfect story for yet. So Yolanda and I discuss her work, thoughts, and ideas around those and related topics. As always, you can learn more about Yolanda and the show notes at braininspired.co slash podcast slash 188. And as always, you can learn how to help support brain inspired via Patreon to get full episodes, join our discord community, or just show your appreciation. Go to braininspired.co to find a link for Patreon support. Thank you, Patreon supporters. Okay, here's your London. Hello, old friend. Are we friends? Yeah. At this point, yeah. Are we beyond friendly acquaintances? We've hung out at conferences. I've played with your kids. That makes us friends, right? Yeah. Yeah, that makes us friends. Okay. We're finally doing it. We've been planning this for a long time and for numerous reasons, as always, that got kicked down the road. So we most recently hung out, believe at like last year at a conference for specifically for eye movements. Isn't that where we last physically hung out? Oh, no, we were at the SFN. I think it has to happen. That's right. Yeah. Okay. But in any sort of like more professional capacity, we hung out the eye movements. And the reason why I wanted to point to that is because my background is in eye movements. That's why I was invited to an eye movement conference to do what I was doing there. But I don't do eye movements anymore. And so part of what I want to discuss with you today is eye movements in general, but also I was thinking more about this. These days, I work with a set of quote unquote naturalistic data, a data set that I'm working with is recorded in various brain areas while mouse is doing a quote unquote naturalistic thing. And naturalistic tasks are all the rage these days. But you've been doing it since the beginning pretty much, right? Yeah. I think so. I mean, that depends what you call the beginning, but definitely my eye movement beginning. Not your physics degree, but. Yeah. So yeah, it took me a while to find what I wanted to do. Like whether I wanted to do research and what I wanted to do. And when I started working on eye movements, I immediately liked it because it sort of bridges several areas. And it's also relatable when I talk to people outside of academia with just something I like to do. So well, your specific research is relatable, not all eye movement. Not all eye movement research. And that's actually true. And that's always fun at that eye movement meeting that you mentioned when you go, you realize all the ins and outs that people work on when they work on eye movements from the muscles and the synapses on the muscles all the way to brain areas in monkeys mice and so on. And yeah, but I work on humans and on eye movements in naturalistic behavior and on eye hand coordination quite a bit. Yeah, well, that's fun to be able to just bring up baseball probably. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. And so that's sort of how I got started. So the lab I joined to do my PhD or I guess my master's already was an eye movement lab looking at smooth pursuit in particular. So smooth pursuit is when we look at a moving target and the eyes sort of follow it really smoothly. And it's actually something you can do without visual input. So if you try to do it, you'll be jumping around your eyes will make those fast movements of the scots that we make all the time. Yeah, but let's just define secade for people because I my parents came to my PhD defense and after I use the word secade, just liberally, you know, without defining it. And then afterwards they're like, it was great, but I didn't know what a secade was until halfway through. Yeah. So smooth. So it and even backing up more, maybe we'll just get into like why eye movements have been traditionally interesting. Yeah. And the lens here. I mean, from my perspective, so I studied psychotic eye movements and a secade as opposed to smooth pursuit is when your eye is it's like a ballistic quick eye movement, right? Yeah. Although, although there is people in the field that would hang you for the term ballistic. So I think it's like the high, the fast velocity is sort of the key part there. And then you shift your line of sight or your gaze from one position to another position. And the odd thing that we often don't think about is we do it all the time. We do it. I don't know. The number is two to three seconds. Two to three for one. Two to three per second, right? Per second. Yeah. Two to three secades per second. So and yet we perceive the world as stable and as sort of this one thing. And so it's amazing if you think about it. It's crazy. Yeah. And this is kind of the thing that a lot of people start with is like, how do we have this stable perception when the visual input on our retinas is just constantly jumping around? Yes. Well, and that is the thing like we should also mention the foveal vision. So high acute vision is only really accurate in a very small part. And so that's about like if you put your hand in front of you, it's about a thumb, and say it can take like that's what you see really highly accurate and everything else is sort of blurred. And then we like point this little area of high acuity around the world. And yet we feel like we see everything sort of stable. Yeah. Yeah. And and you know, that's that's just interesting. I think like even this fact is interesting. And then smooth pursuit is when you look at moving objects. Now your eye actually can sort of or the line of sight the gaze can lock on to the moving object and smoothly follow it and the velocity matches the velocity of the moving object. And then of course those two things work together. So if you have something like a baseball a fast moving object, you won't be able to track it smoothly with your eyes. You'll track it and make a secade. And also if we're in a baseball game, you'll move your head as well, which is something I movement research. You still like to think about traditionally, that's true. Well, and still we they don't I don't say I won't say even myself. I have to say I haven't done much with head movements. I think I should well, there's already that's all there's already like so much going on. So this is this goes back to like why I brought up naturalistic in the beginning because I wanted to ask you and I'm just kind of jumping the gun here so we can come back to this. But I I wanted to ask you how you feel about the term naturalistic. Because a lot of people recently I was at cosine and the term naturalistic is just thrown around now when. For example, my data said it's just a mouse just hanging out in a box walking around. Yeah, it's not that I mean what is naturalistic about that? Yeah, I think so I feel good about it when the task you're doing is in a somewhat controlled environment and it's mimicking some natural behavior. So in my for my PhD, I did a lot of work on manual interception and what's that define that? Yeah, so you are seeing a moving target and you're moving your hand in our case was the index finger to hit it and the target or the visual object moved across the virtual screen. And you do about you're doing a hand movements or not a cursing movement or something so you're doing an actual hand movement and you catch it so it's not actually catching but you hit it by moving your finger to the screen. And so there's aspects of like natural behavior that you actually move your hand so sorry to interrupt just just to make it clear also this is like an analog of hitting a baseball essentially right it's different essentially yes some some of the similarities but just well. So exactly of either catching so we started by looking at something that would be more analog of catching a fly ball, maybe although there you have all the running and stuff and then transition more towards what would be hitting and integrating that decision making progress. But you're still just as well touching us but you still just touching the screen but why I would argue it is naturalistic so. Okay, so maybe I continue my story about starting in the lab so I did my PhD at UBC working with Mary I'm sparing who had an I'm movement lap there and Mary I'm published a paper from her PhD which was called keep your eyes on the ball and it was outlining the benefit of smooth pursuit for motion prediction so really briefly her finding was that when you pursue a moving target. You were better at predicting the path it would take after it was blanked compared to when you just seeing it with peripheral vision and you were fixating so you see like the beginning of the trajectory where the ball is headed and then it disappears and you have to guess or track or. Yeah, so in her case it was like so in her case it was a goal like a visual goal and they had to predict whether the moving ball would hit or miss this goal and so it was blanked and then you had to say okay but it would actually hit the goal or missed the goal and she found that when you're pursuing the target you were better at this motion prediction and the title of that article was keep your eyes on the ball and then some blah blah blah. And what actually happened was that the UBC baseball coach approached her and said I want to work with you and I didn't know that. Yeah and so something that was really cool about this collaboration was that he was very aware of the academic timeline and he didn't expect results within like days but he was like no I want to start a collaboration between the baseball team and the lab and. Great so how does that happen I know it was great yeah yeah and then so eventually he transitioned out of the coaching role and became more a manager role and then the collaboration also interesting fizzled out because the new coaches were more like like we still have seen results the sort of thing yeah but that was just when I joined the lab and so I started working with these baseball players and that was just so cool because they're just yeah. Very incredible participants like they have great eye movements to start with their very yeah just a very patient. Yeah what does that mean that they just when they see a moving target their eyes lock onto it and they track it very smoothly they're very like they understand right away what's being asked of them and so that comes back to what I think is naturalistic so. We then said okay we did a couple things with them first we did just a full vision test with them where we took their acuity and the color vision and this and that and so. That was interesting as well because they were mostly above like average acuity as well so that seemed to indicate that you know it helps like they they need to have a good visual system to play baseball or I've always been asked this question maybe they have a superior. I don't know if that's the right word but a good visual acuity because they play I don't know yeah nature. But anyway so so then we designed this task where they're tracking and it was a simulated fly ball that was would again disappear after launch and then they had to they had the whole entire right hand side of the screen to hit it wherever they wanted to and whenever they wanted to so all we told them was do you want to catch innocent. This this virtual ball and we didn't have to explain much to them and I think then then your task is naturalistic if you don't have to say you know like keep staring at this dot and do this and do that like my instruction to them was very brief it was just like you'll see a dot that starts to move and you want to catch it in this right half of the screen and go and they would just start doing it without really. So it was natural for them because there's such a small. It was natural for them and well we did it with we of course we did it with you know a student population we eventually did it in patients and so I can tell you almost any participant I had had felt like they knew what they had to do like once they got used to the equipment and it's a little bit like you have a tracker on your on your finger and things like that and people are. Interestingly enough the baseball players were always very gentle and touching the screen whereas if you took on the student population stepie like. Or myself yeah right so baseball players have great eye movements and the rest of us are terrible is that which is that is that one of the take home just kidding well no no we had we had these like really fun anecdotes where we were in a computer science building and. We had like tested all the baseball players and we had this idea and then we tested lab members as one does and we were like okay you know we make what does it mean to be have worse eye movements you just make more ketchup secats you're not on the target as closely. And you know the hitting the ball was just further away from the actual position but then we were planning to do this training study and we started recruiting and we recruited first in our building and we had this group of computer scientists and all of a sudden we had this one group that was super good and on the baseline test and we're like what is happening and it turned out they were all gamers and so. Okay yeah because they were doing a lot of gaming they were also very good at at this or game of vibration gaming make them good one could ask as usual yes yes but anyway so I think just for me it's naturalistic when there is some sort of recognition of what you would do and in you and like natural behavior that you know of course it's not natural to hit. To hit a screen and see a simulated dot and so on but right you know later when we transition towards the more batting version where you actually had to go no go decision the players would actually say oh good pitch they would like say that well they sat there like for them it seemed like the real game situation and so it mimicked the timing and the demands really well and I think that that's to meet the key to the naturalistic. So you might not call it ecological but you're happy with naturalistic yeah okay see I think that's a distinction i'm okay with also in for example my my data set right a mouse just wondering around because the mouse does it's quote unquote natural behaviors it walks it grooms. It turns it rears and stuff but I think that people get hung up on the term on. On the nature aspect of naturalistic right yeah maybe yeah yeah and there probably I think there is some validity to that but everything is coming under the banner of naturalistic and that is only kind of recently been the case I would say. I mean you know this literature a lot better than I do I would say that you were pretty early on in. And maybe maybe helping us or and I mean there's there's the collection abilities the you know the deep learning ability to analyze the data yeah all these things that are just bigger more compute power bigger better but you were doing these things it was probably pretty hard to implement these things early on. Yeah I mean there's two people really pioneered this I would say or well yeah make a land and marry hey ho they've done a lot of work really early on and with like 3D cool equipment i mean there's there's more like the baseball work there's someone called be hell. What's his first name I'm blanking anyways like he did a lot of work at baseball players and then Michael and it worked in cricket players. So that they have been they always has been some work what's interesting with this work is that often the results that you present them and people are like oh yeah that makes sense and somehow. That seems to to get less attention because it makes sense it's not surprising. It's not surprising though you know like if you ask people beforehand what their expectation would be of like let's say you want to hit a bouncing ball like where do you look and if I ask you like what's what's your expectation of how would you do it how would you look at it you probably wouldn't would be off right by whatever you predict. But once you find the results people are like yeah that makes sense and like okay what you actually do is you look right predictively at the bounce location and then you track it past bounds. And that enables you to again extract some really important emotion information about the trajectory of the ball. And so it makes sense once you found it and yeah I always like I always baffled me a little bit like I often get this comment that people are like yeah okay that makes sense that and then it's sort of like less interesting because it's not well. Yeah, I mean it's you're not showing them a colorful picture of a brain also. Yeah, that's true. Because I want to make that distinction too that you know so what we've been talking about is all psychophysics and behavioral work. And you know when I grew up in the eye movement community mind I was in non human primate world in this very controlled you know you're not moving your head. You're just moving your eyes. It's a very unnaturalistic task to perform like any of the tasks that I most of them are very unnaturalistic. And you're recording brains brain activity and one of the reasons you do that control it so much constrain it so much reduce your task so much is because you want to be able to rule out other variables. Yeah, that the neural activity might be related to so you want to be able to rule out as much as possible so you can say this neural activity is doing. Attention or whatever my my cognitive function is and and in the psychophysics and behavioral world. You're a wonder if that's a difference is that it sort of frees you to take some of the constraints away and because you're just measuring things and then you have to infer a ton from those measurements and design the experiments well and all that stuff too. Yeah, yeah, I think I think what that can really give you though is a little bit of more. Freedom and let's say the monkey world or so if you find you know consistent patterns in your naturalistic task let's say. And it so it's not always a question of let's say I'm with me. So where do you look but also the timing of when do you look where you look right especially in these tasks where you have moving stimuli. But also when you when you manipulate an object or when you like that means just when you grasp something when you like prepare a sandwich that's one of the famous examples of sandwich preparing. So at first glance you would say okay this is like wild like you have all these possibilities of where you can look and you know of course you can just sort of quantitatively describe it and say okay all the I'm movements go towards peanut butter and sandwich and here and there. And so on yeah, but I think if you do it well you can come up with some principles of you know how you coordinate your actions in this like pretty open environment and then take them back and make your very lap based. Experiments we are more naturalistic and so yeah so in terms of the of the sandwich making we like recently did some work where we put people under pressure while they're like they're not making a sandwich but they have to drop a ball into a slot. And so we put them under pressure by giving them a secondary task and we find this really nice coupling of the day shift so the I'm of shift to the action task that is related to contact event so what's going on. So if you think about you want to grasp your cup of coffee. Most people would probably say yeah you look at your cup of coffee before you grasp it and then you take it and you drink it. If I ask you do you have to look at it i'm about to not look at mine because i'm multitasking right exactly so you don't have to look at it so why do we look at it and what information do we like why do we usually do it. If you know you're not talking to me you would probably look at it so why do you do it and what information do you use to guide what basically. And so what we did was we did a little bit more difficult than grasping a cup of coffee we had a little ball you put into a slot and you use either your fingers or tweezers. And so when you use the tweezers it was really tough and you need you need at the vision to guide it. At the same time you had to monitor a visual scene and you lost points in this little game when you didn't look at the at the display and so now. We can say okay and what times do you disengage your gaze from that visual task to guide your actions. And that timing was really linked to the time when you first contact the ball with the trees or when you drop it you first contact at the slot. And so you got there a little bit earlier but the coupling was to this point of time so when we learn a city like you want to use that visual information. To guide the contact between either the object you manipulating or when you're placing it right and so. So now having learned that you can go back and say. You know I don't know you you look at the monkey and maybe you don't know what time to like what because even and like I think these simple tasks where you have one stimulus and then you put on a different stimulus. That gives you the ability to align your data to the timing of where the second stimulus comes on yeah but now you're going to say that you're going to be able to align. Align to. Behaviorally relevant actions yes exactly so let's say you have a monkey that grasps a banana right like that snatch or grasps I don't know something and that's a naturalistic thing that a monkey might do or maybe you know they like delights another monkey or something like that. And so now you can align your neural activity to the first point of contact of monkey hand to whatever they're grasping and then go back in time and see. And so that gives you a different frame right like you go away from this time frame that you've created by showing a stimulus and you know like of course there's an expectation if there's nothing else on the screen and you show something. Monkey will probably look at it because what else is monkey going to do and so that gives you some validity in a relating brain activity to that visually that you've created. But it really loses the self driven behavior that is such a big part of off natural behavior. I think that's a nice example but it also makes me think of your previous work and I don't think that you explained this before when you know you had baseball players. And the way that they tracked these objects over time so just to refresh everyone's memory here so there's a visual stimulus that comes on the screen and it starts to it looks like a ball is kind of hit. And then it disappears and then they have like the rest of this the big well a full half of the other side of the screen to try to project. Eventually the ball the target is going to come back on and they're going to be able to see it. No, no, no, no, they're seeing it after they hit so they hit into nothingness and then they get feedback of where the target was. At the time where they. Okay, okay, well, then I'm going to let you explain because I'll probably get this wrong but the take home here before you explain this is that different levels of ball player like senior ball players versus freshman you know and on through had different strategies. Yeah, to complete this task they all completed the task well. Right, but they had very different strat not very but suddenly different strategies and the reason I bring this up is because. Okay, well now how do you bring that back into the lab do you now study freshmen separate from yeah no no I think so that that's a slightly. A different point I think so. So okay, so as you as you said like the task was just to intercept this moving object that had disappeared and you would get feedback upon hitting it and we gave them the entire right hand of the screen to do it. And so just that was something you know we often now say we shouldn't do any research without like prior hypothesis or something and our hypothesis was about how well you track and how well you intercept like that was what we were interested in. But as I was looking at all these players doing the task I was like some hit it like if you think of a flyball that comes down like way when it comes down and others hit it like on the way still up. As it was like entering this zone where they could intercept it and so I was looking at this and I thought that that's just interesting like why what like I can quickly see the benefit of hitting it right as it enters because you know you're reducing the time that it's invisible. And he sort of maybe mapping it to like three entry points and now you just have to recognize which of the three trajectories that isn't get your timing right so. Maybe you sort of like debunking the task a little bit but then you could also say you know as you are like if you wait longer you just have more time to plan your interceptive movement to adjust to make online corrections to where you want to go. And so we found sort of two cool things there the first one was everyone had the same accuracy and interception so even though some players waited a lot longer they still ended up at the same level of like they got to the target ask close. And those were the older older players. Yes and that was that was it seemed to relate to the level of playing experience that the ones that played a little bit longer tend to intercept later there was sort of like a nice almost linear mapping and so again it's very hard now to draw conclusion of why that is you can say they played longer so their I'm so the other thing that we found is they track the target longer and more accurately. And so the relied on their I'm in front of print movements to predict where it's going to go. Whereas the ones that intercepted it very early on they tended to rely on the feedback that they got so we found that they intercepted really close to the last feedback they had seen for that trajectory. So the younger folks were like hacking the system and the older folks were more patient less impulsive maybe even slower I mean there's so many different. Yeah there's so many different confounds. Yeah and and also you can say you know the younger ones maybe they were eager and they felt like maybe I'm being evaluated and they wanted to do it like really well we're still more what other people think of their performance and yeah yeah yeah. And then you can also say it nicely for the older folks and say they they had better like they were able to track it longer so they were free to intercept it later sounds like you can say it at thousand different ways. Yes. So I think there like that would not be ready to be transferred to like a more like monkey task like we would have to do follow up experiments and see you know like what if we now forced them to intercept all later do we then still see that. Like some people are just able to track it longer and they are better at intercepting it later or you know like then you do behavioral work to narrow down what the underlying. Um all this may be but what I really like about this finding is that like first of all it was like a finding that completely fell out of me staring at 32 players just doing the task and observing their behavior and I think that's something. You know like first of all if you do really really heavy lap is tasked with just as couple dots or something like that it's hard to observe much different behavior. And then I also think like people don't often don't look at like you know we tend to have an undergrad collect data or something like that right I've done that too and and but you know there's like something in just looking what people do and what you expect them to do may not be necessarily what they're doing and I think that's sort of like a like for me i'm interested to understand human behavior and. So it for me it's important to look at human behavior and how people actually do it and sometimes maybe go a little bit exploratory and go wild and yeah. And become slowly becoming more interested in behavior only because I have to because I mean there you know in the past what seven eight years there have been calls like well we don't understand behavior enough why are we already why have we done 50 years of neuroscience but not even understanding behavior. Because that's what you're going to eventually tie it to or that's what you need to tie it to and so because I want to understand brains right yeah and not like the molecules of brains but how how brains are tied to quote unquote cognition and behavior but yeah with the and and going back to like why I movements have traditionally been. Popular is because because you can control so much it's a very easy story to then like tie your single neural activity to a certain behavior right that is interesting that you say that because I would say I would go the Yarra's road so I'm free to be honest with like a Russian yeah describe the Yara stuff because this is classic work and yeah. A Russian scientist and he like he did actually a lot of. Thank you work on I'm with months but so the his most famous study was that he showed this picture which is I forgot who. Who painted the picture but it's called they did not expect him and it's basically a stranger stepping into a room and then he asked probably a single participant. To to say you know what is the relationship between the stranger entering the room at the people in the room and then he asked what is the other people in the room wealthy for example and you could see really different patterns of scanning the picture so people. We should just say how those like clay cups suction to eyeballs I mean it was like ridiculous you know you do think it was like medieval these days with with the technology but I mean it was kind of an ingenious way they had to like Wrig up little little clay cups to people's eyeballs with like little mirrors so they could tell whether looking right where they're looking at that and that's why you have you don't have one thousand participants but just one lucky soul. But it really it really like yeah I would say coin or like started this other line of research that you can use I movements to infer about. These cognitive processes and these behavioral goals that people have so you know when when I want to find out the relationship people just look at faces and I went back and forth between the faces but when they look at the wealth they look at the furniture and you know like sort of the room to infer the information about that and you know there were several examples and and maps really nicely. Like the I'm positioned would really nicely distinguish between these questions and so I think that was sort of like a psychology route that's cited using I position as an indicator of what people are thinking essentially. And that really contrasts all this more really low level driven I show a stimulus and I record. Single neuron activity. And it's like a simple. No, you must be recording right but and so so but I feel like sort of what my end term goal maybe as I want to sort of link these two because I think you know we we've learned so much because I'm sorry the relatively simple system. You can record where the line of cases you can we know a lot about visual process like the I movement areas in the brain and then we also behaviorly know quite a bit about how we allocate days to different things but I think the. Sort of the there's like this other work trying to make. The I like the how we allocate out case so how how we look at what we look make that very low level driven as well because that's that would be easier to link to the network but I think that is to me is misleading like like do you know what i'm trying to say so. i'm going to go ahead yeah yeah so if you just say okay i just show single stimulus or I show like two stimuli but I make one very bright and then I look at the bright one and so and then I build up my scene from there and I say oh even if it's more cluttered i'll look at the most. Like the location with the most information in the statistics of the image i'm showing to a person. And you know like then you sort of trying to go step by step building up to from your neural work where you have very diminished visual information and then build it up to the rich visual information that we have. But that neglects that where we look is not actually driven by the visual information of the scene but is driven by our behavioral goals and by. What we want to accomplish and buy action goals that we have and the visual information but not and the visual information yes of course yes there and but you know. I I always think like they they sort of you know one starts out low and and I like I think there's worth in studying it from both directions but I feel like like. it's starting off and then it just goes a different path that's never going to meet this. This is the others path because it's sort of going a parallel and. yeah and and yeah so I just want to try to bring that more naturalistic or the more. cognitive. finding that we know where we look i want to bring that further down so we can bring it in more controlled and viabens. and yeah come come that way yeah because when. You know the more naturalistic i so I don't know really how this is in the on movement world since I haven't been in it in a while. But i mean i remember hearing rumblings that in like supernaturalist super quote unquote naturalistic or. high dimensional tasks that you start to lose some of the acuity of like. The the clean story of the neural responses because you have a lot of different things ever lap it yeah but so I think I we very briefly talked about this at the last I'm a from a meeting the Gordon meeting there was just talk. By Elizabeth Buffalo and she had my. Beyond by the way I saw her in cosine but well I have to email her again but. I just ran into her and i was like hi you know I reintroduce myself and she was like oh. I owe you an email don't I yeah so she agreed she's she's going to come on. Okay yeah yeah so I mean so she'll probably portray her work a lot better than me just having seen her one talk but. Basically they had these monkeys in VR and she was then aligning I think it was hippocampal data to like events in VR like behavioral events in VR and. It came out beautifully and so I think there there's sort of you know that goes back to. I know yeah but i'm just saying it goes back to you have to know what to line it to and yeah. And so for that you have to understand a little bit more naturalistic behavior than like I know it's really tempting to say what if I put the stimulus on I know exactly the time when I put it on so I can align it to that point. But you know you don't actually know if monkey or a person whatever. Maybe is right now thinking about something else and there's actually reacting or what to this visual stimulus slightly later on this single trial then on another one whereas if you see a behavior directed towards your stimulus you know they are. I don't know if I dare to say attending. But. At least you know they're going to attain that goal and you know the time they're attaining it and then you can work your way backwards and so that's sort of yeah. I just think it's like a promising way to go and i'm not saying don't do all the other ways like because we have learned a lot and we are still learning a lot. And as you mentioned before there is always visual driven processing as well. Sure yeah yeah. So there are two different ways that i'm thinking to go right now i mean maybe i'll start with this one of the now start with a simpler one right so let's let's go back to like super simple strip down very very control tasks right. I wonder how much of that is due to and or caused us to continue to think of the brain as like a sort of static information processing input output computer metaphor device right but maybe that's a case of circular causality where. You know because we started thinking about it like that when the cognitive quote unquote revolution came around although they were doing those experiments in that way during that time anyway maybe that kind of perpetuated us thinking about the brain yeah that way. Well and then yeah well and then i just want to throw this in there because then people said being like oh well we have to show more complex stimuli so then all this natural scene viewing came along. And you know that just like that's what I mean like that sort of follows the logic step of you're showing the dot and so now maybe you're showing a scene but you're still in this really passive mode and then you know now if you decompose the. Properties of your scene and you find these like really say what's called say and so these these spots in the scene that have rich visual information. You see that people also look there if they don't have a task at like if they're just yeah what's called reviewing where we actually don't really like what. I don't I free viewing to the state to me is like what is it even like when I think about myself reviewing like the things that go through my brain is like right ridiculous right now most of it you're not even aware of your eyes you're just kind of bouncing around and yeah and that that is driven by just some sort of. Visual features of the scene I believe because yeah well okay so this so this is where I was heading with this is one of the things that I have appreciated more and more and in fact i'm going to have some. Ecologically ecological psychology minded folks on the podcast soon who who have always appreciated so Gibson's ecological psychology one of its tenants is that you know there's never like passive. perception it's always like tightly coupled with the is a tightly coupled action action perception loop with the environment in you know your body and the environment and your brain and and i've appreciated it also because of work like Henry Yen who who views. In large part the entire brain is kind of a feedback control system which you know goes back to the kind of the cybernetics view of things yeah but okay so so i've appreciated that more and more that like well this is a you know the the action and perception are tightly linked so it's strange to me even the Arbis experiments is looking at a static image yeah because we're constantly moving in our field is constantly changing and this goes back to my appreciation of your early and continued work that you've always been interested in linking like these action perception coupling essentially which you know it's just been a hard thing to do and you've done. Yeah i mean and that that goes back to that i'm movements are just in space they're also in time and then it just. Immediately becomes complicated and often becomes sort of like even in visualizing it right you're sort of when you're visualizing the one you. tend to lose the other like it's often that i'm like okay so they're moving like they're looking here and then like but when i do they arrive there and then you go. Do maybe a time very in pot and then you're like when where are they looking now and then you have to sort of add it and then you have. Also like the the space like the dimensions and. I mean it's a crazy dynamic continuous flow of exactly and you think you think you know like. You think of brain data and how. Like a complex system and all these interactions and so on and then often I think like oh i'm a person so very understandable but if you really want to understand them in a time space continuum it's actually also gets. quite complicated but I think it is a like they are in a dimension that we can still understand and shouldn't maybe be. I just think for me it's just a promising way to understand like to quantify. behavioral choices. You know in like this on this perception action intersection it gives us sort of a measure and it's not. it's not a direct brain measure but I mean i'm movements are controlled by the brain so. you know and we can continuously record them and so I feel like it's like a pretty direct. indicator and then if you combine it with you know something like. Force like if if you do like you do. You look at grip forces or something like that when you're manipulating objects that also is a direct. result of signals sent by the brain or the spinal cord or. By the nervous system let's say that. And so you know we have these behavioral measures that are real time basically i mean there of course there is a little bit of delay but you know. I mean almost any signal unless you are really recording from. single or I'm sorry like it runs you have a little bit of a delay and we know the mapping pretty well and so why don't we use this real time readout that we have off. off like you know neural control. To understand these. Because it doesn't map it doesn't play well with the. current. popularity of states. Because then you lose yeah. The state and i mean that's that's you know one of the things that and i won't talk too much about like. My own research here but you know in the so right now i'm studying like motor cortex and basal ganglia while animals are performing things and this recent. low dimensionality it's all dynamics explosion has basically been. In these. Like highly skilled tasks when when there's a goal and a reward and there's something writing on it you know it is like deliberate actions and then these like these state space approaches. Work really well like you know like in a reaching task if i reach to the left or to the right. You can decode this high. population neural activity into these low dimensional spaces and voila it is to the left and yeah. And like early returns looking at the data that i have from a mouse just kind of wandering around and recording in these areas. Oh man it's it's a real mess and we're trying to like figure out how to is there a way to like map this. This on to that story or you know and my kind of current thinking is. Like these you know the state space approach is really good for when. There is like a deliberate goal oriented task right yeah and maybe maybe even like the motor cortex is not doing anything when you know just kind of swashing around almost in the right places where it needs to be if it needs to if it needs to do something deliberate right so then there's that feedback hierarchical control and this is all in like a continuous dynamics processual flowing action perception. What a mess state of yes right yeah. Yeah and you know i i don't know. I i don't know how to bridge that so i really don't but i i think. I think you know. You also need to try to understand what at least a little bit like you're saying the mouse is just wondering around okay but maybe the mouse you know at some point encounters a wall or and then it has choice like explore a wall or like turn to different wall or something like that and so there are. Like in the in the behavioral world there are these points of decision or points of contact you have with the external world. That become more demanding in like a behavioral sense right and so then you have you start you create a bottleneck I think that's that's sort of like that is one thing where i'm like. I think it's very difficult if you just have a mouse walking or even a person walking or anything like very free because. And yeah that's that's the way i'm like if you're normally is i mean not like. Not like. Yeah because we do all sorts of goal or anything and we do have these bottlenecks all the time right like you need to pass through a doorway or you have to step over stairs or. Or you know you check your phone while you. Do exercise that people's pathways yeah. Exactly and so that it creates these bottlenecks moments where you're like you're using the like the brain resources for two things or three things or so on at the time and then I think that that can inform you about like. You know now let's say you're trying to walk stairs where we usually like to look at at least some of the stairs and also you're checking your phone like the moments now that you look at like that you coordinate those two things well and form you a little bit of when to look at your brain states or and so on I think. Yeah but it's just it's sort of like we have. Some tools that have worked for particular things and now yeah you know the tendency is to like well these tools have worked for this one thing so i'm just going to. Bro my stuff at it yeah yeah yeah 100% yeah yeah yeah yeah. That's one way to go yeah but it sounds like you're kind of somewhere in the middle right where. Like do you have like a i mean you started to to explain or describe your kind of vision of you know bringing the yarr best world down into it can you elaborate more on that and i mean do you have like a five year sort of. Vision or like an ultimate you know goal or or vision you know yeah i mean i think for me it always changes a little bit so. I mean I do like a five year I think yes but then you know the ultimate goal I think and I think that can sort of happen when you get. Into your daily work and you onto something that interests you and and you just you make your whole research about this thing like at some point maybe it's it's time to be like okay let's step back and see. You know like I can see myself working on something not completely different but yeah i'm going more you know on. I don't know um going more into the sports world for example i don't know but whatever comes my way um but I think for me it's like. Trying like in the next five years i wanted to bridge a little bit more these um. Uh yeah more like. Like. Like the as i was saying early like when when we act and we do something else at the same time so you need these multi tasking. situations I think those can really inform a lot about a. What do we need like what visual information do we really need for our motor control because that's something the motor control field says a lot about visually guided X. But they actually often don't look at where i'm with my it's our and so for me it's like. What visual like do you use peripheral vision do you use foveal vision. Do you need foveal vision when do you need foveal vision right like these seem like trivial things. But I think everything is trivial until you start doing it. Exactly and I feel like Mike again Michael Land and Mary Hale were some two people really starting to look at it and then people just sort of stopped i don't know it became. What did happen to that like like. Because I remember that there was a lot of uh talk in in in at least hey hose early work with the sandwich stuff. Yeah yeah i mean i think so um. Of course there's still people working on this um. Fine people doing fine research no and I think it's going to pick up a little bit again actually with like the. The recent push towards naturalistic and so um. Yeah so I think for me like decomposing what. What is the visual information like what is the visual guidance that we we need like I was saying earlier like we tend to look at something that we grasp. But so do we use foveal vision and what do we use the foveal vision for do we use perfor vision and we already know a lot about this but. Transferring this to a little bit more like say like sequential movements or something like that like when do you latch off a target and onto a new one and so on. Um and so that is one one of my goals um just you know making characterizing that a little bit more system at. Technically um. I'm not interested in in the and how the brain implements these these things because there's enough to do just in the world of behavior. Well i wouldn't say that because i so i think where would come back to the brain is we have these reactive movements visually driven and they you know they tend to. Control like lead to a certain behavior output um you know that's if you have like a sudden target or you have a very salient event or something like that and then you have these more voluntary or more high level things like i'm i want to reach towards this right. Um and so those are controlled probably by a little bit higher levels and so if you can also see like what is prioritized in behavior again um you can learn of how those. You can at least make hypothesis how the brain should be coordinating those two um and then you know like for me i think it'd be more the interest in the brain with then come through patient studies or like expertise. Something like that where I can then make saying like okay if x breaks down I would expect like if this behavior should maybe or could translate to break down in this area or something like that. If you ever get interested in flow let me know because I have with my emerging. Oh yeah. Continuously changing thoughts about. Over overarching thoughts about how brains work you know related to behavior. I have kind of a pet theory or a way to make sense of flow within that scope but we'll be cool. Yeah and we can talk about that. Yeah I think I actually think that's a pretty cool yeah and these are sort of behavioral. Again like there are like behavioral states almost where you get into these weird things right and then but then do we know what really changes. Like right. Even behavioral like yeah have we character like you know flow for example like which we should like should probably say like someone. Oh yeah we should define it. Yeah maybe. Well it's not that well defined actually but. No it's not yeah how would you define it. I would define. Should you get it make me do that. I would define flow as well. The way I used to understand is a little bit different than how I understand it now but because you're supposed to be doing something that is like challenging that you are skilled at so you're kind of at the edge of your abilities but you're. But then because you are you're like motivated and trying very hard but then somehow you slip into this state where you are able to kind of watch yourself do it and you don't necessarily feel like you're deliberately doing anything you're actually can kind of enjoy your body. Ask you know taking over yeah yeah so in a way you can kind of perceive yourself doing something that you're really good at and it also feels really good to be in that state and then you're doing it really well while you're in this yes yes because you have hardly skilled at the yeah yeah and then you have the choking on the other hand and right where you're. I'm not really a choking I don't know I never choke W never know yeah but go ahead yeah where you're very where you're very good at. And then you're like a lot of pressure you have this opposite that you become very aware of like all your bodily positions and so on and like well I mostly know it from the sport literature but then like let's say you're doing a free free throw or something like that you're describing one of my worst memories during a free throw during basketball and I choked and it haunts me. Because I start feeling like yeah why is my hand like is it like this and like that and like or or it can be an an academic sense as well right we probably all had that and I can make a nomination or something where you're like all of a sudden you're aware of these like weird things and you're like why am I thinking about my problem is I've never been in flow in academia of only only been in the choke state. Yeah well maybe you get into flow during your podcast sometimes. And I don't know about that anywhere where we before I took us into the flow because you're talking about your vision right and what you're interested in. Yeah and so so I think I want to I want to be one of the people picking up that naturalistic. So the hey hole work let's call it that and and in fact because we talked early I'm going to start a postdoc with Constantin Houdkopf and he trained with maybe hey hole and he does a lot of modeling like behavioral modeling off you know like I don't know what comes to mind right now is let's say you're doing you're doing a vision would are tracking tasks so you're trying to. You have a dot moving across the screen and you're trying to track it with your cursor or something like that and so then you know you have you have all these different processes going on you have like a murder process going on but you also have the perceptual process going on and maybe you also have a process going on that someone is trying to figure out. Like a cognitive right like what is the underlying structure of the path of the moving thing or something like that and so. As far as I understand the approach right now it's sort of like trying to build on these modules and then by fitting the model then to the behavior you can say okay this much is related this much of the reliability is related to murder versus. So on right and so I think it's like a really nice. Yeah like I think it's like trying to get towards more naturalistic and sequential behavior and then trying to build models that then can help us understand. Like break down the tasks and you know then when we see differences in behavior we can sort of then try to say okay this may be because you know if you're very like good murder person or something like that. Right yeah but I'm saying but only because I'm having a reaction to the kind of mechanistic component nature of of doing that and to say like it's this much motor. Yeah I mean I don't like this is my probably very naive current understand so you're just starting this is your second person. Yes I'll dive in more more deeply starting in the fall and then like yeah I'm sure I'll be able to explain it better. So I think that was that was fine I just was taking on. Yeah no I know. Yeah yeah yeah so I mean I so let's talk just a little bit more in this domain I want to then switch to AI for just a few minutes before we go into some extra Patreon time if you're good with that. Yeah okay so I was mentioning and we've been discussing how my views have kind of morphed over time and in some sense. I've felt that I've never had a view like a perspective right so I can just continuously kind of forming it it's not like I started out and I thought the computer is a brain you know it was you know is very much starting out and I still don't know anything right but I don't know things in different ways now so do you have a sense of how your views you know on behavior or perception action or just what you studied you know over time. I've changed. Yeah I mean I think I came in very nave which I think was a good thing because I didn't come from psychology or even cognitive science or something I I did physics and then I did biomedical engineering but really I I'd say I just like lift my life like I was just a student right like I I did what like I did my exams and my courses but I didn't really I wasn't really interested in my life. I wasn't really interested in any I was interested in a lot of things but you know I was like living a student life and and sort of just going through it and then. I did this internship at UBC with my then later supervisor and I that was the first sort of experience and research that really captivated me and being like okay I could think about this more but I didn't have any of the psychology training or this maybe even baggage. So I really looked at it like and then I also didn't have any physics baggage because I wasn't like a good physicist or you know like I was just sort of like like I think I have like pretty good tools training like you know like solving problems in general but I didn't have any theoretical baggage of expectations or something like that. I learned that baggage pretty quickly in I don't in your case a master's program I mean maybe not because I was really naive too it sounds like you're my long lost sibling or maybe. Maybe throughout these things so although I was a much worse student than you I'm sure in college. Oh I know I don't know. But yeah we can battle that out later. Yeah no I think but I think when I joined the lab so the expectation was also always this what we had before was like you have a stimulus and you follow like you look at the stimulus like you started with the stimulus like you show something on the screen and then you move your eyes to however what the stimulus is and then you process that information and so you know the perception action. Thing maybe a loop but it usually starts with perception that was that's the diminishing still the domineering yeah and so I think the first thing that happened to me was that I changed that to like it like maybe it starts more with action like maybe it's you know like you decide you're going to move somewhere and then you point your eyes or your factor like your hand whatever to that point that you wanted. Grab the information from and then you perceive it so that was the first change that happened in my own view but again I wasn't really how far along much biased. How far along were you when you that was like I'd say like. That can be your off my PhD or something see you learn faster than I do. But I wasn't much biased to start with right I was sort of just the way I read papers was always like perception first but I wasn't that's why I mean I didn't really have baggage like for me it was like oh well if it's circular like I could also hop into circle yeah like into another point but actually now last year as a fan or like shortly before when I was preparing my talk for as a fan. I was like I think that whole circle idea I don't like anymore because it to me it sort of implies sequentially is sequentially like it implies this and I think it's a coordination I think we're constantly. Coordinating these processes and you know there you know sometimes they're going to be sequentially because you have these bottlenecks where you can't actually do things at the same time but if they're light load if you have like a light perceptual load and a light motor load you can do them a parallel and then if it becomes you know like really critical to have information for one then you narrow it down and it becomes. Let's say you need I don't know let's say you want to threaten it all then you need the visual information for your action and then you know it becomes this and so on or like the other way around if you're really trying to understand the text that you're reading you know you may all of your chair or something because you. Don't know and how are you. Oh yeah we'll have to have a beer for that one and fall off our our stools again are you familiar with the phrase coordination dynamics work from people like Scott Kelso who's been talking about metastability for a long time. Not too much now okay i'll send you up recently become i was surprised when you said that because i've recently become. In this concept of coordination dynamics and i think that he would sort of largely agree with you okay yeah sense but yeah that's exciting yeah yeah so anyway so that's that's a you know most people can't. Thread a narrative about how you know have some metacognition about how they used to think about things and and i mean i can come up with a narrative to but i'm not confident that it would be accurate i might be confabulating right because i didn't have you like you were saying yeah. But you know and i think that's why i don't want to say like my long term goal for because i know it's just as i'm working on new problems it may again change and be like oh coordination is like what wild idea maybe it's like i don't know. So whatever. I think it's still it's still like it evolves right but it can evolve like in several directions so yeah. Yeah. All right so we're kind of going back to then the beginning of our conversation when we were talking about naturalistic tasks and the reason why people have traditionally studied i movements and the value of you know what you have done studying i movements in coordination with hand movements and doing interception tasks and. You know the multitasking and just having that coordination speaking of the last two minutes does coordination problems i don't know what is really happening in the robot ai world these days and i don't know if you have a lot of insight either but i'm just curious if things that you you know have found and other others like you. If those kind of coordination continuous dynamical action perception loop principles you know are being applied in the robotics world and one of the reasons why I asked this is because there's none of that in a transformer for example yeah yeah i mean i i think so i know they're. So going back to what you mentioned earlier so the Gibsonian view i know like i haven't followed on it lately but bill Warren he's like he did a lot of walking research and he wrote a few papers that are really really enjoyed and there he talked about these these ways where we can. And then you use information like ecological information to control robots and you know it's like navigating down the hallway I think you had that episode with someone talking about bees before yeah and like you use the I don't know if. Change of raid as you're moving through and so I think going down that path and I don't know why i'm. Thinking about this now but there's something about like when people go through doorways or like slits shoulder width ratio yeah when you turn and so like having these these sort of you know relative principles of change in information. You use like using those as a control system. Rather than using like absolute information okay i think like that like i don't know who's working on it because. It's kind of related to early like Rodney Brooks work which is kind of anti representational work where it's not like the robot has a computer in its brain and it. Processes the doorway and goes people. I will move it's more just like seeing like a robot shoulder width ratio to door size for your distance moving so moving through the world continuously and so you know what's what's funny like if i don't know if you read Gibson but. He actually like writes about that the idea that the brain is a computer is completely stupid and then he was so disparaging about it well i mean that was my reading of it but he says it's like almost as. Like it's along the line the idea that the eye is a camera which he also finds. Unreasonable and so I think it's just sort of. You know if you are moving and moving participant in the world moving agent I guess is the word I. I feel like you need to have some sort of read it real relational information like you can't have this absolute like and then it just makes like I don't know much about it but if I think like I just it makes no sense to me to start. Like trying to map out everything how do you make sense then of how well transformers perform for example or any other modern AI system when we're giving it a task. Because they don't want to give you a task right you're giving it a task like that that's. And you know I think it's useful like to me is. Most of the technology that we're using is like that right we giving the technology a task like we used to have to do humans used to be have to do a lot of physical labor and then you develop machines to. Take away the strings of this physical labor and now we're supposedly you know these they're based on neural networks which are based on our brains so there must be. They must be the same and you can predict brain activity with a convolutional. Yeah well because the brain is also doing sometimes doing a similar task right like there are citric like just the brain is also doing other tasks like there are situations in which the brain is doing a basic object recognition task you know well but baseball is like if you build the baseball robot. It's going to suck right now. Yeah yeah but I think I think there was there's actually some work and showing that oh man okay I don't want to say anything wrong now but. I have editing capabilities yeah. I'll look it up there is a paper using some you know like some in very an information basically or like change in. That can actually perform pretty well at that at the reception like an age like that is actually a problem that I think is. So solvable by like like the other problem then is like how do you implement the physics of the thing moving and things like that and then they have to like have that. And stuff like that. What if the wind blows. Yeah I mean that again that be like that if you really. If you want to have a wind detector so that right but that it's going to influence the path that the moving object takes and so that's going to influence the rate of change that it has in relation to other things and so. Like in the end it doesn't really matter if the wind blows or. I don't know what else they can earthquake happens or something if the. Thank you cancel the game if the North quick happens you cancel the baseball game I believe. Like this spin right on. It's funny there's a we've been taking my kids to there's a science. Museum here Carnegie science museum which just changed names but that's no matter one of the things that they have there. And so that's the thing is this giant robot arm that was made by Carnegie Mellon. I don't know 10 years ago maybe but it's sold job is it's fed a basketball like in a little you know small railings and it uses two prongs to pick up the basketball. It turns and it shoots a free throw. And you know it makes 90 something percent. And you're thinking that would would have been super impressive. 10 years ago maybe yeah you know and now it looks so dumb it's it's kind of ridiculous right I mean it's it probably looks cool for kids but but in the sense of like modern. Technology it just looks like man what is the point of this thing and how easy would that be to implement you know but back then it wouldn't have been easy. Yeah. And that's why yeah that's why again I feel like that was like an area where making predictions is like very dangerous because they make maybe like a breakthrough and then. Oh yeah I know I've already said some things that I've ever regretted saying in the past five minutes you know. So like that it would be terrible at baseball and at that next week there's going to be like some awesome. Yeah but they have those real about soccer competitions that are you know they're kind of yeah yeah and but I think. I think the focus there again like like and that's because there's so many things like if you design a robotic system you like worried about the shape of the thing right like and you're probably limited by shapes you can think up off and then. You you want to like like how does it doesn't local mode or does it like drive but then you know you you'd say like oh why would you make a local mode that's like stupid but then if you like there's stairs like oh now I had a robot that is only on wheels like it can't go upstairs right like I don't know if you've pushed a stroller through any city it's like a nightmare so it's like. Yes I have come on did you really need to ask me that no my wife pushed the stroller all the way always. Exactly there's so many there's so many things where where you have designed decisions to make that in the end I think the information seeking strategy is just one of them and it interact and then again it interacts with the way you've read like what did you build on it what how do you have the camera you're not going to have a phobia that's going to be moving so if you're building a robotic device it's going to seek information to. Seek information differently from how human seek information I don't know why you wouldn't have a both yeah i'm moving both yeah there's there are those well you could there are those but then you know it's like then you go down that path and then you have limitations again that like do you just want to build something that's like another human like I don't I don't know why you. I don't know why you would either but so yeah and now we're kind of nitpicking and thinking about the minutia but my original question was really you know whether you knew like if any of these things you know we're currently being researched or implemented in isn't unfair question because you're not in the robotics world yeah but this is at a ostensibly it used to be more so a podcast devoted to neuroscience and AI so I just have to ask. Yeah I mean I think. Yeah I mean I'm sure but I don't yeah yeah I don't know and all the particulars and I you know and for me it's really the question like. Yeah where I wouldn't even know if I wanted to build a robot I wouldn't even know what to tackle first basically it's my point because I would be worried about the interaction with the environment of this device right and that and let's let's. And that is like bodily and but it's also like information like like information processing like you have both of these that you need to worry about. What could you I'm thinking of your work that we talked about earlier where you're tracking a ball right and you see that the way that humans track the ball is they have some smooth pursuit and then they kind of get behind and they have to catch up with the secade right and then sometimes they smooth pursuit and then they can jump ahead with the secade to predict where they think the balls will be and so there's this interaction in the dynamics of those which we were talking about the timing of I movements and what kind of things I mean could those. I mean could those potentially you know help you design a system that would yeah I think so I think so yeah I definitely think so because the smooth pursuit allows you to to extract really accurate motion information off the object you're trying to intercept and then the secade could be sort of like. Like see well first of all I can help you catch up if you're eyes to to slow and then it can also move you predictively to somewhere where you thought it was going and then you sort of confirm by again having your FOIA on it whether you were like right with your prediction or not and so. Absolutely like that that can that could help in the robotic system yeah I'm not you know. I think I was going to mention this earlier and I just wanted to appreciate just how crazy dynamical our iMovement system is without us even appreciating it because we're just constantly tracking secade and then we didn't even talk about micro secades which it's like eyes just have to like jitter around yeah but it's just a crazy which I also like active probably and have like a yeah attentional yeah all those things yeah yeah. Yeah yeah but see that's the thing like now that we say that again i'm like what would it even make sense to build any robotic device that has a FOIA because it's sort of you know. Recreating the way we do it yeah and it's. You know if you and then I think when it's interesting to go into like vision and the wild and see you know predators half like really well like if these vertical slits as eyes and they can have really good depth procession and that's right and they're probably the ones that would be best at catching about like if I look at my cat like it's so much better at catching things and I am and so you know. Then like for me the approach would be okay I want to build a robotic device to do X like who in the in the world is best at X and then understand their visual system and their. The way they're designed and then you can maybe be inspired by that. Whereas you know we as humans we have sort of like i'm yeah a good solution for most of the problems that we face. In our environment but that doesn't mean that that be a good solution for that official system. And we're the best at everything that's why we need to model everything we do after humans right. We need to like you like i mean you are a male specimen so speak for yourself i want to oh my god alright. You're landed do we is there anything that we missed that we didn't cover that your particularly excited about or or that I that I ask you to death questions. No I think we covered we kind of got a ground well what we didn't cover and maybe we can next time and we talked a little bit about some of the struggles of parenting and you know you mentioned you have to be kids and I will link to in the show notes you wrote a little article about an experience that you had. As a parent going to a conference the decision whether to take them there or not so i'll direct people to that and maybe we can chat more about it next time yeah yeah and if any you know if anyone. Off like you'll listen us is in in the situation that they're like I don't know struggling with kids and I can be I'm always happy. Go to add on Twitter yeah yeah yeah i really i really enjoyed this conversation and. And it made me I was telling my wife. Yesterday that I was going to have this conversation with this person who's like in the i movement world you know halfway i mean you're fully in it but you know that's not like your only focus and i was like i i'm afraid i've forgotten too much to have like a decent conversation about this but I kept up okay yeah yeah it's a slow moving field well it is a slow moving field yeah i'll say it i won't get in trouble it's a slow moving field i mean i'm not going to get it. I'm not going to get in trouble moving field i mean all neuroscience is but I was struck going to that that research conference about just how little has changed in the five six whatever years that it's been. But that's the way it goes that's the way it goes well thank you. All right thank you. I alone produce brain inspired if you value this podcast consider supporting it through patreon to access full versions of all the episodes and to join our discord community or if you want to learn more about the intersection of neuroscience and AI consider signing up for my online course neuro AI the quest to explain intelligence go to brain inspired.co to learn more to get in touch with me email Paul at brain inspired.co you're hearing music by the new year. Find them at the new year.net thank you thank you for your support see you next time.