 How do we measure time? Well, with measure time, because while we have those things changing in us, there is also regular things outside. And those regular things, they leave traces that we can use to measure time. And so that's where it's a little bit funny to think that there could be internal representation of time. Or internal measurement of time. What would that mean? We don't know what it means, an internal measurement of time, because measurement by definition has to be somehow related to next-turn-al-observable standard. That's why I think people are interested in Persona. It's because this way, this duray is really something that is not in our computer or there is not in AI. This is Brain Inspired, powered by the transmitter. When you play hide and seek as you do on a regular basis, I'm sure. And you count to 10 before shouting, ready or not, here I come. How do you keep track of time while you're counting? Is it a clock in your brain as many neuroscientists assume and therefore search for in their research? Or is it something else? Maybe the rhythm of your vocalization, as you say, 1,000 to 1,000. Even if you're silently counting, could it be that you're imagining the movements of speaking aloud and tracking those virtual actions? My guest today, neuroscientist David Robb, sorry about my French, David Robb or Robbie. David believes that we don't rely on clocks in our brains or measure time internally or really that we measure time at all. Rather, our estimation of time emerges through our interactions with the world around us and or the world within us as we behave. David is group leader of the cortical basal ganglia circuits and behavior lab at the Institute of Mediterranean Neurobiology. His perspective on how organisms measure time or duration is the result of his own behavioral experiments with rodents and by revisiting one of his favorite philosophers, only Berksson and rebergsen, the Americanized version. So in this episode, we discuss how all of this came about. How neuroscientists have long searched for brain activity that measures or keeps track of time in brain regions like the basal ganglia, which is the brain region that David focuses on in his research. How the rodents study studies behave in surprising ways when he asks them to estimate time intervals or durations. And how Berksson introduced the world to the notion of duray, our lived experience and feeling of time. So this conversation is particularly fun for me in that I have a philosophical bent, not a philosopher, but as a scientist, I often struggle and do so allowed on this podcast. I struggle with how philosophy can influence in a practical way my own science and science more broadly. And so David's recent past is a good case study in that very phenomenon. Click below for the show notes where I link to the paper in which David really flashes out everything that we discuss. That paper is called Lost in Time, relocating the perception of duration outside the brain. If you value brain inspired, consider supporting it on Patreon to get full episodes, access the full archive of episodes, join our discord community or just express your appreciation. Thank you to all my patrons and to the transmitter for their support and their community work in neuroscience at the transmitter dot org. Here's David. That's your name for me so I get it right when I do the intro. So in French, I would say David rob a roba. Roba, Roba, Roba. Roba. Roba. Okay. If you say it's fine, many people say Robby and that's fine too. Okay. Yeah, and I'm probably going to say Henry Bergs and instead of only a bug song. Actually, so I'm going to start here. We were just talking offline and we'll come back to it about basal ganglia because that's a lot of what I'm doing these days. And that's what you do in what in your well historically and in your day job and your real job. Perhaps although what we're going to talk about maybe is coming a little bit more into that because they're related essentially. Oh yeah, totally. Totally. This is where I got me started in the time in the time business was all those kind of stories in the mid 90s saying that they were potentially internal clock in the striatum. That were like providing internal representation of time. So that's what got me started from the beginning. I had a problem with this idea. That's where I started beginning. Okay. All right. Well, let's get to that. But first I want to say because we were talking about what I'm doing and I'm an Eric itries lab. I reached out to Eric and I was like, hey, you know what? Anything you want me to ask? And first of all, he said, by the way, so I need to ask you how's the tennis game? Send me pro. How's your tennis game coming along? It's going a bit down. I have to admit that those those last two years I've been playing less. So I play less. I still do from time to time, local competition in Marseille. And I need to go back to that more seriously, but I have to admit that I kind of like. Yeah, I went a little bit down in my tennis, but it's still something that I, yeah, I enjoy a lot. Sorry, this is a total aside already. I'm terribly doing this, but did your sports and tennis and particular perhaps did that lead you to interest in behavior and or timing? So I think it's interesting you're asking that. I think at the end, so as a teenager, I was a lot into sports tennis and football. I'm in soccer. Yeah, I went I went in neuroscience and it's interesting how I'm converging more and more to a back to behavior. And I think he does something related to my passion for sport and movement. So it's interesting that I started by doing, you know, slice electrophysiology and I went to do a positive. The theory is lab with, you know, in vivo, in the area recording. And now I'm doing less and less physiology and more and more behavior. Why is that? Is that because we, for me, I've become more interested in behavior and really what I'm interested in is, you know, the connection between neural activity and behavior. But the more I learn, the more I know how, how little we know about even the neural side of it. And then I guess my framework for thinking about these things has changed and behavior itself is an open question. And neural activity is an open question. And of course, I'm just preaching to the modern neural behavior acquire that you have to study these things were embodied and you have to study them in conjunction. So yeah. Yeah, no, I think it's a combination of things, but it's true that my experience has been that it's really important. I mean, like behavior can explain so many things just by itself in the way. When you do electrophysiology in vivo. So if your behavior a chance, you'll know an activity is changed. Okay, so that's what that's the first thing I learned with your book, and that was really great. And so I really enjoyed actually watching, you know, rats running in a maze and seeing actually how you could almost anticipate what was going to do right or wrong just by looking at, you know, the way it was right where we're running. So I got willing to into behavior and then I read I read and I had the chance to make another one of the regular guests from this podcast, John Krakauer, who really also like pushed me and like kind of like kept like them, you know, but that's actually you have to go. You have to be very careful with behavior. And also some, yes, some personal experience, how easy is it to actually, you know, when you do if he's in behaving animal, it's so easy to basically have a sort of bias that it's going to make you interpret the data. The way you want to interpret them because it's so so I realized couple of time in my career that I was very close to make to make mistakes. And then I thought, yeah, we need to it's it's the key is we need to understand really well what's the animal is doing. Otherwise, we can tell basically almost whatever one, especially when you're recording a place like the striatum in which you have a very heterogeneous kind of type of response. So so that that has been the trajectory on those you're like really trying to understand well behavior also practically, I mean, chronic electrophysiology in behaving mice is really, really hard. If you want to do it right and and in France, it's tricky. We have very short. The funding is limited. The PhD duration is short. So it's tricky to have a project that really, you know, that you manage to go through a PhD in which you do, you know, good behavior, good electrophys good data analysis is just impossible. So I ended up, but I hope to do more electrophysiology soon again, but I ended up doing a lot of the area also because it's already a lot of work and. But you can make a story in like three four years if you do good behavior and a bit of perturbation. I think yeah, I was going to say I mean that that's why we come in with with be careful because we come in with I guess the technical term would be bias, but we have a story about what we're looking for and by God, we're going to find it or something related to it. Exactly. Who is Henry, I'm going to say Henry Berkson, Henri Berkson, you say the name again Henri Berkson. There you go. I'm just going to put you at the whole time. Who is this historical philosopher slash scientist slash mathematician sort of and why are you so obsessed with this person and his ideas. Yeah, so so so he's not a scientist now. He's really a philosopher. Yeah. So he's a philosopher of I think he's born in 1859 or something like this and he died in 1941. 41 I think it's 41. Yeah. So yes, he's a French philosopher that was actually extremely famous at some point. He write a couple of important books. He was a celebrity in his day. He was a celebrity. So his right now is a lot in the light after being in the shadow for a while. He's been more recently a lot of light. There's a recent biography in English that has been published by Emily. Oh, okay. But I just want to stop you because I can never tell these days, especially with the algorithms that feed you what you're sort of been searching for and just kind of you get in that silo. Is he kind of making a comeback? I think it is or is it just me that I'm seeing more of it now is making a comeback, but it's not just like since last year or two years ago. I think it's more like something let's say that is growing that are starting growing maybe 10, 15 years ago and now it's starting to really so first he was like more something local also evidently a lot in France. But now I think it's becoming is becoming bigger and my idea is because he's that I think you could define a define him as a as really a philosopher of the living. It was really about understanding the difference between what's so special about living organism versus other non-living things or other the movement of non-living things. So that was this big is big things and he tackled this question at different level, the level of the perception of time, then of memory and then evolution is big famous book is creative evolution. 1907 for which he got the Nobel Prize of literature, which is a paper that has a book that has been so it's been very misunderstood because he's kind of. He's a is a philosopher that tends to say well there is some limits to science and so scientists didn't like so much decided so he went you know his famous also for famous debate with Einstein but so he challenged some of the ideas of of Darwin in terms of the mechanism behind evolution was a true believer in evolution. But he was not sure about the mechanism that allows animal to species to evolve and and because he had this kind of view that was not mechanistic. He got kind of like you know he got some like pushed strong pushed back when all the genetics movement came stronger in the middle of the century and so he got a little bit kind of like like push aside also he had a very special way of doing philosophy didn't really build the school so he got quickly forgotten. But the truth is that if you read his book is really deep so so I think what is nice is to see how somebody at some moment can be kind of like forgotten and then come back and sound so modern when you read back so what me I'm well that's really what strike me so how in so many instances it's like. It's like you're just talking about the stuff we're dealing now so that's really good eyes that that is always the case like sometimes I think that an academics job it seems whatever history philosophy science is just to point out who had that idea beforehand. Yeah you know because it's all well like Buzzaki says there's nothing new under the sun it's all of these ideas right have been well traversed by sometimes forgotten people. Yeah it's true it's true it's but yeah but I'm sometimes so I have debate with some friends I feel like like back some did something very new but it's difficult because yeah he was building not that I'm starting being a little bit more and I get get some help from some philosophy friends I realized that he himself also was influenced by even lesser known people so it's very interesting to see. Yeah the other comment I was going to make is I was recently at a kind of a gathering at Carnegie Mellon University in Pitt for someone who was a mentor of mine and many of us who just recently passed and I asked the question at our little gathering like so the thing is he did very careful super sharp guy very careful science wasn't concerned with glossy journals just concerned mostly like with the just doing asking the right questions pursuing it the right way and you know he's got a great publication record and I asked like you know what do you think his legacy is going to be and it's an interesting thing that what I kind of imagine is 40 years from now people are going to look back on some of these papers right and dig them up again and in the meantime he might be kind of forgotten I don't it's hard to tell but yeah yeah maybe also the people that he talked to will actually you know he will probably have affected the life of a yeah significant amount of of of people that are going to do science in a different way because of working with him so he's I think even like Berkson even when he was kind of like forgotten he was still very influential but just people didn't want to mention his name because he was person and not that but he was still very influencing people so that's why I think yeah. Well from what I understand too that he is maybe at least popularly most well known for losing that famous debate with Einstein but then a lot of careful historians have looked back and it's it's a lot more nuanced he didn't just lose a debate they misunderstood each other they called each other out in their misunderstandings and so it's not clear who quote unquote one or lost. No, yeah clearly he was he was perceived as the loser I mean he was tough not to lose again. Einstein now. I remember myself now I remember when I was a student I had the poster of Einstein in my in my room in the university I had no clue and no understanding about the theory of relativity. Of course not he's just a figure an idol. So it was yeah there was something so big about it nobody could really win against this guy but it's true you're right like what people so couple of people have done some work. He may not can't let's I think he's the one that wrote this book. This the philosophy and the scientist and the philosopher and scientist exactly that's right so in which he she shows that the yeah there was actually no no really debate they misunderstood you. You you you said right another French philosopher is doing I think there's a book that is going to come out soon about about about it you did you ring. Yeah I think actually so I would side with Berkson in the sense that so you have to read what so he wrote a book wait but you should say what the debate was about what you're going to say what yeah yeah no the debate was that so so sort of like implication of the the the the theory of relativity was that maybe there would be some kind of like multiple temporality. There was yeah there was no more this unitary Newtonian time was basically gone and and Berkson said well you're finding is basically about things that move extremely fast and very close to the speed of light. But we can still wonder if in terms of like our experience of time if if we should completely challenge this idea that we more or less all of us you and me right now are living on the same. Tempo. Okay so that was that was that was the debate and what what what's what's kind of impressive is that so you wrote a book about it which goes called duré and and simultaneity so duration and simultaneity and if you open the book the first so the the beginning of the book is him actually rewriting the equation of the theory of relativity and saying that he entirely agree with with the theory so it was a guide I was able to actually redo the match which me I'm not able people say it's not that complicated but it did this effort so we did a huge effort and actually called himself really is there is more understanding than Einstein. But his question was can we can we can we make conclusion about our experience of time based on on a theory that is applied to things that move that the speed of light or very near near the speed of light. And that was his question and to the discredit of Einstein Einstein did not make a lot of efforts if you if you would kind of balance the two if one guy's had made a lot of effort to to understand the theory was more more but the problem is that Berkson is a bit is not always easy to understand so his weakness as they didn't manage to make himself understood from from from to Einstein and Einstein was not very patient. So he also Berks von people back in the day and that this is the story that is kind of now becoming overturned is that well he wasn't good at understanding the science but but he actually was good at understanding the science what everything. Yeah, he was good. It was very good. He was an extremely bright guy. He had like. Yeah, he had like one lots of prices in mathematics when he was 18 19 20 and his teacher was where extremely disappointed that he decided to do philosophy. They were like, come on, you should be right. My team, my team and you're going to end up just like a philosopher. There's like a sale like these that goes in the legend of a poor philosophy. Why does that have such a bad rap? I was going to ask how you got wrapped up in all this because I have a philosophical bent and then there's something you know something behind me always saying like, oh, you just stick to the science. People, people are going to make fun of you, but you know don't waste your breath on philosophy. Yeah, well, so I think I always like philosophy. So even if I'm not sure I was really good at it and I was. I was very interesting like almost everyone that does neuroscience is interested in you know the relationship between mine and body. And when I was with this philosophy for a long, long time and still is. Yeah, but I was studying biology and I was starting to study neuroscience and I felt like neuroscience was really the key to you know as a student. I was like, okay, neuroscience is explaining all this. This rate and one day I was in a library and I saw really by chance I saw a book of Berkson, which is called a matter and memory. And the subtitle of the book is a nest about the relationship between less free and a matter. So the spirit and the mind and the matter. Find the body something like this and I was like, oh wow, this is exactly what I'm trying to to understand with this neuroscience stuff. So I took the book. And I started reading and it was kind of a shock like I didn't understand anything that guy was saying it was basically saying on every topic, the opposite that what I was thinking. But with you could see that the guy I thought a lot about it and he was very confident and he was like it's impossible that the brain is an organ that generates representation and I was like, what are you talking about? Or it doesn't make any sense to think that the brain stores memory and I was like, what is the guy is totally nuts. But I so I didn't go through the entire book, but I got one thing at that at that time, which is in the first chapter of this book is that perception is a beginning of action. So that's the that's the first part of that book and I found that even if it took me a long time to understand this idea, at the end I was like, yes, it's true. We only perceive things we're going to be able to act on. That's not a bad point. So he had this really disloop the fact that we're not information processing machine, but we are constantly what we see around us is basically already kind of like adapted to our motor system. So perception is basically a question asked to my motor system and I found this idea very nice. The rest of the book I couldn't I couldn't deal with it. It was to our pre this is pre ecological psychology right Gibson. Yes, this is pre ecological psychology, which is something that then got me into ecological psychology psychology later on. And I was like, but how come they never said that I was very surprised about asking why why is that is very surprised you can yeah, yeah, I mean there are trails because because person was I think label with this idea of a long vital which came later. Yes, it was labela some kind of like is it a really kind of like romantic guy what is what is a long vital for the was there so the other vital is is a no sort of metaphor that bring that Berkson brings in his third book which is creative evolution. And it's not you really have to understand it as a metaphor it's the idea that is trying to think so is basically persuading that that living that's something different between living and non-leaving matter. And that that should be some kind of original impulse is not believing in some kind of like fluid you know like so it's not a vitalist. Right, which is that that's what it got labelled as is there some sort of magic. But it's not is not he is a scientist he believes that the body is driven by you know electricity chemistry et cetera. But that at the beginning of life there is some kind of like impulse impetus that that is like sort of force that is pushing living to thrive and survive and also transform itself et cetera. And create yeah transform itself create and create and create against matter. Okay, that's the big thing is create is a form of creation why matters is kind of like you know it's kind of like trying to kind of like like kill you. Oh, like oppressive. Yeah going against entropy despite matter exactly able to create exactly exactly so yet this metaphor of a long vital and that got in kind of like smashed the scientist also other philosophy of Bertrand Russell was really against him so so yeah so so that's the that's a bit the story so. Okay, but yeah so that got me into Berkson and then I kind of like you know I was reading from time to time article of him but I never actually had that moment I never understood the concept of durée. So that's what we're that's what you're on to with this with this paper that we're going to frame our discussion around and so when did you when did you pick up the concept of durée was it after your neuroscience beginnings and yeah yeah those allow us way after so actually what happened is that so so we were interested in the lab so so there was a lot of those iPod is he saying that they were like kind of like really time representation in the strata. Yeah but everybody knows also that the strata is really important in motor control so so I had decided others to that probably if the strata matter rolling like time estimation it was because it had a rolling in motor control well I'm should say like that this idea of there being time represented internally it's been applied to many parts of the brain it can be de-exhausted from many parts of the brain and so exactly so it's been a scribe to so so the assumption is we must have this because we're good at timing things we must have these internal clocks that our brain produces that we can then read out as organisms to do things right exactly but at the time where I started working on this the strata was one of like the big kind of like okay there was strata and prefrontal cortex and cerebellum where kind of like the three things the three kind of like hotspot for time at different times today so so we wanted to so so my idea was that actually the role of the strata mean timing was related to movement and that it's because it changed animal move that that that animal change their performance in time estimation task so we was a with actually my first post doc we designed this crazy experiment parallel without Roscoe was not in Mexico we designed a task on a treadmill so we knew we knew another thing that everybody knows but nobody speaks too much is that if you do a time estimation task with like in which you request the animal to really respect a time interval otherwise you will get like a you know no reward or punishment then animal develop those kind of like weird superstitious behavior so this was something that was known okay this was the problem that we had also is that we know that the striatum response to movement to sensory stimuli so that the trick is that how do you make an experiment in which you can dissociate time and movement and sensory response knowing that on top of that the animals are going to tend to develop some kind of motor routine superstitious behavior so we decided to do a time estimation while rats would be running on a treadmill okay the idea would be to kind of clamp the animal into a state in which it cannot really escape and what we wanted to do is that we wanted to change the speed of the treadmill and or expectation would be that if the treadmill goes faster maybe the animal maybe counts with his pole then he would have the impression that time is passing faster something like this this was kind of intuition okay and then we got this very weird behavior so the task was you know we had a treadmill and the animal had to go at the front of the treadmill there was like a reward area that was clearly a salient and the task was the animal has to go there seven seconds after the trial started and the treadmill start pushing the animal away from this reward area so so if the animal is still it starts moving back on the treadmill and the I but what you guys thought was that it would just kind of keep running right next to the reward port and just yeah for seven seconds yeah exactly and they didn't do that they they all all the rats starting doing this strategy in which they they so through first they struggled okay because they would go to early okay they would go to early so they would go to early get like you know be the sound then we had like a sort of a we had the rat run for an extra time so yeah so they did a lot of error trials because the impuls of a rat like us is if he's thirsty and there's a reward in front of him he goes there straight okay yeah so he does that over and over until he gets bored and then a new trial starts the treadmill pushes the animal away and then at the end the animal bump into the rear wall and then run and then he gets the reward because now seven seconds we so we are the time of seven seconds seven seconds as a lapse and he gets the reward so that the animal understand that to get the reward they have to go to the back and then that's what that's what their superstition understands yeah exactly so we're really disappointed because this is not what we want it and we tried the bunch of stuff and he never he never worked so so but we said okay this is great we have a nice stereotype behavior we can do recording in the stride term which is supposed to be important in stereotype behavior and we did still a very nice paper on this with with Pabel but then we had the visit of of John in the lab and John told us you guys need to understand better this task what's the animal is doing etc so we did a lot of experiment and we realized that really the animals were unable to do this task if they were not if they were not allowed to to use what we call a motor routine yeah but did they did they all develop slightly different routines or was it so in okay is like 80% of the rad develop this routine but I think it's because of the setup we had like some rads that were doing other stuff but they were still doing some stereotype stuff yeah still stereotyped but it wasn't always just hit the back wall and go and run but this is there is just one yeah basically so so I think this is why many rats stand on to this one wait let me let me just pause here and just say because this experimental setup is sort of in between the hyper reduced experimental setup that had become dominant in neuroscience and was still you know that's my PhD work was fix everything as still as possible the organism needs to move only its eyes right to perform this task and of course the animal wasn't completely still of course they had their their moving their arm you know even if their head was fixed or whatever and so they still your point in the paper also is that all of these hyper reduced experiments the animal it people don't control for these little movement routines that the animal could be undergoing to help time behaviors in these tiny tasks for example but but so yours is in between so that's the hyper reduced and now we have like these super freely behaving and I guess yours those rats were freely behaving on the treadmill yeah it was pretty moving yeah yeah but they're still in the behavioral like they're in an apparatus right that they're that they're behaving exactly and context and our idea was to somehow try to clamp this motor activity and we we fade because the planet wilder behaving freely exactly and so yeah we were we so we we did a kind of a nice purely behavioral study in which we did a bunch of manipulation to see that yeah like it was really the routine that the animal had no clue really about time they really managed to do this task by developing a motor sequence and if you perturb this motor sequence then the the accuracy goes down and we were yeah we were wondering and some people told you know we had the debate why why is this this way or is there other condition in which the animal could do a time estimation task is this just like a failure to basically be understood by the animal etc and this is where I stumble again by chance on their son on on actually there was it was just at the beginning of the of the covid uh when you're going going through your old books and saying what shall I do now so so no actually more more luckily there was a podcast in France about matter and memory and so there is this really cool philosophy podcast that is that not exist anymore called the Shaman La Philosophy the road of the philosophy and they are the podcast in four episodes the four chapter of matter and memory and so I'm like okay you know I have time now I'm going to listen to that and the first podcast the the the speaker is like one of the most famous scholar of Bertrand in France um Friedrich Vorms his name and he says well we have to understand that the the matter and memory the book is the problem comes from actually the first book of Bertrand we see which is uh time and free will in English and in that book Bertrand says that we misunderstand time because instead of leaving it we specialize it and then what was very interesting for me is that the conclusion of our papers so paper we published in in penising 2020 was that rats were developing were especially were developing a special routine to be proficient into a time estimation task so that so that was like the conclusion that they were specializing time and I was like what like it's exactly what our rats are doing. Do you wait you wrote this before you came across the yeah yeah the the 2020 paper I was written I hadn't been back to to to Bertrand and then I so then I was like oh I need to read this first book and then he was really kind of a sort of like you know like a sort of deep yurica kind of moment that is the best when you revisit although you weren't revisiting in this case but you're revisiting Bertrand but you weren't revisiting but when what my point is when you read something even that you've read before but you're coming at it from a different framework you get all the sudden it expands and you have this yurica moment it's so beautiful yeah it was like what yeah he's explaining us exactly why animals do that and why they actually can't do a time estimation task and so that was like you know I felt like right right they can they can't do it internally and actually what they're doing is just they're getting rewards they're not really measuring time they're just you know they're just doing what we want us to do which is getting a lot of utility comes in that they're actually basing their yeah that's that that came that came a little bit later but also with a bit thanks to to Bertrand but because he has some idea about time being like a sort of cost you know and actually there is a huge field in the Rosanz about this idea about time being seen as a cost so yes this was my moment in which like so I was read because this was the covid lockdown so I you know I read I read this book then I understood better matter and memory so I read matter and memory then I read so I basically read like in circle wow these three main books and and then I decided to write this this kind of like long yeah long piece and it was it was great it was fun so with with his concepts then you were able to sort of reinterpret your own data your own studies but and I don't I don't want to I don't want to lose the listener because so we should you should talk about what Durey is and in dark Sony in terms right yeah so so the idea of Durey is simply that when we experience time when we leave because we have memory the all memory constantly prolong prolong the past into the present okay that's the way that we manage to have a conversation together is that we we constantly remembering a little bit of the past into the present okay so every present moment is inundated with at least some of our past memories exactly the entirety of our past but maybe exactly some of our memories yeah so exactly the moment is created a new and is unique in that exactly so his point is that this thing is really it's a sort of continuous heterogeneous new thing that is created at every moment so it's undivisible you cannot divide it you can divide it artificially but the Durey the experience time itself that that experience it doesn't make any sense to divide or you the way the example I like to use is when you grow in patient you know think about whatever occasion in which you grow in patient you know it's it's something that that accumulates but there's you cannot really tell at which moment you know you you are impatient it's just it's a process you know it grows and you cannot switch you know you cannot switch time you to be very impatient and mad and ready to yell at somebody you you you needed to go through the process of waiting but you cannot go from mad to to super some people can so some people some very special people seem to be able to but I take your point but how is that related then to how is that concept then related to externalizing time and how do you yeah so so his point is that so this experience so basically experiencing time being in time because you cannot divide it you cannot measure it directly so then how do we measure time well with measure time because while we have those things changing in us there is also regular things outside and those regular things they leave traces that we can use to measure time so for instance the movement of a clock while I'm talking it's moving then it arrives there and and the distance traveled from the moment I started talking or moving to the end that gives me a proxy from time so actually measure time is not about time it's about space so that's his big his big kind of like discovery is to say hey there is two aspect of time one that is lived in which because of memory it's a sort of continuous melting pot of the past of the present and you cannot be divided you cannot you cannot measure it because one moment you know one moment it's here and then after that it's gone so there's no there's no possibility of measurement because measurement is about superposition but but in that case isn't there no time because it's always just present so it's not exactly just present because you remember yeah but that's part of the present right so yeah but it's growing but it's growing in you you know otherwise you wouldn't become impatient it something has to stay and accumulate for you to become impatient so it's ever changing that that's how you that's how you measure it's because it's ever changing in the part you can that it's ever changing with this communication of the of the of the past into the present I think that's really the key something some people like we stay the philosophy the Dure of Berkson with the say of Eraclidus that says you know everything is changing you know you never step twice and that's not the same idea I'll say Heraclitus for our Europe for our American artist yeah sorry that's kind of like sure yeah exactly so that's not the same idea because for him for Heraclitus it's continuous change all the time but there is no there is no memory kind of like effect you see and that's the key thing of Berkson is saying that each new moment each new moment is totally new it's not just different it's it cannot repeat in the sense of like Heraclitus is more like a sort of eternal is kind of philosophy it's changing all the time but it's kind of the same in the change while before Berkson is it's actually new it's really new something we're right now we different you can't measure it it's not something like so this this you cannot measure it directly I love this idea because you know as a scientist and you become a reductionist and then you view everything in those terms and then you think wow how does anything move how does anything new and I love this account of everything is always new like and it is an act of creation exactly wonderful thing yeah yeah so so so the point is that yeah you need to you to be able to measure you need to somehow relate to something external that you can you know leave fixed traces so so that's why movement is a very change you know the the change of light is a good cue for for knowing how much time is passing etc this is why we keep saying all the time oh this movie was too long or the time passed too quickly it's so specialized time yeah it is we and so we have no way to actually not measure time in reference to to space and movement and so that's where it's a little bit funny to think that there could be internal representation of time or because or internal measurement of time what would that mean we don't know what what it means an internal measurement of time because measurement by definition has to be somehow related to a external or observable it's for standards relational relational relation yet to measure it yeah so in other words well you have to read it out but people you know people like Dean Bonamano who's on my podcast a long time ago and lots of other people you know are just continue to try to find this internal representation of time be it in the recurrent dynamics of recurrent neural networks be it in the timing of nested oscillations in the brain that where you could read these things out yes like accumulation models things all sorts of ways that you could represent time internally so you can you can use them to represent time for you so you know you you plot your plot your firing rate changes and then gives you to you a representation of time because it's a change but it doesn't mean that the animal use it as a representation of time like this was the point in which I really was actually Yuri Bujaki had like a very similar idea that it's not because you have like a change in your brain and then you relate it to something that it means that this is a correlative distinct so so it doesn't have to be that way since you mentioned Yuri's and you did a post-doc with him like in your paper I'll just go ahead and ask this now even though it's a bit of an aside there's like what just one or two lines and they almost seem like extra thrown in where you say well this is where Bujaki got it wrong in his inside out view and this comes at the end of the paper right so you've built up all these ideas and then you it's like you're reflecting a little bit and at the time I didn't know that you had been a postdoc in his lab when I read the paper yeah yeah so well first I want to say that I'm a big I'm a huge fan of Yuri yeah it's like sure it was the best time of my life in his lab really fantastic well fantastic person human person and a fantastic scientist well Yuri has his view you know very like you know internal model and so yes I'll summarize Yuri's view real quick the inside out approach right is the very very short version is that he thinks that we've gotten it wrong using we have these like really old psychological terms that were invented by psychologists to describe what we were doing and then we've been looking for neural activity and processes to map onto those terms and concepts and what he proposes is instead let's look at the way the brain is actually processing signals information the past the capacities the structures etc what the brain is doing and then use those to build up our psychological constructs throw away the old psychological terms and become up with new ones or understand them in a different way and and so that's his quote unquote inside out approach saying that we haven't gotten very far with this outside in approach so I just wanted to make sure we explain what his view was yeah you explained that's exactly right and that's exactly the point so the point in which I kind of like this a real museum I think it's a false problem to say that the psychological terms are kind of like all fashion and they don't reflect anything right I think so I think the the game so if you think if you think about an experience of time so I'll take on analogy to try to convey what I want to say you went to a movie you know you had a great time you were very entertained and then you know the movie finishes you realize it lasted two hours and a half and you say you didn't say you didn't see the time passing okay so this is when you say you didn't see time passing it's a very approximate description of what you experienced during the movie but it's good for communication purpose okay that's allows to to convey to your friend, wife, partner that you enjoy the movie and that you didn't see time passing and so that's it's like it's a short you know it's an approximate label for the entire experience yeah it's a condensed abstract version of what you went to exactly but it's you already you already lost a lot of information there but there's no way you're going to be able to recreate all this information even with like if you had like recordings all your brain activity during the entire movie right you wouldn't you wouldn't say at this at this point it was fanning in and fanning out from my retina to the through the thalamus and then it really fanned in and then it really there's a lot of gain from the basal ganglion so yeah you wouldn't you wouldn't go throughout the brain activity yeah so the the point I'm just making is that yeah we're never going to be able to explain or some aspect of our psychology because we we we always limited by let's say language and and that's fine that language is inaccurate because that's not the purpose the purpose is not it to be perfectly accurate it's just it allows just to to communicate enough and so I don't think yeah I think it's kind of a lost cause to try to find like the the the perfect description of like whatever brain cognitive stuff is going on in your brain with no runoff activity because anyway and I think at the end this was the part because you invited the john to ask question no I think that's the question I had it was it was Yuri and David Puppel on the yeah but I think we are maybe David that's the that question or john or whatever is one of them asked Yuri but okay now you're gonna have like you're still gonna need at some point a word to describe the the thing that relates to your to this no one activity that you found was important and so so then you're basically you know and it's still gonna be there's still gonna be a gap so so you can't really yeah you you you can't just bank everything on the inside there's always gonna be an inside and outside I think yes that's the way I'm just you that it's yeah yeah I mean I get behind that but I I've become a radical plural pluralist man like that so you know it's not about the word itself it's about refining the concepts that the word is attached to and stands in for right and so Yuri's point I don't want to speak for him is that the the folks psychological terms that we use are attached the way we understand them might be highly inaccurate relative to the actual processes going on so it's not about whether you have a word or don't it's just about refining the concepts but I don't know if you would say that at all yeah so my my my point would be that whatever concept will come out will always be somehow insufficient for two reasons because this is just something that is fixed it's gonna be a fixed label yeah okay and all and all brain state is constantly changing all the time so there's there will always always be a kind of like a distance between the two and that's fine it doesn't mean that they're not related it doesn't mean that science doesn't do a good job at approximating you know attention depression feeling one cold or impatient etc so it doesn't mean that science cannot do stuff on that but it's there's always going to be a sort of like a little gap and I think that's I think it's a good news and it's weird like when so neuroscientists do this all the time we'll take a and I'm sorry we're I want to come back to to the main topic here but so using a term like indecision making sciences right and in neuro economics which you are uh right about and study there's a term let's say you're making a decision and then you use the term urgency right but then you define it sort of neuronally uh you have an operational definition well actually sometimes you don't so for urgency then you ask well what would urgency look like in neuronal signals so the other way to do it is to say here's a neuronal signal what what concept could we at you know ascribe to that neuronal signal and then it's something like kind of like what we think of as urgency so it's coming from the bottom up I don't want to do anyway yeah but you could also you could also try to define it verbally sure and and then manipulate that manipulate your agency even if it's you know it's not a perfect term but you could you if once you decide what is your agency which I think you know it's well you can you know operationalize a definition manipulate the parameters and see if it correlates with something more less in the brain and then yeah as long as you attach it with that operational definition because what happens is that then just the term urgency starts getting used to not not be attached to the operational definition but with our common conception of urgency right and all the subjective baggage that comes with it yeah and the the issue would would also be that you would reduce your agency to the neuronal activity which there is no reason to do that because if you have you have different if your definition of urgency is about a certain type of of B-A-RU altitude in certain circumstances then it's really urgency is this whole complex thing it doesn't have to be it's not that neurons aren't urgent aren't feeling urgency exactly exactly I think the big issue comes with when you want to really localize thinking the brain like you know you want to say memory procedural memory is in the stratum you know whatever but that form of memory emotional memory is in the amygdala then you you then you get in all kind of trouble and I think it's also a bit in this interaction to this kind of like reductionism that that Yuri also right right I'm not sure is right to start from the brain I think there is no reason to do that I think you can we can do both that I think that I think you hit the hammer the nail on the hammer on the nail with with the both and I just I think it's so healthy to have someone like Yuri and have people like David Popol and John Crackauer everyone saying they've got it wrong when everyone's right in it's both and it's all right in some sense but bring us back to the the reason that you felt not the reason you felt obliged to but what you were keying in on when you mentioned Yuri's inside out of you with respect to the conception of of duet and the way that you think of time related to brains and bodies and movements so why did I bring him in the yeah what was it what what what is it specifically about that approach I think you you mentioned it earlier but maybe just yeah it's just that basically the point of of of Berkson is that is to really realize that or or mental state or life is constantly where we're we're beings in becoming okay we're constantly transforming ourselves so adding some kind of fix label is great you know I'm called David you're called Paul okay and that's very convenient it's fix label also we are constantly changing and I think there is nothing wrong on on on that and so what I was kind of like calling into question is that yeah we it's not a big deal that we use fix label as long as we are aware that they are just labels but the problems that if we think that those labels are become like like real things that we can find like traces in the brain then that doesn't make any sense you just you I don't know if I'm clear yeah but yeah it's like okay now if you if you think attention is one thing you're gonna want to to find attention in the brain and that's ridiculous because attention is a dynamical process so it's not gonna be a thing that you're gonna find in the brain but it's good to name something attention for communication purposes as we know what we're talking about but of course there's it's it's a label it's it's so it's there's always a gap in especially in psychology there's there's always going to be a gap between the labels that we use to speak to communicate about science and actually the real stuff going on which is constantly changing attention is like a dynamical thing why is it why are humans myself very much included so prone to make that leap and say oh attention it's a thing and it's therefore it's in the brain and I'm gonna find attention in the brain why does that feel like such a natural way to think it's embarrassing how easy it is to do that yeah but I think the the case of time is really a nice it's a very it's very easy to to to speak about this kind of like tendency we have because so we have this feeling of change of you know this experience of time and we speak a lot about it all the time and we say you know time went by quickly slowly a movie is too long a trip is too short whatever so we we constantly we constantly have those those fixed label that we need to use on our on our on top of our experience that is constantly changing and so at the end we end up confusing the two you know we end up basically having the feeling that we can slice divide what's going on in our brain because you if we take a clock we see the clock moving and we have the feeling that it divides our life and so we so we tend to yeah we get confused I think at the end because of language we get confused but then we feel things from the inside and so we said okay there is something going on inside and so why why do I why am I sometimes feeling time passing fast and sometimes passing slow so so so then we it's of use that we want to attribute that to our to our brain so we basically we localize something that is dynamic first through the language and then because we feel something inside of us is changing then we think okay well we need to explain it with like no wrong I think that's it's pretty it's quite straightforward and that's actually it's typically what you see in paper about time a paper about time perception in neuroscience start by a sentence saying time passes past when we are fun and slowly when we when we when we board but then it says the neural mechanisms underlying this situation because poorly understood exactly because because the only explanation because it's this kind of like subjective things you feel like then it has to become from your brain but the problem is that you attributed fast and slow to which are something that are about actually movement to something that was very actually not movement it was a temporal things it was like your experience your memory et cetera so you so you see it's I think it makes sense that that you think that that it becomes it's something that is related to your your brain activity and in a sense it is it is it has to be yeah it has to be so make that connection for us then but you so you have you have rats you have this task where they're on a treadmill and they have to do these timing experiments and they book they develop these stereotyped motor sequences to basically to help them keep track of when to go back to the port when seven seconds in one case has elapsed so they can get back to the port right just after seven seconds to maximize their reward so they go through these stereotyped behaviors between trials to do that and areas like the basal ganglia are doing things that are coordinating there and maybe maybe this is where of course it's also in the brain because you're actuating these movements through this continuous perception action cycle but it's the movements themselves that get honed over time and that you use to to to as your clock you're kind of using your own movements as a clock exactly so but the kind of like tricky stuff here that's very different kind of like subtle is that we're always tempted that to say animal use their their their body and their movement to measure time but they're not really aware that they have to measure time yeah so they just so I think so I think the key here is to think that we human have this ability to feel time okay the fact that you know if if I stop talking now something is something uncomfortable is going to grow and we're going to say okay what is he what's going on okay so we we're able to do that and at the same time we're able to watch a clock move and kind of like really relate or experience of change or internal experience of change with this regular movement okay and that's allow us to kind of like measure and I like you know but the question is that do the animals are able to do that are they able to do this comparison no I don't think so I think rats they are really just in time they're not comparing they're in time they're not comparing with like something and saying no no they're just in time and so they cannot measure they're just like look you know they're just like okay I gotta get my reward and so they're just they cannot like step back from from time and and and compare what they've done with something regular so they they're just leaving time that's why they can do those tasks and that's why you can do whatever you want in my so that's my bet so humans again are special in in in this particular way that they can reflect on their experienced living time with some machines ticking exactly well first was the sun you know the rotation of the earth that's that's how it started and then and then they they developed tools to do that very accurately but yeah it's exactly that I think there is something special in the ability of of human cognition to be able to to co-register their own internal change with external change and and I don't think maybe so the key so I don't think rats are able to do it that we know as maybe there could be some condition in which they could do it primates might be able to do it in certain condition but I don't think they can do and the key thing is that we do that you know because we kind of like kind of like relax so I don't know but imagine a rat's actually thirsty and wanting to get reward he's gonna be in time a lot you know to your point I mean we are embodied and you know reading your paper I sat quietly tried to sit very still and just you know time something in my head just match the seconds right but of course I found myself barely nodding my head or like internally vocalizing the seconds you know and so there it's always related to some sort of movement even if that movement here's what I want to ask you even if that movement is just on internal models or representations like even if do you think of cognition as internalized movement it's terrible because we're using language and we were just talking about yeah yeah it's great that you think that because I'm writing I'm trying to write a kind of like new new shorter paper on that subject and it's really about exactly that it's like that that cognition is a form of like I mean it's really close to you know movement and and a form of internalized movement but can it be entirely internalized that's the big that's the tricky question as you've said as you've said when you're trying when you have to time in your head it's very you know you're like making those more moves you know that I recently I took I participated to online experiments on time perception and the instruction were so you're gonna see a square and you have to say how long the square appear but you should not uh count you should not know that uh what was it you shouldn't use around numbers there's all kind of like wind instruction and I was like you know I was thinking about not but what they should say that you should stop breathing you should stop blinking you should write so it's an impossible experiment and when you have an impossible experiment maybe this should give you a hint that something is wrong and I think that's the same with the rats if you see that you have to you know like struggle so much to have a rat learn something is maybe the question is not is not the right question and I'm saying that being a guy that has actually you know train and and design experiments to do that and and and now I'm not doing this anymore and I'm quite happy I'm doing other and I feel and time is still a very important things but you don't need to put it into this setup of measurement I think that's not a good and actually John was one one even I think he disagreed with many things I say uh no he said one he's yes because he doesn't like when you go too much into cognition and movement you know he has this uh I know I know yeah but but he said to me David find me an example of a of an animal in nature that would do a time estimation kind of task and it was true that I realized when when when when when wrote the paper the 2020 paper and I wanted to find an example for the introduction for the first line of introduction I was really struggling to find the right what is the right example it's actually extremely rare even for human extremely rare to have like a pure time estimation experiments but that fits that fits exactly with your modern conception exactly and at that fits a lot with what person is uh was was saying so it's uh that that was kind of like the you know I needed this kind of like kind of guys actually assuming you know all the way in that the experience of time as it's not is something different than measuring time and that's what we're doing in neuroscience is that we would take the experience of time of an animal and we would like him to measure and say long yeah short and that's we're like I'm measuring it you measure it too exactly yeah exactly so yeah and that's great I think it's great also if if you have actually I mean if there's ideas that you push and uh what I found really nice is that yeah is how the animals were telling us you guys this is wrong and actually and when I talk to people I go visit labs you know a lot of people that are doing this kind of experiment they tell me oh we've seen it too and so what's very interesting is why nobody speak about it you know and and also that you have to do an experiment in which okay now that we see that the animals are moving during time experiment you have to think about a way in which the animal is not moving because otherwise you won't be able to do a nature neuroscience paper that would be purely about cognitive things because movement is not the right stuff is it kind of it's nuts it is it's yeah I appreciate that more and more how arbitrary it is to try to untether our behavior from our minds because they are it's just a continuous cycle and a lot continuous and it's never divorced although you know even like John Cracker would argue like well actually we do have these internal representations that are divorced and that's you know pretty special but even that it's it's maybe I don't know where the line is he doesn't either no one dies right or whether because even if you have this internal representation it is still continuously connected with another layer with another layer with another layer and there's out into the environment embodied and in the environment so I know I'm preaching to acquire here we're not going to get into a free will debate but as you were talking about looking at a clock and measuring it reminded me of the limit experiments right where you you're looking at a clock and then you note where the clock is when you volitionally whenever you want to like tap your finger and then you note it and the famous experiment and there's been a lot to debunk these things is that your brain reads out your what you're going to do before you know you're going to do it before you report that you have subjective awareness that you're going to do it therefore we have no free will but and so there's been a lot of reasons why that experimental setup is perhaps not the best has holes in it but has is there a road into free will with this with your conception now of oh yeah no but well remember remember the translation the title of the first book of version in French is called essay sur les données immédiats de la conscience essay about the immediate data unconsciousness but it was translated in English as time and free will that's the title of the book and actually if you read the book I really so the translation is not great but it's it's okay so you see it and read it in French you know what's crazy is that not that I'm talking to philosophers and I'm talking I've been talking recently to Japanese philosopher people that study Berkson basically French and that's it that's I found that so amazing that you know like like philosopher that studies German philosopher they actually learn German and we that's a very different world than or overall but so so the book is actually if you look at the book the book the the the four word of Berkson is that actually the problem is want to attack with this question of time is the problem of of free will of of of free you would call I don't yeah of freedom the point is point is that is that is that the problem of the free will is just like a very badly framed problem due to a sort of mechanistic kind of like approach it basically says and that's once you've understood you read the problem the problem of free will totally vanishes oh how's that if every every moment is new okay so at every moment our life is a new moment so then we're not then we're not bound we're not bound to to to to to anything it's like we actually creating ourselves how how could you know at each moment so that's it there's there's no this could really this could really make us go another few hours yeah no it's very so it's it's very interesting on how he says yeah no the problem of the way we think about free will is because we're thinking retrospectively okay we see something that happened and then after it's been done we think oh yeah we I can understand why David decided to jump out of the the rock at 10 meters high you know but actually when I went you know to do that jump 10 meters high in the sea I'm like hesitating but nobody knows what I'm gonna do because I'm done this is a new moment for my life even me I have no mental uh uh kind of like internal model of this because I'm a new person doing something new so actually this new thing it's gonna define define me if I jump it I'll be like oh yeah I did it and I'm I'll be a new person if I don't do it I'll go down the rock my son will be looking at me and say hey that you didn't jump and so you see what I mean but so retrospectively of course we can justify we can explain things but the question is that when you do something entirely new how can you explain something that never happened but then okay so it's a liberating idea then that we're constantly everything is new in every moment every passing moment exactly it's very very then why do I have the same stupid habits that I've had for a long time why is it so hard to change things yeah why am I so predictable in so many respects if every if I'm creating myself a new in every instance yeah because we have this fight between uh so it's a set of balance between surviving in which we need to to somehow take advantage of regularities that are beneficial to us not jump a win it yeah for instance if this is to you know it can be advantageous in some cases right this is to impress somebody like you want to impress your son so so yeah we so we're gonna get you know we'll be able to yeah take advantage of some kind of like regularities to be able to to live fine food striving in the world so so there is this kind of like a kind of like competition between some kind of like habit in which yeah we take advantage of the world for things but also we will change it at some point the bad habit will break or not but it will change anyway or you you'll get more and more frustrated with your bad habit I'm also sure yeah I think I like there's a word that that person uses that um if I have free will okay I can understand why I need some kind of like determinism to to take advantage of the regularities of the things that happens all the time that I can use okay that cause an effect if I have this free will it's really important that I'm also able to take a body if I was entirely determinist determinist why do I have this feeling of free will I like right it's kind of very kind of it's counter intuitive and it actually it uses the argument against free will for an argument for free will if things are deterministic enough I can actually make use of that you know I have to make us switch gears here because this podcast although less and less so is ostensibly about the natural and artificial intelligence and sciences what does this mean for artificial intelligence dip so but so you know a robot could just actually keep an internal cassio watch a clock right why would it yeah why would this conception or implementation or way to approach time make any difference for an artificial intelligence well I think it makes so you know I'm not expecting intelligent artificial but I wouldn't want my computer to subjectively become bored or or to go faster sometimes and slower sometimes yeah so constant but that's that's so that's the big difference I think and that's why I think people are interested in person now is because this this way this duray is really something that is not in our computer or there's not in AI is that like you know I don't know exactly how works the AI algorithm but I we can imagine that you know in in the computers there's clocks that kind of like you know that it has to be precise it has to be precise and it's process time regularly and and one being you know is separated from the other one and that's you know then you basically you stop the computer you turn it on again an hour later and you know you can go back to where you were before but that's exactly not how we are duray is actually the the opposite of that is duray is the fact that you cannot be not is this kind of like continuous merging that makes that if you stop doing something you you become impatient or uneasy etc but but I don't think AI yet you know if you're interacting with chat GPT and asking in question about French philosopher and all of a sudden you stop asking he's not gonna tell you hey what's going on I'm like and I was even like shut down or you know so it's not it's not built it's not built like that for the somehow from this kind of like accumulation and and and merging from the past to the present things are very discretized I think this kind of like a system so I think this is what what is kind of interesting is that's very yeah it's a very different yeah there's no time basically time doesn't matter anymore in AI no there's no time it's just sequence of things dynamics matter but time so would we would you want an AI to have this same sort of Berksonian duray like would there be an advantage I mean there's obviously an advantage no no there's not obviously an advantage for us actually I was about to say I don't think if I don't think if it's if it's is it possible can we I don't think we we can I think that's really it's dependent on being a living system you think I've always kind of like think so but I'm not I haven't really thought how you could somehow because the idea is that you you were constantly kind of like transforming outside you would say okay an AI system is also constantly growing updating its weights but yeah I don't feel like that would give you wouldn't say like it's getting old no like you know like my computer's getting old right now different ways yes but you see what I mean for an AI that is like okay nice yeah or you wouldn't yeah you how how would you so how how could you include impatience you know like a true impatience because the true impatience doesn't have to be played repetitively you know because I'm a patient you know now I go out I take my car the red light is too long I mean you know but it's gonna be different if I do it tomorrow so it doesn't have to be an impatient that is replayed all the time it's got to be new every time and that's not possible we want the AI system it's got to be very regular when I ask him you know what's the birthday of a person is gonna give me the birthday each time but if you if you keep asking me maybe I'll do you you know maybe I'll be bothered by your question and I'll tell you something stupid I don't know if this can come into an AI I don't think they're designed for that but maybe so one of the advantages for us having this sense is let's say the the hawk is coming down on the mouse and the mouse needs to hurry the hell up and get in the hole and so time is gonna go very slowly because it needs to move very fast right and that it's it's a jury in that moment is it's changed for it subjectively so so our timing our sense of timing is dependent on that on motions and the needs of our demands from the environment and to survive etc but maybe you know take the example of self-driving car right you would want it to I don't know if the boulder is let's say let's say David has jumped off a rock 10 meters high thinking that the highway was actually the sea and you detect David falling through the air and you you don't want to contribute to his demise by hitting him with the car also right you would want your car to be able to slow down and but I don't think you would actually need jury to do that you could still just use clock time if you're there yeah yeah are we just constrained because we are not because we don't have an internal clock we can't use clock time we have to use this jury is that one way to phrase it yeah well we we do is making itself in us whatever we you know whatever we do it's imposed to us we're changing right now like like you know like you know there's like you know we're growing some reflection about our discussion and then so it's like we cannot just keep it it's so it's kind of a force of change in a sense we're not going to stay immobile or you know something is going to happen with time for sure for us to which which I don't think is the case for Neyra if we stop it now it's not going to say hey guys take care of me or whatever no because I mean we're like you know we have those metabolite needs that we need to you know so we're in perpetual kind of like disequilibrium and so time is is actually is important first and is it in that sense that Berkson also conceives of time essentially as a force upon us exactly it's like it's going to do something on you so you it's an active it's an active thing and that's actually why why actually and that's what you see a lot and that's what's great is actually when you do those time experiments where you ask animal estimate you're constantly surprised at why do the animal always go too early because time is acting on us and so actually for the small the small kind of like story with this time experiment we designed with Pavel and the beginning we wanted the rats to wait 10 seconds okay because we thought like this we would get like a lot of good units you know like a good stable chunk of units for 10 10 10 seconds and then we were really pissed because the rats they were when they started doing this task they were like 9.5 you two the time yeah so we said we said okay let's move down to 9 and then they moved on immediately 8.5 and so we kept moving down and then at some point we realized that they were like you know they would just want you know so I think and this is chewing like if you look a lot of different papers like the the work of Ben Seolievsky if you look at the data the animals they really struggle to wait and in that sense that's where you can see that they acted by time they want the reward as soon as possible time is important for us for them and for us too so then just to wrap up the little our little AI segment here so you not only can you not imagine why anyone why AI engineers would want to figure out how to implement a program in this sense but you can't imagine that it's possible in a machine it has to be a living being it has to be a living for being for which time matters for which time matters are they living for which time doesn't matter no or living beings like well I guess maybe for plants it's a little bit different no you could think time because they're constant they're having to create themselves well but you know they're just like in the place in which actually you know they get their food for free they don't you know so they have to like the roots have to go down they have to bend toward the sun they have to do they still have to like configure but that's a plant cognition conversation yeah but you see you see what I mean I think I guess what you would have to to design is something like if you if you were putting a AI on the pressure then maybe maybe I shouldn't say that we don't want to go there and also I don't want it I don't want an AI to be impatient with me come on yeah ask a better question come on yeah exactly so that would be the only the reason why it's like that is time matters for you no it doesn't no but for us time matters you know another thing you mentioned in your paper is a again I see it as a sort of recent trend among people like you and more increasingly me of saying oh doing this okay from my perspective there's this kind of recent rah rah science needs humanities sort of movement and I'm and I always kind of question that thinking well does it really or does a certain segment of scientists need humanities and those can be the people who can who connect it but so that was kind of thrown in there also and I'm curious what your take is like why why are we hearing this more and more that the science need humanities and and how you got from this idea the time is not in the brain to connect to science needs the to so they know so the idea the idea if we stay on the time topics is that in impatience you like you know so this this this way we we are changing in time all the time because it's like because it's changing all the time it's basically unreachable by science we're always going to be a little bit behind you know we're going to lag behind all the time in this description so we'll do a description of the living that is actually a mechanical description because it's the best approximation we can do in the given moment exactly yeah exactly so there will always be a sort of like gap between the mechanical kind of like stuff and the real changing creative process that is life and so and so then if there is a gap then there there might be other way you know to to add resist so for instance you can learn a lot about perception with visual artists okay because they're going to you know do you some make some experiments and you won't be able to actually they won't you know it's there's no point of putting electrodes while you're watching stuff or et cetera no it's just going to be you're going to you know it's a different kind of experience because it's just focusing on the experience itself okay because it's a new experience to do science you need to repeat an experience let's say like this very simple if you want to do a science something you need to repeat how would you repeat somebody watching a piece of art it would be no it won't be the same once you've seen it the second time will be by definition different it will not be the same so you won't be able to do so and actually it's actually I think it's an under kind of like appreciate it phenomenon in neuroscience we want to we try to have the animal doing the same trial over and over and over and they don't actually it's not true it's not you know we would like them to behave like robots but they don't so my point with the art stuff is that there will be a limit in which you know because of this novelty stuff and so then then we can just talk about it in literature literature will give you a sense of what's happening in the mind of an artist creating or a character watching a piece of art that will be much more about as valuable in form of knowledge of humanity than knowing what's going on in his brain but that's okay so that then that's separate from what I think of as science which is where you want to be able to reliably reproduce results so that's it's it's it's own thing that's not science using humanities that's it's like a different it's almost not science right it's just a different description a different story of experience exactly and it's a valuable one okay it's not sure that it's failing more than than science in the sense that I mean science is great and he's doing it's approximating a lot of things there's no question about the benefit of scientists scientists but it's because it's like kind of always like a line then let's let's not discard you know other form of like of approach to to reality arts is one is one of them literature is one of them but this is this is different than bringing I'll just say humanities to encompass all them bringing humanities into the science it sounds more like appreciating the humanities as a different perspective you're right okay so that that was kind of my my my original point now the only maybe little twitch that I could say is that well for instance so we often there is often like the tendency to think that neuroscience is going to help philosophy I feel like my encounter my rian counter with berson was the opposite it's like basically berson for me but it's not it's still a debate but for me it's kind of like solving a problem in science well the change to your perspective a change to the the way that you approach the problem yeah well you can say you know there's an entire committee that is struggling with trying to have rats doing time estimation experiment and then there's a guy that say hey maybe it's because you're confusing time and space that's cool you know and I think that's great I think you know it's it's it's interesting it's not to think that every experiment is a good one maybe there's experiments that are just that I mean another I think your guest policy sec was was there uh policy sec yeah yeah he has a very nice paper I think or at some point where he's the introduction of one of his papers saying that you know the toughest part in science is actually to find the right question and I think it's really true and it's sometimes we we ask question that I like some kind of like you know very quick superficial psychology and then we apply it to animals and then it it fails I think that's the case so in my in my case with berson I feel like yeah I think well I think people should take you know yeah should read him and and and and actually taking a count is uh and maybe it's the redirect science so much so this was something else with with what I liked a lot with berson is that is actually all his philosophical works is very tight to science see that's what uh yeah I was about to say is I I have my own internal dialogue sometimes like oh it's what I'm interested really philosophy or am I interested in science and really what I'm interested in is just uh knowing stuff and I'm curious about stuff but I think it's easy to once you start sort of opening that door to philosophy then it's easy to kind of get hung up because you get immediately into the debates and the semantics around the concepts and then what and then you can just get lost there so having it always having like your perspective where you had already this sort of scientific data set and viewpoint and questions and then you visited revisited in your case berson who you revisited in light of your specific set of questions and problems and that that was effective and that's where philosophy can be effective I think because you know I said oh philosophy needs to be like the humanities philosophy needs people need to read philosophy but you can't just go read philosophy you have to go with your set of problems and you I think you have to interact I think the key here is to interact with people when you do the risk is sometimes I feel like yeah it's a little bit too much closed society you know philosophy well maybe both philosophy and the Rossants they tend maybe to be a little bit too uh you know in their thing and I think the the mix is great and it's what is very interesting is that berson was actually saying philosophy should be much more like science and despite the fact that he's a lot of scientists were really pissed at him and like we're like calling him like really like kind of like a rubbish but he really he had decided that that what was lacking philosophy was the precision of uh of science and I think he doesn't he got flack for because he's very fond of using metaphors right and that's exactly so because he's not a scientist right that he was trying to find actually good metaphor and I think his metaphors are really sometimes it's really not I mean he's I love reading he's really very it's very precise very sharp well that's how we think his metaphors right George Lackos uh yeah yes um was oh yeah I I had this thought before we spoke um I was walking my dog and I was thinking about philosophy and science and I remembered a recent conversation we were having in my lab actually and the topic of whether pineapple is good on pizza came up and of course we all had our opinions on this you know um and we were sort of debating it and then one of my colleagues Mark said I don't understand why people are so adamant about their opinions about this stuff and I thought that's kind of like the way I feel about scientists and their opinions of philosophy like why do you have to have an opinion on whether someone is interested in and uses philosophical inquiry to aid their aid their own science right like you think it's useless other people find it useful who cares if there's pineapple on the pizza the person eating pizza likes the pineapple there you go there's a metaphor there's a no that's that's a nice that's a nice one but you think do you really think that people think uh that philosophy is useless in a raw sense of course like there's tons of historical examples of scientists talking about how useless philosophy is yeah but that big names you know but I feel my my impression I was extremely surprised by by uh each time I you know gave a talk about this stuff uh like how people were really engaging I feel like people are actually hungry for for doing meaningful stuff you know and uh and if you do an experiment and you wonder why does it take you so long to train your rats well you know it's kind of cool also to have like this this perspective of like philosophy of people also that think about science I think it's yeah and I feel people are hungry about that and and students a lot uh and I think that's that's really great that's positive yeah David I've uh hopefully I have not taken you over your personal duray but I've taken you over clock time so I have a little bit but it's okay yeah okay my my my final question is pineapple on pizza yeah your name okay okay spoken like a true sorry French person but you're okay with other people having pineapple on pizza right yeah yeah yeah yeah okay all right thank you for your uh duray well thanks but it was really fun brain inspired is powered by the transmitter an online publication that aims to deliver useful information insights and tools to build bridges across neuroscience and advanced research visit the transmitter dot org to explore the latest neuroscience news and perspectives written by journalists and scientists if you value brain inspired support it through patreon to access full length episodes join our discord community and even influence why invite to the podcast go to braininspired dot co to learn more the music you're hearing is little wing performed by Kyle thank you for your support see you next time you