 The following is a conversation with Roja Prasad. He's the vice president and head scientist of Amazon Alexa and one of its original creators. The Alexa team embodies some of the most challenging, incredible, impactful, and inspiring work that is done in AI today. The team has to both solve problems at the cutting edge of natural language processing and provide a trustworthy, secure, and enjoyable experience to millions of people. This is where state-of-the-art methods in computer science meet the challenges of real world engineering. In many ways, Alexa and the other voice assistants are the voices of artificial intelligence to millions of people and an introduction to AI for people who have only encountered it in science fiction. This is an important and exciting opportunity. So the work that Roja and the Alexa team are doing is an inspiration to me and to many researchers and engineers in the AI community. This is the Artificial Intelligence Podcast. If you enjoy it, subscribe on YouTube, give five stars an Apple Podcast, support it on Patreon, or simply connect with me on Twitter. Alexa Friedman spelled F-R-I-D-M-A-N. If you leave a review on Apple Podcasts especially, but also Cast Box or comment on YouTube, consider mentioning topics, people, ideas, questions, quotes, and science, tech, philosophy that you find interesting. And I'll read them on this podcast. I won't call out names, but I love comments with kindness and thoughtfulness in them, so I thought I'd share them. Someone on YouTube highlighted a quote from the conversation with Ray Dalio where he said that you have to appreciate all the different ways that people can be A players. This connected with me too. On teams of engineers, it's easy to think that raw productivity is the measure of excellence, but there are others. I've worked with people who brought a smile to my face every time I got to work in the morning. Their contribution to the team is immeasurable. I recently started doing podcast ads at the end of the introduction. I'll do one or two minutes after introducing the episode and never any ads in the middle that break the flow of the conversation. I hope that works for you. It doesn't hurt the listening experience. This show is presented by CashApp, the number one finance app in the App Store. I personally use CashApp to send money to friends, but you can also use it to buy, sell, and deposit Bitcoin in just seconds. CashApp also has a new investing feature. You can buy fractions of a stock, say $1 worth, no matter what the stock price is. Broke your services are provided by CashApp investing a subsidiary of Square and Membrace IPC. I'm excited to be working with CashApp to support one of my favorite organizations called First. Best known for their first robotics and legal competitions. They educate and inspire hundreds of thousands of students in over 110 countries, and have a perfect rating on charity navigator, which means the donated money is used to maximum effectiveness. When you get CashApp from the App Store Google Play and use code Lex Podcast, you'll get $10. And CashApp will also donate $10 to First, which again is an organization that I've personally seen inspire girls and boys to dream of engineering about a world. This podcast is also supported by Zippercruiter, hiring great people is hard, and to me is one of the most important elements of a successful mission-driven team. I've been fortunate to be a part of and lead several great engineering teams. The hiring I've done in the past was mostly through tools we built ourselves, but reinventing the wheel was painful. Zippercruiter is a tool that's already available for you. It seeks to make hiring simple, fast, and smart. For example, Codable Co-founder, Gretchen Hebner, used Zippercruiter to find a new game artist to join our education tech company. By using Zippercruiter's screening questions to filter candidates, Gretchen founded easier to focus on the best candidates, and finally hiring the perfect person for the role, and less than two weeks from start to finish. Zippercruiter, the smartest way to hire. See why Zippercruiter is effective for businesses of all sizes by signing up, as I did, for free at zippercruiter.com slash Lex Pod, that's zippercruiter.com slash Lex Pod. And now, here's my conversation with Rohit Prasad. Zippercruiter is a great player. He's a great player. He's a great player. He's a great player. He's a great player. He's a great player. He's a great player. He's a great player. In the movie, Her, I'm not sure if you've ever seen it. Human falls in love with the voice of an AI system. Let's start at the highest philosophical level before we get to deep learning and some of the fun things. Do you think this, what the movie, Her, shows, is within our reach? I think not specifically about her, but I think what we are seeing is a massive increase in adoption of AI assistance or AI and all parts of our social fabric. And I think it's what I do believe is that the utility these AI provide. Some of the functionalities that are shown are absolutely within reach. So some of the functionalities in terms of the interactive elements, but in terms of the deep connection that's purely voice-based, do you think such a close connection is possible with voice alone? It's been a while since I saw her, but I would say, in terms of the interactions which are both human-like and in these AI assistance, you have to value what is also superhuman. We as humans can be in only one place. AI assistance can be multiple places at the same time, one with you on your mobile device, one at your home, one at work. So you have to respect these superhuman capabilities, too. Plus, as humans, we have certain attributes we're very good at, very good at reasoning. AI assistance not yet there, but in realm of AI assistance, what they're great at is computation, memory, it's infinite and pure. These are the attributes you have to start respecting. So I think the comparison with human-like versus the other aspect, which is also superhuman, has to be taken into consideration. So I think we need to elevate the discussion to not just human-like. So there's certainly elements we just mentioned. Alexa is everywhere. Computation is speaking. So this is a much bigger infrastructure than just the thing that sits there in the room with you. But it certainly feels to us mere humans that there's just another little creature there when you're interacting with it. You're not interacting with the entirety of the infrastructure. You're interacting with the device. The feeling is, OK, sure, we anthropomorphize things, but that feeling is still there. So what do you think we assume is the purity of the interaction with a smart assistant? What do you think we look for in that interaction? I think in the certain interactions, I think, will be very much where it does feel like a human, because it has a persona of its own. And in certain ones, it wouldn't be. So I think a simple example to think of it is if you're walking through the house and you just want to turn on your lights on and off and you're issuing a command, that's not very much like a human-like interaction. And that's where the AI shouldn't come back and have a conversation with you. Just it should simply complete that command. So I think the blend of, we have to think about this is not human-human alone. It is a human-machine interaction. And certain aspects of humans are needed. And certain aspects of situations demand it to be like a machine. So I told you, it's going to be philosophical in parts. What was the difference between human and machine in that interaction? When we interact with two humans, especially those are friends and loved ones versus you and A, machine that you also are close with. I think you have to think about the roles the AI plays. And it differs from different customer to customer, different situation to situation, especially I can speak from a legs of perspective. It is a companion, a friend, at times, an assistant, and a advisor down the line. So I think most AIs will have this kind of attributes and it will be very situational in nature. So where is the boundary? I think the boundary depends on exact context in which you're interacting with the AI. So the depth and the richness of natural language conversation has been, by Alan Turing, been used to try to define what it means to be intelligent. There's a lot of criticism of that kind of test. But what do you think is a good test of intelligence in your view in the context of the Turing test? And Alexa, what do you Alexa prize? This whole realm, do you think about this human intelligence, what it means to define it, what it means to reach that level? I do think the ability to converse is a sign of an ultimate intelligence. I think that is no question about it. So if you think about all aspects of humans, there are sensors we have. And those are basically a data collection mechanism. And based on that, we make some decisions with our sensory brains. And from that perspective, I think that there are elements we have to talk about how we sense the world and then how we act based on what we sense. Those elements clearly machines have. But then there's the other aspects of computation that is way better. I also mentioned about memory again in terms of being near infinite depending on the storage capacity you have. And the retrieval can be extremely fast and pure. In terms of there's no ambiguity of who did I see when? Right? If machines can remember that quite well. So again, on a philosophical level, I do subscribe to the fact that to be able to converse and as part of that, to be able to reason based on the world knowledge you have acquired and the sensory knowledge that is there is definitely very much the essence of intelligence. But intelligence can go beyond human level intelligence based on what machines are getting capable of. So what do you think maybe stepping outside of Alexa broadly as an AI field? What do you think is a good test of intelligence? Put it another way outside of Alexa because so much of Alexa is a product, is an experience for the customer. On the research side, what would impress the heck out of you if you saw? What is the test where you said, wow, this thing is now starting to encroach into the realm of what we loosely think of as human intelligence. So well, we think of it as AGI and human intelligence all together, right? So in some sense. And I think we are quite far from that. I think an unbiased view I have is that the Alexa's intelligence capability is a great test. I think of it as there are many other true points, like self-driving cars, game playing, like Go or chess. Let's take those two for as an example. Clearly requires a lot of data driven learning and intelligence, but it's not as hard a problem as conversing with as an AI is with the humans to accomplish certain tasks or open domain chat, as you mentioned, like surprise. In those settings, the key differences that the end goal is not defined, unlike game playing, you also do not know exactly what state you are in in a particular goal completion scenario. In certain sense, sometimes you can, if it is a simple goal, but if you're even certain examples, like planning a weekend, or you can imagine how many things change along the way. You look for weather, you may change your mind, and you change the destination, or you want to catch a particular event, and then you decide, no, I want this other event I want to go to. So these dimensions of how many different steps are possible when you're conversing as a human with a machine makes it an extremely daunting problem. And I think it is the ultimate test for intelligence. And don't you think the natural language is enough to prove that conversation? It's pure conversation. From a scientific standpoint, natural language is a great test, but I would go beyond, I don't want to limit it to as natural language, or simply understanding an intent or parsing for entities, and so forth. We are really talking about dialogue. So I would say human machine dialogue is definitely one of the best tests of intelligence. So can you briefly speak to the Alexa Prize for people who are not familiar with it, and also just maybe were things stand, and what have you learned and what's surprising? What have you seen that's surprising from this incredible competition? Absolutely. It's a very exciting competition. Alexa Prize is essentially a grand challenge and conversational artificial intelligence, where we threw the conflict to the universities who do active research in the field to say, can you build what we call a social bot that can converse with you coherently and engagingly for 20 minutes? That is an extremely hard challenge talking to someone who you're meeting for the first time, or even if you've met them quite often, to speak at 20 minutes on any topic and evolving nature of topics is super hard. We have completed two successful years of the competition. First was one with the University of Washington, second University of California. We are in our third instance. We have an extremely strong team of 10 cohorts, and the third instance of the Alexa Prize is underway now. And we are seeing a concert evolution. First year was definitely a learning. It was a lot of things to be put together. We had to build a lot of infrastructure to enable these universities to be able to build magical experiences and do high quality research. Just a few quick questions, sorry for the introduction. What does failure look like in the 20-minute session? So what does it mean to fail not to reach the 20-minute model? Awesome question. So there are one, first of all, I forgot to mention one more detail. It's not just 20 minutes, but the quality of the conversation too, that matters. And the beauty of this competition before I answer that question on what failure means is first that you actually converse with millions and millions of customers as these social bots. So during the judging phases, there are multiple phases. Before we get to the finals, which is a very controlled judging in a situation where we bring in judges and we have interactors who interact with these social bots, that is a much more controlled setting. But till the point we get to the finals, all the judging is essentially by the customers of Alexa. And there you basically rate on a simple question how good your experience was. So that's where we are not testing for a 20-minute boundary being crossed because you do want it to be very much like a clear cut winner, we've chosen and it's an absolute bar. So did you really break that 20-minute barrier? Is why we have to test it in a more controlled setting with actors, essentially, interactors, and see how the conversation goes. So this is why it's a subtle difference between how it's being tested in the field with real customers versus in the lab to award the prize. So on the latter one, what it means is that essentially, there are three judges and two of them have to say this conversation has started, essentially. Got it. And the judges are human experts. Judges are human experts. OK, great. So it's in the third year. So what's been the evolution? How far? So in the DARPA challenge in the first year, the autonomous vehicle is nobody finished in the second year, a few more finished in the desert. So how far along in this, I would say, much harder challenge, are we? This challenge has come a long way. To the extent that we're definitely not close to the 20-minute barrier being with coherence and engaging conversation. I think we are still five to 10 years away in that horizon to complete that. But the progress is immense. What you're finding is the accuracy in what kind of responses these social bots generate is getting better and better. What's even amazing to see that now there's humor coming in. The bots are quite awesome. You're talking about ultimate science of intelligence. I think humor is a very high bar in terms of what it takes to create humor. And I don't mean just being goofy. I really mean good sense of humor is also a sign of intelligence in my mind and something very hard to do. So these social bots are now exploring not only what we think of natural language abilities, but also personality attributes and aspects of when to inject an appropriate joke, when you don't know the domain, how you come back with something more intelligible so that you can continue the conversation. If you and I are talking about AI and we are domain experts, we can speak to it. But if you suddenly switch a topic to that, I don't know off. How do I change that conversation? So you're starting to notice these elements as well. And that's coming from partly by the nature of the 20-minute challenge that people are getting quite clever on how to really converse and essentially must some of the understanding defects of the exist. So some of this, this is not Alexa the product. This is somewhat for fun, for research, for innovation, and so on. I have a question sort of in this modern era. There's a lot of, if you look at Twitter and Facebook and so on, there's discourse, public discourse going on. And some things are a little bit too edgy. People get blocked and so on. I'm just out of curiosity. Are people in this context pushing the limits? Is anyone using the F word? Is anyone sort of pushing back sort of arguing, I guess I should say, as part of the dialogue to really draw people in? First of all, let me just back up a bit and it's a why we are doing this. So you said it's fun. I think fun is more part of the engaging part for customers. It is one of the most used skills as well in our skills store. But up that apart, the real goal was essentially what was happening is with a lot of AI research moving to industry. We felt that academia has the risk of not being able to have the same resources at disposal that we have, which is lots of data, massive computing power, and a clear ways to test these AI advances with real customer benefits. So we brought all these three together in the Alexa price. That's why it's one of my favorite projects in Amazon. And with that, the secondary effect is, yes, it has become engaging for our customers as well. We're not there in terms of where we want it to be, right? But it's a huge progress. But coming back to your question on how do the conversations evolve? Yes, there is some natural attributes of what you said in terms of argument and some amount of swearing. The way we take care of that is that there is a sensitive filter we have built that says keywords. It's more than keywords a little more in terms of, of course, there's keyword base too, but there's more in terms of these words can be very contextual, as you can see. And also the topic can be something that you don't want a conversation to happen, because this is a communal device as well. A lot of people use these devices. So we have put a lot of guardrails for the conversation to be more useful for advancing AI and not so much of these other issues you attributed what's happening in AI field as well. Right, so this is actually a serious opportunity. I didn't use the right word fun. I think it's an open opportunity to do some of the best innovation in conversational agents in the world. Absolutely. Why just universities? Why just universities? Because as I said, I really felt young minds. Young minds. It's also to, if you think about the other aspect of where the whole industry is moving with AI, there's a dearth of talent in, given the demands. So you do want universities to have a clear place where they can invent and research and not fall behind with that they can't motivate students. Imagine all grad students left to, to industry like us or faculty members, which has happened too. So this is a way that if you're so passionate about the field where you feel industry and academia need to work well, this is a great example and a great way for universities to participate. So what do you think it takes to build a system that wins the Luxur prize? I think you have to start focusing on aspects of reasoning that it is, there are still more lookups of what intents customers are asking for and responding to those rather than really reasoning about the elements of the conversation. For instance, if you have, if you're playing, if the conversation is about games and it's about a recent sports event, there's so much context involved and you have to understand the entities that are being mentioned so that the conversation is coherent rather than you suddenly just switch to knowing some fact about a sports entity and you're just relaying that rather than understanding the true context of the game. Like if you just said I learned this fun fact about Tom Brady rather than really say how he played the game the previous night, then the conversation is not really that intelligent. So you have to go to more reasoning elements of understanding the context of the dialogue and giving more appropriate responses which tells you that we are still quite far because a lot of times it's more fact being looked up and something that's close enough as an answer but not really the answer. So that is where the research needs to go more and actual true understanding and reasoning and that's why I feel it's a great way to do it because you have an engaged set of users working to make help these AI advances happen in this case. You mentioned customers, they're quite a bit, and there's a skill. What is the experience for the user that it's helping? So just to clarify, this isn't as far as I understand the Alexa, so this skill is a standalone for the Alexa prize. I mean, it's focused on the Alexa prize. It's not you ordering certain things and it was like, oh, I'm checking the weather or playing Spotify. It's a separate skill. And so you're focused on helping that, I don't know how do people, how do customers think of it? Are they having fun? Are they helping to each system? What's the experience like? I think it's both actually, and let me tell you how you invoke this skill. So all you have to say, Alexa, let's chat. And then the first time you say, Alexa, let's chat, it comes back with a clear message that you're interacting with one of those, you know, social bots and there's a clear, so you know exactly how you interact, right? And that is why it's very transparent. You are being asked to help, right? And we have a lot of mechanisms where as we are in the first phase of feedback phase, then you send a lot of emails to our customers and then they know that the team needs a lot of interactions to improve the accuracy of the system. So we know we have a lot of customers who really want to help these university bots and they are conversing with that. And some are just having fun with just saying, Alexa, let's chat. And also some adversarial behavior to see whether, how much do you understand as a social bot? So I think we have a good, healthy mix of all three situations. So what is the, if we talk about solving the Alexa challenge, the Alexa prize, what's the data set of really engaging pleasant conversations look like? Because if we think of this as a supervised learning problem, I don't know if it has to be, but if it does, maybe you can comment on that. Do you think there needs to be a data set of what it means to be an engaging, successful, fulfilling conversation? I think that's part of the research question here. This is, I think, we at least got the first part right, which is have a way for universities to build and test in a real world setting. Now you're asking in terms of the next phase of questions, which we are also asking, by the way, what does success look like from a optimization function? That's what you're asking in terms of, we as researchers are used to having a great purpose of annotated data and then making, or then, you know, sort of tune our algorithms on those, right? And fortunately and unfortunately, in this world of Alexa prize, that is not the way we are going after it. So you have to focus more on learning based on life feedback. That is another element that's unique, where just now I started with giving you how you ingress and experience this capability as a customer. What happens when you're done? So they ask you a simple question on a scale of one to five, how likely are you to interact with this social bot again? That is a good feedback and customers can also leave more open-ended feedback. And I think partly that to me is one part of the question you're asking, which I'm saying is a mental model shift that as researchers also, you have to change your mindset that this is not a DARPA evaluation or a NSF-funded study and you have a nice corpus. This is where it's real world. You have real data. The scale is amazing. It's a beautiful thing. So in the customer, the user can quit the conversation in any time. Exactly. That is also a signal for how good you were at that point. So and then on a scale of one to five, one to three, do they say how likely are you or is it just a binary? How would they want to five? One to five. Wow, OK. That's such a beautifully constructed challenge, OK? You said the only way to make a smart assistant really smart is to give it eyes and let it explore the world. I'm not sure you might have been taken out of context, but can you comment on that? Can you elaborate on that idea? Is that I personally also find that idea super exciting from a social robotics person and robotics perspective? Yeah, a lot of things do get taken out of context. My, this particular one was just as a philosophical discussion we were having on terms of what does intelligence look like. And the context was in terms of learning, I think, just we said we as humans are empowered with many different sensory abilities. I do believe that eyes are an important aspect of it in terms of if you think about how we as humans learn, it is quite complex. And it's also not unimodal that you are fed a ton of text or audio and you just learn that way. No, you learn by experience, you learn by seeing, you're taught by humans. And we are very efficient in how we learn. Machines on the contrary are very inefficient, I don't know how they learn, especially these AIs. I think the next wave of research is going to be with less data, not just less human, not just with less labeled data, but also with a lot of weak supervision. And where you can increase the learning rate, I don't mean less data in terms of not having a lot of data to learn from, that we are generating so much data, but it is more about from a aspect of how fast can you learn? So improving the quality of the data, that's the quality of data and the learning process. I think more on the learning process, I think we have to, we as humans learn with a lot of noisy data, right? And I think that's the part that I don't think should change, what should change is how we learn, right? So if you look at, you mentioned supervised learning, we have making transformative shifts from moving to more unsupervised, more weak supervision. Those are the key aspects of how to learn. And I think in that setting, I hope you agree with me that having other senses is very crucial in terms of how you learn. So absolutely, from a machine learning perspective, which I hope we get a chance to talk to a few aspects that are fascinating there, but just stick on the point of sort of a body, you know, an embodiment. So Alexa has a body as a very minimalistic, beautiful interface or there's a ring and so on. I mean, I'm not sure of all the flavors of the device that Alexa lives on, but there's a minimalistic, basic interface. And nevertheless, we humans, so I have a room by I have all kinds of robots all over everywhere. So what do you think the Alexa, the future, looks like if it begins to shift what is body looks like, what maybe beyond Alexa, what do you think are the different devices in the home as they start to embody their intelligence more and more? What do you think that looks like? Philosophically, a future, what do you think that looks like? I think let's look at what's happening today. You mentioned, I think, other devices as an Amazon devices, but I also wanted to point out Alexa is already integrated on a lot of third party devices, which also come in lots of forms and shapes. Some in robots, some in microwaves, some in appliances that you use in everyday life. So I think it is, it's not just the shape Alexa takes in terms of form factors, but it's also where all it's available. It's getting in cars, it's getting in different appliances in homes, even toothbrushes. Right? I think you have to think about it as not a physical assistant. It will be in some embodiment as you said, we already have these nice devices, but I think it's also important to think of it. It is a virtual assistant. It is superhuman in the sense that it is in multiple places at the same time. So I think the actual embodiment in some sense, to me doesn't matter. I think you have to think of it as not as human-like and more of what its capabilities are that derive a lot of benefit for customers and how there are different ways to delight it and delight customers in different experiences. And I think I'm a big fan of it not being just human-like. It should be human-like in certain situations, Alexa price, social-bought, in terms of conversation is a great way to look at it, but there are other scenarios where human-like, I think, is underselling the abilities of this AI. So if I could trivialize what we're talking about. So if you look at the way Steve Jobs thought about the interaction with the device that Apple produced, there was an extreme focus on controlling the experience by making sure there's only these Apple-produced devices. You see the voice of Alexa being taking all kinds of forms, depending on what the customer's want. And that means it could be anywhere from the microwave to a vacuum cleaner to the home. And so on, the voice is the essential algorithm to the interaction. I think voice is an essence. It's not all, but it's a key aspect. I think to your question in terms of, you should be able to recognize Alexa. And that's a huge problem. I think in terms of a huge scientific problem, I should say, like, what are the traits? What makes it look like Alexa, especially in different settings? And especially if it's primarily voice, what it is. But Alexa is not just voice either, right? I mean, we have devices with a screen. Now you're seeing just other behaviors of Alexa. So I think they're in very early stages of what that means. And this will be an important topic for the following years. But I do believe that being able to recognize and tell when it's Alexa versus it's not, is going to be important from. An Alexa perspective. I'm not speaking for the entire AI community, but from, but I think attribution. And as we go into more of understanding, who did what? That identity of the AI is crucial in the coming world. I think from the broad AI community perspective, that's also a fascinating problem. So basically if I close my eyes and listen to the voice, what would it take for me to recognize that this is Alexa? Exactly. Or at least the Alexa that I've come to know from my personal experience in my home through my interactions that come. Yeah. And the Alexa here in the US is very different. The Alexa and UK and the Alexa and India, even though they are all speaking English, are the Australian version. So again, where, so now think about when you go into a different culture, different community, but you travel there, what do you recognize Alexa? I think these are super hard questions actually. So there's a, there's a team that works on personality. So if we talk about those different flavors of what it means, culturally speaking, India, UK, US, what does it mean to add? So the problem that we just stated is just fascinating. How do we make it purely recognizable that it's Alexa? Assuming that the qualities of the voice are not sufficient. It's also the content of what is being said. How do we do that? How does the personality come into play? What's that research you will look like? I mean, such a fascinating. It's a very fascinating folks who from both the UX background and human factors are looking at these aspects and these exact questions. But I'll definitely say it's not just how it sounds, the choice of words, the tone, not just, I mean, the voice identity of it, but the tone matters, the speed matters, how you speak, how you enunciate words, how, what choice of words are you using? How does or you are how lending in your explanations you are? All of these are factors. And you also, you mentioned something crucial that it's may have personalized it, Alexa, to a some extent, in your homes or in the devices you are interacting with. So you as your individual, how you prefer Alexa sounds can be different than how I prefer. And the amount of custom is ability you want to give is also a key debate we always have. But I do want to point out it's more than the voice actor that recorded and it sounds like that actor. It is more about the choices of words, the attributes of tonality, the volume in terms of how you raise your pitch and so forth, all of that matters. This is such a fascinating problem from a product perspective. I could see those debates just happening inside of the Alexa team of how much personalization do you do for the specific customer? Because you're taking a risk if you over-personalize. Because if you create a personality for a million people, you can test that better. You can create a rich, fulfilling experience that will do well. But if the more you personalize it, the less you can test it, the less you can know that it's a great experience. So how much personalization, what's the right balance? I think the right balance depends on the customer. Give them the control. So I'll say, I think the more control you give customers, the better it is for everyone. And I'll give you some key personalization features. I think we have a feature called Remember This, which is where you can tell Alexa to remember something. There you have an explicit sort of control in customer's hand because they have to say Alexa, remember XYZ. What kind of things would that be used for? So you can like you or something. I have stored my tire specs for my car because it's so hard to go and find and see what it is when you're having some issues. I store my mileage plan, numbers for all the frequent flyer ones where I'm sometimes just looking at it and it's not handy. So those are my own personal choices I've made for Alexa to remember something on my behalf. So again, I think the choice was be explicit about how you provide that to a customer as a control. So I think these are the aspects of what you do like think about where we can use speaker recognition capabilities that it's if you taught Alexa that you are Lex and this person in your household is person two, then you can personalize the experiences. Again, these are very in the CX customer experience patterns are very clear about and transparent when a personalization action is happening. And then you have other ways like you go through explicit control right now through your app that your multiple service providers let's say for music. Which one is your preferred one? So when you say play sting, depend on your whether you have preferred Spotify or Amazon music or Apple music that the decision is made where to play it from. So what's Alexa's backstory from her perspective? Is there a? I remember just asking as probably a lot of us are just the basic questions about love and so on. Of Alexa just to see what the answer would be just as I it feels like there's a little bit of a back like there's a feels like there's a little bit of personality but not too much is Alexa have a metaphysical presence in this human. Universal living or is this something more ambiguous? Is there a past? Is there a birth? Is there a family kind of idea even for joking purposes and so on? I think well it does tell you if I think you actually double check this but if you said when were you born I think we do respond. I need to double check that but I'm pretty positive about it. I think you do it because I think I've tested that. But that's like that's like how like I was born in your brand of champagne and whatever the year. Good thing. Yeah. So on terms of the metaphysical I think it's early. Does it have the historic knowledge about herself to be able to do that? Maybe have we crossed that boundary not yet? Right in terms of being thank you. Have we thought about it quite a bit but I wouldn't say that we have come to a clear decision in terms of what it should look like but you can imagine though and I bring this back to the Alexa price social about one there you will start seeing some of that like you these bots have their identity and in terms of that you may find you know this is such a great research topic that some academia team may think of these problems and start solving them too. So let me ask a question it's kind of difficult I think but it feels infastening to me because I'm fascinated with psychology. It feels that the more personality you have the more dangerous it is in terms of a customer perspective of product if you want to create a product that's useful day by dangerous I mean creating an experience that upsets me. And so what how do you get that right because if you look at the relationships maybe I'm just a screwed up Russian but if you look at the human to human relations of some of our deepest relationships have fights have tension have the push and pull have a little flavor in them. Do you want to have such flavor in an interaction with Alexa how do you think about that. So there's one other common thing that you didn't say but as we think of it as paramount for any deep relationship that's trust trust. So I think if you trust every attribute you said a fight some tension is all healthy but the what is sort of unnegotiable in this instance is trust. And I think the bar to earn customer trust for AI is very high in some sense more than a human it's it's not just about personal information or your data it's also about your actions on a daily basis how trustworthy are you in terms of consistency in terms of how accurate are you in understanding me like if you're talking to a person on the phone if you have a problem with your let's say your internet or something if the person is not understanding you lose trust right away you don't want to talk to that person that whole example gets amplified by a factor of 10 because when you're a human interacting with an AI you have a certain expectation either you expect it to be very intelligent and then you get upset why is it behaving this way or you expect it to be not so intelligent and when it surprises you are like really you're trying to be too smart so I think we grapple with these hard questions as well but I think the key is actions need to be trustworthy from these AI's not just about data protection your personal information protection but also from how accurately it accomplishes all commands or all interactions. Well it's tough to hear because trust yeah absolutely right but trust is such a high bar with AI systems because people and I see this because I mean the bar this place on AI system is unreasonably high. Yeah that is going to be as I agree with you and I think of it as it's a challenge and it's also keeps my job right so from that perspective that I totally I think of it at both sides as a customer and as a researcher I think as a researcher yes occasionally it will frustrate me that why is the bar so high for these AI's and as a customer then I say absolutely it has to be that high right so I think that's the trade-off we have to balance but doesn't change the fundamentals that trust has to be owned and the question then becomes is are we holding the AI's to a different bar in accuracy and mistakes than we hold humans that's going to be a great societal questions for years to come I think for us. Well one of the questions that we grapple as a society now that I think about a lot I think a lot of people in the AI think about a lot and Alexis taking on head on as privacy is the reality is us giving over data to any AI system can be used to enrich our lives in in in profound ways so if it may be basically any product that does anything awesome for you would the more data has the more awesome things it can do and yet on the other side people imagine the worst case possible scenario of what can you possibly do with that data people it's go buzz down the trust as you said before there's a fundamental distrust of in certain groups of governments and so on depending on the government depending on who's in power depending on all these kinds of factors and so here's Alex in the middle of all of it in the home trying to do good things for the customers so how do you think about privacy in this context the smart assistance in the home how do you maintain how do you earn trust absolutely so as you said trust is the key here so you start with trust and then privacy is a key aspect of it it has to be designed from very big name about that and we believe in two fundamental principles one is transparency and second is control so if by transparency I mean when we build what is now called smart speaker or the first echo we were quite judicious about making these right trade-offs on customers behalf that it is pretty clear when when the audio is being sent to cloud the light ring comes on when it has heard you say the word wake word and then the streaming happens right so in the light ring comes up we also had we put a physical mute button on it just so you're if you didn't want it to be listening even for the wake word then you turn the power button on the mute button on and that disables the microphones that's just the first decision on essentially transparency and control over then even when we launched we gave the control in the hands of the customers that you can go and look at any of your individual utterances that is recorded and delete them anytime and we have cut to true to that promise right so and that is super again a great instance of showing how you have the control then we made it even easier you can say Alexa delete what I said today so that is now making it even just just more control in your hands with what's most convenient about this technology is voice you delete it with your voice now so these are the types of decisions we continually make we just recently launched this feature called what we think of it as if you wanted humans not to review your data because you mentioned supervised learning right so you in supervised learning humans have to give some annotation and that also is now a feature where you can essentially if you've selected that flag your data will not be reviewed by a human so these are the types of controls that we have to constantly offer with customers so why do you think about this people so much that so everything you just said is really powerful so the control the ability to leak because we collect we have studies here running at MIT the collects huge amounts of data and people consent and so on the ability to delete that data is really empowering and almost nobody ever has to delete it but the ability to have that control is really powerful but still you know there's these popular anecdotes anecdotal evidence that people say they like to tell that them and a friend were talking about something I don't know sweaters for cats and all of a sudden they'll have advertisements for cat sweaters on Amazon there's that that's a popular anecdote as if something is always listening what can you explain that anecdote that experience that people have what's the psychology of that what's that experience and can you you've answered it but let me just ask is Alexa listening no Alexa listens only for the wake word on the device right and the wake word is the words like Alexa Amazon echo and you but you only choose one at a time so you choose one and it listens only for that on our devices so that's first from a listening perspective we have to be very clear that it's just the wake word so you said why is there this anxiety if you make it's because there's a lot of confusion what it really listens to right and and I think it's partly on us to keep educating our customers and the general media more in terms of like how what really happens and we've done a lot of it and we are pages on information are clear but still people have to have more there's always a hunger for information and clarity and we'll constantly look at how best to communicate if you go back and read everything yes it states exactly that and then people could still question it and I think that's absolutely okay to question what we have to make sure is that we are because our fundamental philosophy is customer first customer obsession is our leadership principle if you put as researchers I put myself in the shoes of the customer and all decisions in Amazon are made with that and and trust has to be earned and we have to keep earning the trust of our customers in this setting and to your other point unlike is there something showing up based on your conversations no I think the answer is like you a lot of times when those experiences happen you have to also be know that okay it may be a winter season people are looking for sweaters right and it shows up on your amazon.com because it is popular so there are many of these you mentioned that personality or personalization turns out we are not that unique either right so those things we as humans start thinking oh must be because something was heard and that's why this other thing showed up the answer is no probably it is just the season for sweaters I'm not going to ask you this question because it's just because you're also because people have so much paranoia but for my let me just say from my perspective I hope there's a day when customer can ask Alexa to listen all the time to improve the experience to improve because I personally don't see the negative because if you have the control and if you have the trust there's no reason why shouldn't be listening all the time to the conversations to learn more about you because ultimately as long as you have control and trust every data you provide to the device that the device wants is going to be useful and so to me as a machine learning person I think it worries me how sensitive people are about their data relative to how empowering it could be for the devices around them enriching it could be for their own life to improve the product so I just it's something I think about sort of a lot how to make that device is obviously Alexa thinks about a lot as well I don't know if you want to comment on that sort of have you seen let me ask it in a form of a question okay have you seen evolution in the way people think about their private data in the previous several years so as we as a society get more and more comfortable to the benefits we get by sharing more data first let me answer that part and then I'll want to go back to the other aspect you were mentioning so as a society on a general we are getting more comfortable as a society doesn't mean that everyone is and I think we have to respect that I don't think one size fits all is always going to be the answer for all right by definition so I think that's something to keep in mind in these going back to your on what more magical experiences can be launched in these kind of AI settings I think again if you give the control we it's possible certain parts of it so we have a feature called follow up mode where you if you turn it on and Alexa after you've spoken to it will open the mics again thinking you will answer something again like if you're adding a list to your shopping items right or a shopping list or to do list you're not done you want to keep so in that setting it's awesome that it opens the mic for you to say eggs and milk and then bread right so these are the kind of things which you can empower so I and then another feature we have which is called Alexa guard I said it only listens for the way could all right but if you have a let's say you're going to say Lex you leave your home and you want Alexa to listen for couple of sound events like smoke alarm going off or someone breaking your glass right so it's like just to keep your peace of mind so you can say Alexa on guard or or I'm away or and then it can be listening for these sound events and when you're home it you come out of that mode right so this is another one where you again gave controls in the hands of the user or the customer and to enable some experience that is you high utility and maybe even more delightful in the certain settings like follow up more and so forth and again this general principle is the same control in the hands of the customer. So I know we kind of started with a lot of philosophy and a lot of interesting topics and we're just jumping our lower the place but really some of the fascinating things that the Alexa team and Amazon is doing is in the the algorithm side the data side the technology the deep learning machine learning and so on so can you give a brief history of Alexa from the perspective of just innovation the algorithm is the data of how how is born how came to be how is grown worried us today. Yeah it's talked with the in Amazon everything starts with the customer and we have a process called working backwards Alexa and more specifically than the product echo there was a working backwards document essentially that reflected what it would be started with a very simple vision statement for instance that morphed into a full-fledged document along the way it changed into what all it can do right you can but the inspiration was the start for a computer so when you think of it that way you know everything is possible but when you launch a product you have to start with some place and when I joined we the product was already in conception and we started working on the far field speech recognition because that was the first thing to solve by that we mean that you should be able to speak to the device from a distance and in those days that wasn't a common practice and even in the previous research world I was in was considered to a unsolvable problem then in terms of whether you can converse from a length and here I'm still talking about the first part of the problem where you say get the attention of the device as in by saying what we call the wake word which means the word Alexa has to be detected with a very high accuracy because it is a very common word it has sound units that map with words like I like you or Alec Alex right so it's a undoubtedly hard problem to detect the right mentions of Alexa's address to the device versus I like Alexa so you have to pick up that signal when there's a lot of noise not only noise but a lot of conversation in the house right you remember on the device you're simply listening for the wake word Alexa and there's a lot of words being spoken in the house how do you know it's Alexa and directed at Alexa because I could say I love my Alexa I hate my Alexa I want Alexa to do this and in all these three sentences I said Alexa I didn't want it to wake up yeah so can I just pause on that second what would be your device that I should probably in the introduction of this conversation give to people in terms of with them turning off their Alexa device if they're listening to this podcast conversation out loud like what's the probability that an Alexa device will go off because we mentioned Alexa like a million times so it will we have done a lot of different things where we can figure out that there is the device the speech is coming from a human versus over the air also I mean in terms of like also it is think about ads or so we also launch the technology for watermarking kind of approaches on terms of filtering it out but yes if this kind of a podcast is happening it's possible your device will wake up a few times it's a non-solve problem but it is definitely something we care very much about but that is you want to detect Alexa meant for the device so the device first of all just even hearing Alexa versus I like yeah something I mean that's a fascinating part so that was the first relief that's the first the worst best detector of Alexa yeah the first words best wake word detector yeah in a far field setting not like something where the phone is sitting on the table this is like people have devices 40 feet away like in my house or 20 feet away and you still get an answer so that was the first part the next is okay you're speaking to the device of course you're gonna issue many different requests some may be simple some may be extremely hard but it's a large vocabulary speech recognition problem essentially where the audio is now not coming onto your phone or a handle mic like this or a close talking mic but it's from 20 feet away where if you're in a busy household your son may be listening to music your daughter may be running around with something and asking your mom something and so forth right so this is like a common household setting where the words you're speaking to Alexa need to be recognized with very high accuracy right now we're still just in the recognition problem we haven't yet come to the understanding one right and if it's a big problem so I once again what year was this is this before neural networks began to start to seriously prove themselves in audio space yeah this is around so I joined in 2013 in April right so the early research and neural networks coming back and showing some promising results and speech recognition space had started happening but it was very early but we just now build on that on the very first thing we did when I joined and we the team and remember it was a very much of a startup environment which is great about Amazon and we doubled on deep learning right away and we knew we'll have to improve accuracy fast and because of that we worked on and the scale of data once you have a device like this if it is successful will improve big time like you'll suddenly have large volumes of data to learn from to make the customer experience better so how do you scale deep learning so we did our one of the first works in in training with distributed GPUs and where the training time was you know was linear in terms of like in the amount of data so that was quite important work where it was algorithmic improvements as well as lot of engineering improvements to be able to train on thousands and thousands of of speech and that was an important factor so if you asked me like in back in 2013 and 2014 when we launched Echo the combination of large scale data deep learning progress near infinite GPUs we had available on AWS even then was all came together for us to be able to solve the far field speech recognition to the extent it could be useful to the customers it's still not solved like I mean it's not that we are perfect at recognizing speech but we agreed at it in terms of the settings that are in homes right so and that was important even in the early stages so first I'll just even I'm trying to look back at that time if I remember correctly it was it seems like the task will be pretty daunting so like so we kind of take it for granted that it works now yes so right so let me like how first of you mentioned startup I wasn't familiar how big the team was I kind of because I know there's a lot of really smart people working out so now it's very very large team how big was the team how likely were you to fail in the highs of everyone else and ourselves in yourself so like what I'll give you a very interesting anecdote on that when I joined the team the speech recognition team was six people my first meeting and we had a high of a few more people it was ten people nine out of ten people thought it can't be done right who was the one the one was me say and actually I should say and one was say my optimistic yeah and the and eight were trying to convince let's go to the management and say let's not work on this problem let's work on some other problem like either telephony speech for customer service calls and so forth but this is the kind of belief you must have and I had experience with far field speech recognition and I my eyes lit up when I saw a problem like that saying okay we have been in speech recognition always looking for that killer app yeah and this was a killer use case to bring something delightful in the hands of customers you mentioned you do a kind of think of it in the product way in the future have a press release and FAQ and you think backwards that's right did you have the the team have the echo in mind so this far field speech recognition actually putting a thing in the home that works the tabletern to record was that the press release was the way close I would say in terms of the as I said the vision was started computer right right or the inspiration and from there I can't divulge all the exact specifications but one of the first things that was magical on Alexa was music it brought me to back to music because my taste is still in when I was in undergrad right so I still listen to those songs and I it was too hard for me to be a music fan with a phone right so I and I don't I hate things in my career so from that perspective it was quite hard and music was part of the at least the documents I have seen right so from that perspective I think yes in terms of how far are we from the original vision I can't reveal that but that's why I have done a fun at work because every day we go in and thinking like these are the new set of challenges to solve as a great way to create engineering as you think of the product the press release I like that idea actually maybe we'll talk about it a bit later was just a super nice way to have a focus I'll tell you this you're a scientist and a lot of my scientists have adopted that they they have now they love it as a process because it was very as scientists you're trained to write great papers but they are all after you've done the research or you've proven like and your PhD dissertation proposal is something that comes closest or a DARPA proposal or a NSF proposal is the closest that comes to a press release but that process is now ingrained in our scientists which is like delightful for me to see you write the paper first and then make it happen that's right I mean fact that's not steady out results or you leave the result section open but you have a thesis about here's what I expect right and here's what would you change right so I think it is a great thing it works for researchers as well so far field recognition yeah what was the big leap what what what what were the breakthroughs and yeah what was that journey like today yeah I think the as you said first there was lot of skepticism on whether far field speech recognition will ever work to be good enough right and what we first did was got a lot of training data in a far field setting and that was extremely hard to get because none of it existed so how do you collect data in far field set up right with no customer base that's no customer base right so that was first innovation and once we had that the next thing was okay you if you have the data first of all we didn't talk about like what would magical mean in this kind of a setting what is good enough for customers right that's always since you've never done this before what would be magical so it wasn't just a research problem you had to put some in terms of accuracy and customer experience features some stakes on the ground saying here's where I think should it should get to so you established a bar and then how do you measure progress to where it's given you have no customer right now so from that perspective we went so first was the data without customers second was doubling down on deep learning as a way to learn and I can just tell you that the combination of the two got our error rates by a factor of five from where we were when I started to within six months of having that data we at that point I got the conviction that this will work right so because that was magical in terms of when it started working and that reached the match that came close to the magical bar back to the bar right that we felt would be where people will use it which was critical because you you're you're really a one chance at this if we had launched in November 2014 is when we launched if it was below the bar I don't think this category exists if you don't meet the bar yeah and I just having looked at voice-based interactions like in the car earlier systems it's a source of huge frustration for people in fact we use voice-based interaction for collecting data on subjects to measure frustration so as the trainings had for computer vision for face data so we can get a data set of frustrated people that's the best way to get frustrated people is having them interact with the voice-based system in the car. So so that bar I imagine is pretty high. It was very high and we talked about how also errors are perceived from AI's versus errors by humans but we are not done with the problems that ended up we had to solve to get it to launch so do you want the next one? Yeah so the next one was what I think of as multi-domain natural language understanding it's very I wouldn't say easy but it is during those days it solving it understanding in one domain a narrow domain was doable but for these multiple domains like music like information other kinds of household productivity alarms timers even though it wasn't as big as it is in terms of the number of skills Alexa has and the Confucian space has like grown by three orders of magnitude it was still daunting even those days and again no customer base yet again no customer base so now you're looking at meaning understanding and intent understanding and taking actions on behalf of customers based on their requests and that is the next hard problem even if you have gotten the words recognized how do you make sense of them in those days there was still a lot of emphasis on rule-based systems for writing grammar patterns to understand the intent but we had a statistical first approach even then where for a language understanding we had in even those starting days and an entity recognized and an intent classifier which was all trained statistically in fact we had to build the deterministic matching as a follow up to fix bugs that statistical models have right so it was just a different mindset where we focused on data driven statistical understanding wins in the end if you have a huge day set yes it is contingent on that and that's why it came back to how do you get the data before customers the fact that this is why data becomes crucial to get to the point that you have the understanding system built in built up and notice that for you we were talking about human machine dialogue even those early days even it was very much transactional do one thing one shot at turns is in great way there was a lot of debate on how much should Alexa talk back in terms of if you misunderstood you or you said play songs by the stones and let's say it doesn't know you know early days knowledge can be sparse who are the stones right I the rolling stones right so are and you don't want the match to be stone temple pilots or rolling stones right so you don't know which one it is so these kind of other signals to now there we had great assets right from Amazon in terms of UX like what is it what kind of yeah how do you solve that problem in terms of what we think of it as an entity resolution problem right so oh I just one is it right I mean the even if you figured out the stones is an entity yeah you have to resolve it to whether it's the stones or the temple pilots or some other stones maybe I misunderstood is the resolution the job of the algorithm or is the job of UX communicating with the human to help the resolution well there is both right it is large you want 90% or high 90s to be done without any further questioning or UX right so but that it's absolutely okay just like as humans we ask the question I didn't understand your legs it's fine for Alexa to occasion is here I did not understand you right and and that's an important way to learn and I'll talk about where we have come with more self learning with these kind of feedback signals but in those days just solving the ability of understanding the intent and resolving to an action where action could be play a particular artist or a particular song was super hot again to the bar was high as you as we're talking about right so while we launched it in sort of 13 big domains I would say in terms of or I think we think of it as 13 the big skills we had like music is a massive one when we launched it and now we have 90,000 plus skills on Alexa so what are the big skills can you just go over the only thing I use it for is music weather and shopping so we think of it as music information right so it's a whether it's a part of information right so when we launch we didn't have smart home but within this by spot on my mean you connect your smart devices you control them with voice if you haven't done it it's worth it will change your life and so yeah turning on your light to do anything that's connected and has a it's just what's your favorite smart device for you light and now you have this smart plug with and you don't we also have this echo plug which is oh yeah you can plug it in and now you can turn on that one on and off I use this conversation motivation and get one garage door you can check your status of the garage door and things like and we have gone make Alexa more and more proactive where it even have a hunt has hunches now that or looks hunches like you left your light on or let's say you've gone to your bed and you left the garage light on so it's so it will help you out in these settings right so that smart devices right information smart devices said music yeah so I don't remember everything we had a lot of the big ones were the big ones like that was you know the timers were very popular right away music also like you could play song artists album everything and so that was like a clear win in terms of the customer experience so that's again this is language understanding now things have evolved right so where we want Alexa definitely to be more accurate competent trustworthy based on how well it does these core things but we have evolved in many different dimensions first is what I think of it doing more conversational for high utility not just for chat right and there we at re-mars this year which is our AI conference we launch what is called Alexa conversations that is providing the ability for developers to author multi-turn experiences on Alexa with no code essentially where in terms of the good dialogue code initially it was like you know all these IVR systems you have to fully author if the customer says this do that right so the whole dialogue flow is hand author and with Alexa conversations the way it is that you just provide a sample interaction data with your service or API let's say your atom tickets that provides a service for buying movie tickets you provide a few examples of how your customers will interact with your APIs and then the dialogue flow is automatically constructed using a recurrent neural network a train on that data so that simplifies the proper experience we just launched our preview for the developers to try this capability out and then the second part of it which shows it even increased utility for customers is you and I when we interact with Alexa or any customer as I coming back to our initial part of the conversation the goal is often unclear or unknown to the AI if I say Alexa what movies are playing nearby am I trying to just buy movie tickets am I actually even do you think I'm looking for just movies for curiosity whether the Avengers is still in theater or when is it maybe it's gone and maybe it will come on my mr. so I may watch it on prime which happened to me so from that perspective now you're looking into what is my goal and let's say I now complete the movie ticket purchase maybe I would like to get dinner nearby so what is really the goal here is it night out or is it movies as in just go watch a movie the answer is we don't know so can Alexa now figure we have the intelligence that I think this meta goal is really night out or at least say to the customer when you've completed the purchase of movie tickets from Adam tickets or Fandango or pick your anyone then the next thing is do you want to get to get a Uber to the theater right or do you want to book a restaurant next to it and and then not ask the same one formation over and over again what time what how many people in your party right so this is where you shift the cognitive burden from the customer to the AI where it's thinking the of what is your it anticipates your goal and takes the next best action to complete it now that's the machine learning problem but essentially you're the way we saw this first instance and we have a long way to go to make it scale to everything possible in the world but at least for this situation it is from at every instance Alexa is making the determination whether it should stick with the experience with Adam tickets or offer or you based on what you say whether either you have completed the interaction or you said no get me an Uber now so it will shift context into another experience or scale on another service so that's a dynamic decision making that's making Alexa you can say more conversational for the benefit of the customer rather than simply complete transactions which are well thought through you have you as a customer has fully specified what you want to be accomplished it's accomplishing that so it's kind of as we do this with pedestrians like intent modeling is predicting what your possible goals are most likely go and switching that depending on the things you say so my question is there it seems maybe it's a dumb question but it would help a lot of Alexa remembered me what I said previously right is it is it's trying to use some memories for the customer is using a lot of memory within that so right now not so much in terms of okay which restaurant you prefer right that is a more long term memory but within the short term memory within the session it is remembering how many people did you so if you said buy four tickets now it has made an implicit assumption that you are going to have you need four at least four seats at a restaurant right so these are the kind of context it's preserving between these skills but within that session but you're asking the right question in terms of for it to be more and more useful it has to have more long term memory and that's also an open question and again this is still early days so it's for me I mean everybody's different but yeah I'm definitely not representative of the general population in the sense that I do the same thing every day like I eat the same I do I do everything the same the same thing where the same thing clearly this or the black shirt so it's frustrating when Alexa doesn't get what I'm saying because I have to correct her every time in exact same way this has to do with certain songs like she doesn't know certain weird songs are like and doesn't know I've complained to Spotify about this talk to the R.D. had of R.D. Spotify's stairway to heaven I have to correct it every time it doesn't play let's have a correct it plays cover of let's of stairway to heaven so you should figure you should send me your next time it fails this is free to send it to me will take care of it okay well you know what let's upload is one of my favorite rather works for me so like shocked it doesn't work for you this is an official report I'll put I'll put it I'll make it public and we'll get re-tweet it we're going to fix the stairway to heaven anyway but the point is you know I'm pretty boring and do the same thing but I'm sure most people do the same set of things do you see Alexa sort of utilizing that in the future for improving experience yes and not only utilizing it's already doing some of it we call it more where Alexa is becoming more self-learning so Alexa is now auto processing millions and millions of utterances in US without any human supervision involved the way it does it is let's take an example of a particular song didn't work for you what do you do next you either it played the wrong song and you said Alexa no that's not the song I want or you say Alexa play that you tried again and that is a signal to Alexa that she may have done and from that perspective we can learn if there's that failure pattern or that action of song A was played when song B was requested yes and it's very common with station names because play NPR you can have NB confused as an M and then you for a certain accent like mine people confuse my NNM all the time and because I will in an accent they're confusedable to humans it is for Alexa too and in that part but it starts auto correcting and we collect we correct a lot of these automatically without a human looking at the failures so the one of the things that's for me missing in Alexa I don't know from a representative customer but every time I correct it it would be nice to know that that made a difference yes you know I mean like the sort of like I heard you like some acknowledgement of that we work a lot with with Tesla we study the autopilot and so on and a large amount of the customers they use Tesla autopilot they feel like they're always teaching the system they're almost excited by the possibility of the teaching I don't know Alexa customers generally think of it as they're teaching to improve the system and that's a really powerful thing against I would say it's a spectrum some customers do think that way and some would be annoyed by Alexa acknowledging that or so there's a again no one you know while there are certain patterns not everyone is the same in this way but we believe that again customers helping Alexa is a talent for us in terms of improving it and more self-learning is by again this is like fully unsupervised right there is no human in the loop and no labeling happening and based on your actions as a customer Alexa becomes smarter again it's early days but I think this whole area of teachable AI is gonna get bigger and bigger in the whole space especially in the AI assistant space so that's the second part where I mentioned more conversational this is more self-learning the third is more natural and the way I think of more natural is we talked about how Alexa sounds and there are and we have done a lot of advances in our text to speech by using a new network technology for it to sound very human like and the individual texture of the sound to the the the timing the tunnel and the tone everything I would think in terms of there's lot of controls in each of the places for how I mean the speed of the voice the prosthetic patterns the the actual smoothness of how it sounds all of those are factored and we do ton of listening tests to make sure is that but natural is how it sounds should be very natural how it understands requests is also very important like and in terms of like we have 95,000 skills and if we have imagine that and many of these skills you have to remember the skill lane and say Alexa ask the tied skill to tell me X right or now if you have to remove the skill lane that means the discovery and the interaction is unnatural and we are trying to solve that by what we think of as again this was you don't have to have the app metaphor here these are not individual apps right even though there so you you're not sort of opening one at a time and interacting so it should be seamless because it's voice and when it's voice you have to be able to understand these requests independent of the specificity like a skill lane and to do that what we have done is again built a deep learning base capability where we shot list a bunch of skills when you say Alexa get me a car and then we figure it out okay it means meant for an Uber skill versus a left or based on your preferences and then you can rank the responses from the skill and then choose the best response for the customer so that's on the more natural other examples of more natural is like we were talking about lists for instance and you want to you don't want to say Alexa add milk Alexa add eggs Alexa add cookies no Alexa add cookies milk and eggs and that in one shot right so that works that helps with the nationalists we talked about memory like if you said you can say Alexa remember I have to go to mom's house or you may have entered a calendar event through your calendar that's linked to Alexa you don't remember whether it's in my calendar or did I tell you to remember something or some other reminder right so you have to now independent of how customers create these events it should just say Alexa when do you have to go to mom's house and it tells you when you have to go to mom's house that's the fascinating problem who's that problem on so there's people create skills who's who's tasked with integrating all that knowledge together so the skills become seamless is it the creators of the skills so or system is an infrastructure that Alexa provides problem it's both I think the large problem in terms of making sure your skill quality is high we that has to be done by our tools because it's just so these skills just to put the context they're built through Alexa skills gift which is a self serve way of building an experience on Alexa this is like any developer in the world could go to Alexa skills kit and build an experience on Alexa like if you're a dominoes you can build a domino skills for instance that does pizza ordering when you have authored that you do want to now if people say Alexa open dominoes Alexa ask dominoes dominoes to get particular type of pizza that will work but discovery is hard you can't just say Alexa get me a pizza and then Alexa figures out what to do that latter part is definitely our responsibility in terms of when the request is not fully specific how do you figure out what's the best skill or a service that can fulfill the customers request and it can keep evolving imagine going to the situation I said which was the night out planning that the goal could be more than individual request that came up a pizza ordering could mean a night time yeah where you're having an event with your kids in their house and you're so this is welcome to the world of conversation lay out this is this is super exciting because it's not the academic problem of NLP of natural English processing understanding dialogue this is like real world this takes a high innocence that customers get frustrated quickly people get frustrated quickly so you have to get it right if to get that interaction right so it's I love it but so from that perspective what what are the challenges today what what are the problems that really need to be solved in the years I think first and foremost as I mentioned that get the basics right are still true basically even the one shot requests which we think of as trans action requests needs to work magically no question about that if it doesn't turn your light on and off you'll be super frustrated even if I can complete the night out for you and not do that that is unacceptable for as a customer right so that you have to get the foundational understanding going very well the second aspect when I said more conversational is as you imagine is more about reasoning it is really about figuring out what the latent goal is of the customer based on what I have the information now and the history what's the next best thing to do so that's a complete reasoning and decision making problem just like yourself driving car but the goal is still more finite here it evolves your environment is super hard and self-reviewing and the cost of a mistake is huge here but there are certain similarities but if you think about how many decisions Alexa is making or evaluating at any given time it's a huge hypothesis space and we're only talked about so far about what I think of reactive decision in terms of you asked for something and Alexa is reacting to it if you bring the proactive part which is Alexa having hunches so any given instance then you're it's really a decision at any given point based on the information Alexa has to determine what's the best thing it needs to do so these are the ultimate AI problem decisions based on the information you have do you think just from my perspective I work a lot with sensing of the human face do you think they'll and we touched this topic a little bit earlier but do you think it'll be a day soon when Alexa can also look at you to help improve the quality of the hunch it has or at least detect frustration or detects you know improve the quality of its perception of what you're trying to do I mean let me bring back to what it already does we talked about how based on you bargin over Alexa clearly it's a very high probability it must have done something wrong that's why you watched it the next extension of whether frustration is a signal or not of course is a natural thought in terms of how that should be in a signal to you can get that from voice you can get from voice but it's very hard like I mean frustration as a signal historically if you think about emotions of different kinds you know there's a whole field of affective computing something that MIT has also done a lot of research and is super hard and you're now talking about a far-field device as when you're talking to a distance noisy environment and in that environment it needs to have a good sense for your emotions this is a very very hard problem but you haven't shadow away from hard problems so well you know so deep learning has been at the core of a lot of this technology are you optimistic about the current deep learning approaches the solving the hardest aspects of what we're talking about or do you think they will come a time where new ideas need to you know if you look at reasoning so open AI deep mind a lot of folks are now starting to work in reasoning trying to see how it can make neural networks reason do you see that new approaches need to be invented to take the next big leap absolutely I think there has to be a lot more investment and I think in many different ways and there are these I would say nuggets of research forming in a good way like learning with less data or like zero short learning one short learning and the active learning stuff you've talked about is yes is the incredible so transfer learning is also super critical especially when you're thinking about applying knowledge from one task to another or one language to another right it's really ripe so these are great pieces deep learning has been useful to and now we're sort of marrying deep learning with with transfer learning an active learning of course that's more straightforward in terms of applying deep learning and an active learning setup but but I do think in terms of now looking into more reasoning based approaches is going to be key for our next wave of the technology but there is a good news the good news is that I think for keeping on to delight customers that lot of it can be done by prediction tasks so and so we haven't exhausted that so yeah so it's we don't need to give up on the deep learning approaches for that so that's just I wanted to sort of creating a rich fulfilling amazing experience that makes Amazon a lot of money and a lot of everybody a lot of money because it does awesome things deep learning is enough the point the point I don't think no I mean I wouldn't say deep learning is enough I think for the purposes of Alexa accomplish the task for customers I'm saying there's still a lot of things we can do with prediction based approaches that do not reason right I'm not saying that and we haven't exhausted those but for the kind of high utility experiences that I'm personally passionate about of what Alexa needs to do reasoning has to be solved to the to the same extent as you can think of natural language understanding and speech recognition to the extent of understanding intense has been how accurate it has become but reasoning we have very very early days the mess the another way how hard of a problem do you think that is hardest of them I would say hardest of them because again the hypothesis space of is really really large and when you go back in time like you were saying I want to I want Alexa to remember more things that once you go beyond a session of interaction which is by session I mean a time span which is today two verses remembering which restaurant I like and then when I'm planning a night out to say do you want to go to the same restaurant now you're up the stakes big time and and this is where the reasoning dimension also goes way way bigger so you think the space be elaborate in that a little bit just philosophically speaking do you think when you reason about trying to model what the goal of a person is in the context of interacting with Alexa you think that space is huge it's huge absolutely you think so like another sort of devil's advocate would be that we human beings are really simple and we all want like just a small set of things and so you think you think it's possible because we're not talking about a fulfilling general conversation perhaps actually the Alexa prize is a little bit too much after that creating a customer like there's so many of the interactions it feels like are clustered in groups that are don't require general reasoning I think yeah you're right in terms of the head of the distribution of all the possible things customers may want to accomplish the tail is long and it's diverse right so from many many long tales very many so from that perspective I think you have to solve that problem otherwise and everyone's very different like I mean we see this already in terms of the skills right I mean if you if you're an avid surfer which I am not right but somebody is asking Alexa about surfing conditions right and there's a skill that is there for them to get to right that tells you that the tail is massive like in terms of like what kind of skills people have created it's humongous in terms of it and which means there are these diverse needs and and when you start looking at the combinations of these right even if you're at pairs of skills and 90,000 choose to it's still a big kind of combination you're going so I'm saying there's a huge to do here now and I think customers are you know wonderfully frustrated with things and then to keep getting to do better things for them and they're not known to be super patients so you have to do it fast you have to do it fast so you've mentioned the idea of a press release the research and development Amazon Alexa and Amazon General you kind of think of what the future product will look like and you kind of make it happen you work backwards so can you draft for me you probably already have one but can you make up one for 10 20 30 40 years out that you see the Alexa team putting out just in broad strokes something that you dream about I think let's start with the five years first right so and I'll get to the 40 years to so I'm pretty sure you have a real fat you're going to say it when I yeah in broad strokes let's start with I think the five years is where I mean I think of in these spaces it's hard especially if you're in pick of things to think beyond the five years space because a lot of things change right I mean if you ask me five years back will Alexa will be here I wouldn't have I think it has surpassed my imagination of that time right so I think it then from the next five years perspective from a AI perspective what we're going to see is that notion which you said goal-oriented dialogues and open domain like Alexa price I think that bridge is going to get closed they won't be different and I'll give you why that's the case you mentioned shopping how do you shop do you shop in in one shot sure your double A batteries paper towels yes how long does it take for you to buy a camera you do ton of research yeah then you make a decision so is there is that a goal-oriented dialogue when Alexa somebody says Alexa find me a camera is it simply inclusiveness right so even in the something that you think of it as shopping which you said you yourself use a lot of if you go beyond where it's a reorder or items where you sort of are not brand conscious and so forth yeah that was just in shop yeah I've just to come and quickly I've never bought anything through Alexa they haven't bought before Amazon on the desktop after I clicked in a bunch of red a bunch of reviews that kind of stuff so it's repurchase so now you think in even for something that you felt like is is a finite goal I think the space is huge because even products the attributes are many like and you want to look at reviews some on Amazon some outside some you want to look at what scene it is saying or another consumer forum is saying about even a product for instance right so that's just a just just shopping where you could you could argue the ultimate goal is sort of known and we haven't talked about Alexa what's the weather and Cape Cod this weekend right so why am I asking that weather question right so I think I think of it as how do you complete goals with minimum steps for our customers right and when you think of it that way the distinction between goal oriented and conversations for open domain say goes away I may want to know what happened in the presidential debate right and is it I'm seeking just information on I'm looking at who's winning winning the debates right so these are all quite hard problems so even the five-year horizon problem I'm like I sure hope we'll solve these in you your your optimistic because that's the hard problem which part the the reasoning you know enough to be able to help explore complex goals that are beyond something simplistic that feels like it could be well five years is a nice is a nice bar for yeah right I think you will it's a like a nice ambition and do we have press releases for that absolutely can I tell you what specifically the roadmap will be no right and what and will we solve all of it in the five-year space now this is will be will work on this forever actually if we this is the hardest of the I problems and I don't see of that being solved even in a 40-year horizon because even if you limit to the human intelligence we know we are quite far from that in fact every aspects of our sensing to neural processing to how brain stores information and how it processes we don't yet know how to represent knowledge right so we are in still in those are early stages so I wanted to start that's why at the five year yeah because the five-year success would look like that and solving these complex goals and the 40-year would be where it's just natural to talk to these in terms of more of these complex goals right now we've already come to the point where these transactions you mentioned of asking for weather or reordering something or listening to your favorite tune it's natural for you to ask you Alex it's it's now unnatural to pick up your phone right and that I think is the first five-year transformation the next five-year transformation would be okay I can plan my weekend with Alexa or I can plan my next meal with Alexa or my next night out with seamless effort so just to pause and look back at the big picture of it all it's a year-apart of a large team that's creating a system that's in the home that's not human that gets to interact with human beings so we human beings we these descendants of Apes have created an artificial intelligence system that's able to have conversations I mean that that to me the two most transformative robots of this century I think will be autonomous vehicles but they're a little bit transformative in a more boring way it's like a tool I think conversational agents in the home is like an experience how does that make you feel the you're at the center of creating that is it's you do you sit back in awe sometimes what what is your what is your feeling about the whole mess of it can you even believe that we're able to create something like this I think it's a privilege I'm so fortunate like where where I ended up right and it's been a long journey like I've been in the space for a long time in Cambridge right and it's it's so heartwarming to see the kind of adoption conversational agents are having now five years back it was almost like should I move out of this because we are unable to find the scalar application that customers would love that would not simply be good to have thing in research labs and it's so fulfilling to see it make a difference to millions and billions of people worldwide the good thing is that still very early so I have another 20 years of job security doing what I love like so I think from that perspective I feel I tell every researcher there's that joins or every member of my team this is a unique privilege like I think and we have and I would say not just launching Alexa in 2014 which was first of it kind along the way we have when we launch Alexa Skillskated became became democratizing AI when before that there was no good evidence of an SDK for speech and language now we are coming to this where you and I having this conversation where I'm not saying oh Lex planning a night out with an AI agent impossible I'm saying it's in the realm of possibility and not only possibly we'll be launching this right so some elements of that every it will keep getting better we know that is a universal truth once you have these kind of agents out there being used they get better for your customers and I think that's where I think the amount of research topics we are throwing out at our budding researchers is just going to be exponentially hard and the great thing is you can now get immense satisfaction by having customers use it not just a paper and new reps or another conference. I think everyone myself included deeply excited about that feature so I don't think there's a better place to and Rohit thank you so much. Thank you so much. Thank you same here. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Rohit Prasad and thank you to our presenting sponsor Cash App. Download it use code Lex Podcast you'll get $10 and $10 will go to first a STEM education nonprofit and it's buyers hundreds of thousands of young minds to learn and to dream of engineering our future. If you enjoy this podcast subscribe by YouTube give it five stars and apple podcast support it on Patreon or connect with me on Twitter and now let me leave you with some words of wisdom from the great Alan Turing. Sometimes it is the people no one can imagine anything of who do the things no one can imagine. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.