The following is a conversation with Sarah Walker, an astrobiologist and theoretical physicist at Arizona State University and the Santa Fe Institute. She is interested in the origin of life, how to find life on other worlds, and in general the more fundamental question of what even life is. She seeks to discover the universal laws that describe living systems on Earth and elsewhere, using physics, biology, and computation. Look mentioned of our sponsors, athletic greens, net suite, blinkest, and magic spoon. Check them out in the description to support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that my hope for this podcast is to try and alternate between technical and non-technical discussions. To jump from the big picture down to specific detail research and back to the big picture, and to do so with scientists and non-scientists. In terms of cutting edge research and AI physics, biology, and history, and then back to AI. I hope you come along with me for that wild, oscillating journey. Some people message me saying to slow down since they are falling behind on the episodes of this podcast. To their disappointment, I have to say that I will probably do more episodes, not less, but you really don't need to listen to every episode. Just listen to the ones that spark your curiosity. Think about it like a party full of strangers. You don't have to talk to everyone. Just walk over to the ones who look interesting and get to know them. And if you're lucky, that one conversation with a stranger might change the direction of your life. And it's the short life, so be picky with the strangers you talk to at this metaphorical party. This is the Lex Friedman podcast, and here is my conversation with Sarah Walker. How did life originate on Earth? What are the various hypotheses for how life originated on Earth? Yeah, so I guess you're asking a historical question, which is always a good place to start thinking about life. So there's a lot of ideas about how life started on Earth. Probably the most popular is what's called the RNA World scenario. So this idea is probably the one that you'll see most reported in the news. And it is based on the idea that there are molecules in our bodies that relay genetic information. We know those as DNA, obviously, but there's also sort of an intermediary called RNA, ribonoclake acid, that also plays the role of proteins. And people came up with this idea in the 80s that maybe that was the first genetic material because it could play both roles of being genetic and performing catalysis. And then somehow that idea got reduced to this idea that there was a molecule that emerged on early Earth and underwent Darwinian evolution, and that was the start of life. So there's a lot of assumptions packed in there that we could unpack, but that's sort of the leading hypothesis. There's also other ideas about life starting as metabolism. And so that's more connected to the geochemistry of early Earth. And it would be kind of more focused on this idea that you get some kind of catalytic cycle of molecules that can reproduce themselves and form some kind of metabolism. And then life starts basically as self-organization. And then you have to explain how evolution comes later. Right. So that's the difference between sort of energy and genetic code. So like energy and information are those of the two kind of... Yeah. Yeah, I think that's a good way of putting it. It's kind of funny because I think most of the people that think about these things are really disciplinary bias. So the people that tend to think about genetics come from a biology background and they're really evolution focused. And so they're worried about where does the information come from and how does it change over time, but they're talking about information in a really narrow way where they're talking about a genetic sequence. And then most of the people that think about metabolism, origins of life scenarios tend to be people like physicists or geochemists that are worried about what are the energy sources and what kinds of organization can you get out of those energy sources? Okay. So which one is your favorite? I don't like either. Okay. Can we talk about them for a little bit longer though? Yeah, that's right. So okay. So there's early Earth. Was there just mostly covered by oceans? Was there heat sources? Energy sources, so if we talk about the metabolism view of the origin of life, like where was the source of energy? Probably the most popular view for where the original life happened on Earth is hydrothermal vents because they had sufficient energy. And so we don't really know a lot about early Earth. We have some ideas about when oceans first forms and things like that, but the time of the origin of life is kind of not well understood or pinned down and the conditions on Earth at that time are not well known. But a lot of people do think that there was probably hydrothermal vents, which are really hot, chemically active regions say on the sea floor in modern times, which also would have been present on early Earth. And they would have provided energy and organics and basically all of the right conditions for the origins of life, which is one of the reasons that we look for these hydrothermal systems when we're talking about life elsewhere too. Okay. And for the genetic code, the idea is that the RNA is the first, like, why would RNA be the first moment you can say its life? I guess the idea is it could both have persistent information and then it can also do some of the work of like what, creating a self-sustaining organism? Yeah, that's the basic idea. So the idea is you have in an RNA molecule, you have a sequence of character size. You can treat it like a string in a computer and it can be copied. So information can be propagated, which is important for evolution because evolution happens by having inheritance of information. So example, you know, like my eyes are brown because my mother's eyes were browned. So you need that copying of information. But then you also have the ability to perform catalysis, which means that that RNA molecule is not a nut in that environment, but it actually interacts with something that could potentially mediate, say, a metabolism that could then fuel the actual reproduction of that molecule. So in some ways, people think that RNA gives you, you know, the most bang for your buck in a single molecule and therefore, you know, it gives you all the features that you might think are life. And so this is sort of where this RNA world conjecture came from is because of those two properties. Isn't it amazing that RNA came to be in general? Isn't it? Yes, that is amazing. Okay, so we're not talking down about RNA. No, no, I love RNA. It's one of my favorite molecules. It's not. It's just not step one. Yeah, I think I think the issue, it's not even the RNA world is a problem. And actually, if you really dig into it, the RNA world is not one hypothesis. It is a set of hypothesis. And they range from a molecule of RNA spontaneously emerged on the early earth and started evolving, which is kind of like the hardest RNA world scenario, which is the one I cited and I get a little animated about because it seems so blatantly wrong to me, but that's a separate story. And then the other one is actually something I agree with, which is that you can say there was an RNA world because RNA was the first genetic material for life on earth. So an RNA world could just be the earliest organisms that had genetics in a modern sense, didn't have DNA evolved yet. They had RNA. Right? And so that's sort of a softer RNA world scenario in the sense that it doesn't mean it was the first thing that happened, but it was a thing that definitely was part of the lineage of events that led to us. So if life was like a best of album, it would be on the, it would be one of the songs on there. Yes. It's on the greatest hits. Greatest hits. That's the word I was looking for. Okay. Did life, do you think, originate once, twice, three times on earth, multiple times? What do you think? I think that's a really difficult question. Is it an important question? Is it a super important question? No, that's no, it's a really important question. And so there's some, so there's, there's a lot of questions in that question. So one of the first ones that I think needs to be addressed is, is the original life a continuous process on our planet. So we think about the original life as something that happened on earth, say almost four billion years ago, because we have evidence of life emerging very early on our planet. And then an original life event, quote, unquote, a singular event, whatever that was happened. And then all life on earth that we know is a descendant of that particular event in our universe, right? And so, but we don't have any idea one way or the other if the original life is happening repeatedly. And maybe it's just not taking off because life is already established. That's a argument that people will make. Or maybe there are alternative forms of life on earth that we don't even recognize. So this is the idea of a shadow bias here that there actually might just be completely other life on earth. But it's so alien that we don't even know what it is. I'm going to have to talk to you about the shadow bias here. Yeah, that's one one. In a second, but first, let me ask for the other alternative, which is pan spermia. Right. So that's the idea that hypothesis that life exists elsewhere in the universe and got to us through like an asteroid, our planetoid, or some, according to Wikipedia, space dust, whatever the heck that is. It sounds fun. But basically wrote along, yeah, whatever kind of rock and got to us. Do you think that's at all a possibility? Sure. So I think the reason that most original life science tests are interested in the original life on earth and say not the original life on Mars and then pan spermia, the exchange of life between planets being the explanation is once you start removing the original life from earth, you know, even less about it than you do if you study it on earth. Although I think there are ways of reformulating the problems. This is why I said earlier, like, oh, you mean the historical original life problem? You don't mean the problem of how does life arise in the universe and what the universal principles are because there's this historic problem. How did it happen on early earth? And there's a more tractable general problem of how does it happen? And how does it happen? Is something we can actually ask in the lab. How did it, how did it happen on early earth is a much more detailed and nuanced question and requires detailed knowledge of what was happening on early earth that we don't have. And I'm personally more interested in general mechanisms. So to me, it doesn't matter if it happened on earth or it happened on Mars. It just matters that it happened. We have evidence that happened. The question is, did it happen more than once in our universe? And so the reason I don't find pan spermia as a particularly, I think it's a fascinating hypothesis. I definitely think it's possible. And I am particularly think it's possible once you get to the stage of life where you have technology because then you obviously can spread out into the cosmos. But it's also possible for microbes because we know that certain microorganisms can survive the journey in space. And we, they can live in a rock and go between Mars and earth. People have done experiments to try to prove that could work. So in that scenario, it's super cool because then you get planetary exchange. And say we go find, we go look for life on Mars and it ends up being exactly the same life we have on earth biochemically speaking. Then we haven't really discovered something new about the universe. What kind of aliens are possible? Were there other original life events? If we find, if all the life we ever find is the same original life event in the universe, it doesn't help me solve my problem. But it's possible that that would be a sign that you could separate the environment from the basic ingredients. Yes. That's true. You shoot throughout the universe. And then once you shoot it, I think the Simpsons with the makeup gun, that was a great episode. When you shoot this life gun, it'll find the earths, it'll get sticky. It'll stick to the earth. And that kind of reduces the barrier of the time it takes, the luck it takes to actually from nothing, from the basic chemistry, from the basic physics of the universe, for the life to spring up. Yeah, I think this is actually super important. Just think about, like, does life getting seated on a planet have to be geochemically compatible with that planet? So you're suggesting we could just shoot guns in space. And life could go to Mars and then it would just live there and be happy there. But that's actually an open question. So one of the things I was going to say in response to your question about whether the original life happened once or multiple times is for me personally right now, in my thinking all this changes on a weekly basis. But is that I think of life more as a planetary phenomena? So I think the original life, because life is so intimately tied to planetary cycles and planetary processes, and this goes all the way back through the history of our planet, that the original life itself grew out of geochemistry and became coupled and controlled geochemistry. And when we start to talk about life existing on the planet is when we have evidence of life actually influencing properties of the planet. And so if life is a planetary property, then going to Mars is not a trivial thing because you basically have to make Mars more Earth-like. And so in some sense, like when I think about sort of long-term vision of humans in space, for example, really what you're talking about when you're saying, let's send our civilization to Mars, is you're not saying let's send our civilization to Mars, you're saying, let's reproduce our planet on Mars. Like the information from our planet actually has to go to Mars and make Mars more Earth-like, which means that you're now having a reproduction process, like a cell reproduces itself to propagate information in the future. Planets have to figure out how to reproduce their conditions, including geochemical conditions on other planets in order to actually reproduce life in the universe, which is kind of a little bit radical, but I think for long-term sustainability of life on a planet that's absolutely essential. Okay, so if we were to think about life as a planetary phenomena, and so life on Mars would be best if it's way different than life on Earth, we have to ask the very basic question of what is life. I actually don't think that's the right question to ask. It took me a long time to get there, right? And cross it out. Yeah, cross it off your list, it's wrong. Next question. No, no, no, I mean, I think it has an answer, but I think the part of the problem is, most of the places in science where we get really stuck is because we don't know what questions to ask. And so you can't answer a question if you're asking the wrong question. And I think the way I think about it is obviously I'm interested in what life is. So I'm being a little cheeky when I say that's the wrong question to ask. That's exactly the question that's like the core of my existence. But I think the way of framing that is what is it about our universe that allows features that we associate life to be there? And so really what I guess when I'm asking that question, when I'm after is an explanatory framework for what life is, right? And so most people, they try to go in and define life and they say, well, life is say a self-reproducing chemical system capable of Darwinian evolution. That's a very popular definition for life. Or life is something that metabolizes and eats. That is not how I think about life. What I think about life is there are principles and laws that govern our universe that we don't understand yet that have something to do with how information interacts with the physical world. I don't know exactly what I mean even when I say that because we don't know these rules. But it's a little bit like I like to use analogies if you give me time to be like a little long-winded for a second even in SI. But sort of like if you look at the history of physics for example, this is like so. We are in the period of the development of thought on our planet where we don't understand what we are yet, right? There was a period of thought in the history of our planet where we didn't understand what gravity was. And we didn't understand for example planets in the heavens, you know, we're actually planets or that they operated by the same laws that we did. And so there has been the sort of progression of getting a deeper understanding of explaining basic phenomena like I'm not going to drop the cup. I'll drop the water bottle. There you go. Okay that fell, right? But why did that fall? This is why I'm a theorist not experienced. I could have gone wrong in so many ways. Oh my god I'm especially afraid that the confidence smashed. So if you think take this view that there's some missing principles, I associate them to information and what the sort of feeling there is there's some missing explanatory framework for how our universe works. And if we understood that physics, it would explain what we are. It might also explain a lot of other features we don't associate to life. And so it's a little like people accept the fact that gravity is a universal phenomena. But when we want to study gravity, we study things like large scale, you know, galactic structures or black holes or planets. If we want to understand information and how it operates in the physical world, we study intelligent systems or living systems because they are the manifestation of that physics. And the fact that we can't see that clearly yet or we don't have that explanatory framework, I think it's just because we haven't been thinking about the problem deeply enough. But I feel like if you're explaining something, you're deriving it from some more fundamental property. And of course, I have to say I'm wearing my physicist hat. So I have a huge bias of liking simple, elegant explanations of the universe that, you know, really are compelling. But I think one of the things that I've sort of maybe in some ways rejected my training as a physicist is that most of the elegant explanations that we have so far don't include us in the universe. And I can't help but think there's something really special about what we are and there have to be some deep principles that play there. And so that's sort of my perspective on it. Now, when you ask me what life is, I have some ideas of what I think it is. But I think that we haven't gotten there yet because we haven't been able to see that structure. And just to go back to the gravity example, it's a little like, you know, in ancient times they didn't know I was talking about stars and heavens and things. They didn't know those were, you know, governed by the same principles as that darned experiment. Here's where I was going with it. Once you realize, like Newton did, that, you know, heavenly motions and earthly motions are governed by the same principles and you unified to rational and celestial motion. You get these more powerful ideas. And I think where life is is somehow unifying these abstract ideas of computation and information with the physical world with matter. And realizing that there's some explanatory framework that's not physics and it's not computation. But it's something that's deeper. So answering the question of what is life requires deeply understanding something about the universe as information processing the universe's computation. Sort of. Something about like, would once you come up with an answer to what is life, will the words information and computation be in the paragraph? No, I don't think so. Oh, dammit. Okay. I know. It doesn't help. Does it? I know. I hate actually, I hate this about what I do because it's so hard to communicate, right? With words, like when you have words that are ideas that have historically described one thing and you're trying to describe something, people haven't seen yet. Right. And the words just don't fit. So what what's wrong? Is it too ambiguous the word information? We could switch to binary if you want. Yeah, no, I don't think it's binary either. I think information is just loaded. I use it. So the other way I might talk about it is the physics of causation. But I think that's worse because causation is even more loaded than information. So causation is fundamental, you think? I do. Yeah. And in some sense, I think the physics, so this is a really radical part. Sometimes like when I really think about it sort of most deeply, what I think life is is actually the physics of existence. What gets to exist and why? And you know, for simple elementary particles, that's not very complicated because the interactions are simple, but for things like, you know, you and me and human civilizations, you know, what comes next in the universe is really dependent on what came before. And there's a huge space of possibilities of things that can exist. And when I say information and causation, what I mean is, why is it that cups evolved in the universe and not some other object that could deliver water and not spill it? I don't know what you would call it. Maybe it wouldn't be a cup, but it's a huge, it's um, you know, people talk about the space of things that could exist as being actually infinitely large, I don't know if I believe in infinity, but I do think that there is something very interesting about the problem of what exists in its relationship to life. So do you think this, the set of things that could exist this finite? It's very large. But like if we were to think about the physics of existence, like how many shapes of mugs can there be? Like it is an initial programming. I should go to the math department for that, but that's not a topology question. I just mean maybe another way to ask is what do you think is fundamental to the universe and what is emergent? So if existence, I was supposed to think of that as somehow fundamental, you think? And so there's a couple of problems in physics that I think this is related to. One is why does mathematics work at describing reality so well? And then there is this problem of we don't understand why the laws of physics are the way they are or why certain things get to exist or what put in place the initial condition of our universe, right? There's all of these sort of really deep and big problems and they all indirectly are related, I think, to the same kind of thing that, you know, our physics is really good if you specify the initial condition at specifying a certain sequence of events, but it doesn't deal with the fact that other things could have happened, which is kind of an informational property, like a counterfactual property. And it's not good at explaining this conversation right now. There are certain things that are outside the explanatory reach of current physics and I think they require looking at it from a completely different direction. And so I don't want to have to find to the initial condition of the universe to specify precisely all the information in this conversation. I think that's a ridiculous assertion, but that's sort of like how people want to frame it when they're talk about, you know, the standard model is sufficient if we had computing power to basically explain all of life in our existence. An interesting thing you said is the way we think about information and computation is by observing a particular kind of systems on Earth that exhibit something we think of as intelligence, but that's like looking at, I guess, the tip of an iceberg and we should be really looking at the fundamentals of like the iceberg, like what makes water and ice and the chemistry that from which intelligence emerges essentially. Yes, yes. We can't just couple the information from the physics and I think that's what we've gotten really good at doing, especially with sort of the modern age where software is so abstracted from hardware. But the entire process of biological evolution has basically been building layers of increasing abstraction. And so it's really hard to see that physics in us, but it's much clearer to see it in molecules. Yeah, but I guess I'm trying to figure out what do you think are the best tools to look at it? What do you think? An open mind? Is that a tool? What's the physics of an open mind? I think if we solve that, we'll solve everything. I'm saying an open mind because I think the biggest stumbling block to understanding sort of the things I've been trying to articulate or and when I talk also with colleagues that are thinking deeply about these same issues is none of it is inconsistent with what we know. It's just such a radically different perception of the way we understand things now that it's hard for people to get there. And in some ways, you have to almost forget what you've learned in order to learn something new, right? So I feel like most of my career trying to understand the problem of life has been variously forgetting and then relearning things that I learned in physics. And I think you have to have a capacity to learn things, but then accept that things that you learned might not be true or might need refinement or reframing. And the best way I can say that is just like with a physics education, there are just certain things you're told and undergrad that are like facts about the world. And your physics professors never tell you that those facts actually emerge from a human mind, right? So we're taught to think about say the laws of physics, for example, as this like autonomous thing that exists outside of our universe and tells our universe how it works. But the laws of physics were invented by human minds to describe things that are regularities in our everyday experience. They don't exist autonomous to the universe. All right, so it's like turtles on top of turtles, but eventually it gets the human mind and then you have to explain the human mind with the turtles. Yes. So you have to, yeah, it comes from humans, right? This understanding, this simplification of the universe, these models. There's a guy named Stephen Wolfram. There's a concept called cellular automata. So there's there's some mysteries in these systems that are computational nature that have maybe echoes of the kind of mysteries we should need to solve to understand what is life. So if we could talk, take a computational view of things, do you think there's something compelling to reducing everything down to computation like the universe's computation and then trying to understand life. So throw away the biology, throw away the chemistry, throw away even the physics that you you learn on a grad and graduate school and a more look at these simple little systems, whether it's cellular automata or whatever the heck kind of computational systems that operate on simple local rules and then create complexity as they evolve. Is it at all, do you think productive to focus on those kinds of systems to get an inkling of what is life? And if it is, do you think it's possible to come up with some kind of laws and principles about what makes life in those computational systems? So I like cellular automata. I think they're good toy models. But mostly where I've thought about them and used them is to actually, let's say, poke at sort of the current conceptual framework that we have and see where the flaws are. So I think the part that you're talking about that people find intriguing is that if you have a fairly simple rule and you specify some initial condition and you run that rule and that initial condition, you can get really complex patterns emerging. And ooh, doesn't that look like like? Yeah. Well, it's like really surprising. It is really surprising and they're beautiful. And I think they have a lot of nice features associated to them. I think the things that I find, yeah. So I do think as a proof of principle that you can get complex things emerging from simple rules, they're great. As a sort of proof of principle about some of the ways that we might think of computation as being sort of a fundamental principle for dynamical systems and maybe the evolution of the universe as a whole, they're a great model system. As an explanatory framework for life, I think they're a bit problematic for the same reason that the laws of physics are a bit problematic. And the clearest way I can articulate that is like cellular automata are actually cast in sort of a conceptual framework for how the universe should be described that goes all the way back to Newton in fact with this idea that we can have a fixed law of motion which exists sort of it's given to you. You know, the great programmer in the sky gave you this equation or this rule and then you just run with it. And the rule doesn't have so a good feature of the rule is it doesn't have specified in the rule information about the patterns it generates. So you wouldn't want, for example, the my cup or my water bottle or you know me sitting here to be specified in the laws of physics that would be ridiculous because it wouldn't be a very simple explanation of all the things happening. It'd have to explain everything. So and cellular automata have that feature and the laws of physics have that feature. But you know, you also need to specify the initial condition. And it also it basically means that everything that happens is sort of a consequence of that initial condition. And I think this kind of framework is just not the right one for biology. And part of the way that it's easiest to see this is a lot of people talk about self-reference being important in life. The fact that you know like the genome has information encoded in it. That information gets read out. It specifies something about the architecture of a cell. The architecture of the cell includes the genome. So the genome has basically self-referential information. Self-reference obviously comes up in computational law because it's kind of foundational to Turing's work and what Gertl did with the incompleteness theorems and things. So there's a lot of parallels there and people have talked about that at depth. But the other way of kind of thinking about it in terms of like a more physicsy way of talking about it is that what it looks like in biology is that the rules or the laws depend on the state. This is typical computer science. This is obvious to you. You know, the update rule depends on the state of the machine, right? But you know, you don't think about that being sort of the dynamic in physics, it's the rules given to you and then it's a very special subclass say of computations if you don't ever change the update. But in biology, it seems to be that the state and the law change together as a function of time. And we don't have that as a paradigm in physics. And so a lot of people talk about this as being kind of a perplexing feature that maybe there are certain scenarios where the laws of physics or the laws that govern a particular system actually change as a function of the state of that system. That's trippy. Yeah. So the hope of physics, it's a hope I guess, but often stated as a underlying assumption is that the law is static. Right. Okay. And even having laws that vary in time, not even as a function of the state is very radical when you the time in general. Like yeah, you want to remove time from the equation, as much as possible. Yeah. I do. There's some interesting things in this like when we think it's sort of deep more deeply about the actual physics that we're trying to propose governs life with me with collaborators and then also other people that think about similar things that time might actually be fundamental and there really is an ordering to time. And that events in the universe are unique because they have a particular, you know, they they happen like an object in the universe requires a certain history of events in order to exist, which therefore suggests that time really does have an ordering. I'm not talking about the flow of time in our perception of time, just the ordering of events. Causing of things. Yes. Causing there's that word again. So causation, that's which when you say time, you mean causation. Yes. In your proposed model of the physics of life, the fundamental thing would be causation. If you were to bet your money on one particular horse or whatever. Yes. And then space is emergent. Yes. So everything is emergent except time. Kind of. Yeah. Or causation. And law has changed all the time. Why does it look like laws? Laws, laws, well, because well, one way and I actually this idea comes from Lee Cronin because I work with him very closely on these things is that the laws of physics look the way they do because they're low memory laws. So they don't require a lot of information to specify them. They're very easy for the universe to implement. But if you get something like me, for example, I require four billion year history to exist in the universe. I come with a lot of historical baggage. And that's part of what I am as a set of causes that exist in the universe. So I have local rules that apply to me that are associated with sort of the information of my history that aren't universal to every object in the universe. And there are some things that are very easily easy to implement low memory rules that apply to everything in the universe. So there's no shortcuts to you? No. So yeah, I don't believe in things like Boltzmann Brains or you know, fluctuations out of the vacuum that can produce things like your desk ornaments. I actually think they require a particular causal chain of events to exist. Well, I appreciate the togetherness of that. But so how does that, if we have to simulate the entire universe to create the ornaments and the two of us, how are we supposed to create engineer life? Yeah, that's a web. This goes back to sort of the critique of the RNA world. I think one of the problems, and I'll get to answering your question, but I think this is kind of relevant here. One of the problems of the RNA world when we test it in the laboratory is how much information we're putting into the experiment. We specify the flasks, we make pure reagents, we mix them, we take them out, we put them in the next flask, we change the pH, we change the UV light, and then we get a molecule. And it's not even an RNA molecule necessarily. It might just be a base. So people don't usually think about the fact that we're agents in the universe making that experiment, and therefore we put a little bit of life into that experiment, because it's part of our biological lineage, in the same sense that I am a part of the biological lineage. The same exact idea is our injecting life to the experience. And the constraints that we put on the experiments, because those conditions wouldn't exist in the universe on planet Earth at that time without us as the boundary condition. Even though we're not actually adding any actual chemistry or biology that could be identified as life, are the constraints we're adding to the experiment, the design of the experiment? Yeah, you can think of the design experiment as a program, you put information in. It's an algorithmic procedure that you design the experiment. And so the origin of life problem becomes one of minimizing the information we put into physics to actually watch the spontaneous origin of life. Can we have, so is it possible in a lab to have an information vacuum then? So like, if we could, we would, that would be amazing. I don't know. That's a good question for more for Lee. Yeah, you guys, by the way, for people who don't know Lee Cronin, is you guys are colleagues. Yeah. And I've gotten a chance to listen to the two of you talking. There's great sort of chemistry and your brilliant brainstorming together. And there's a really exciting community here of brilliant people from different disciplines working on the problem of life, of complexity of, I don't know, whatever the words fail us to describe the exact problem we're trying to actually understand here. Intelligence, all those kinds of things. Okay, so what, from a lab perspective, so Lee, I guess, would you call him a chemist? No. I think by training he's a chemist, but I think most of the people that work in the field, we do have lost their discipline. I can't answer your question. I don't know what you call. I don't know what I call myself. I don't know what I call any of my friends. So why is it so hard to create, and it's an interesting question to create biological life in the lab. Like from your perspective, is that an important problem to work on, to try to recreate the historical origin of life on earth, or echoes of the historical origin? I think echoes is more appropriate. I don't think asking the question of what was the exact historical sequence of events and engineering every step in the process to make exactly the chemistry of life on earth as we know it is a meaningful way of asking the question. And it's a little bit like, you know, since you're in computer science, like if you know the answer to a problem, it's easier to find a program to specify the output, right? But if you don't know the answer of a priori, you know, finding an algorithm for like, say, finding a prime or something, it's easy to, you know, verify it's a prime number, it's hard to find the next prime. And the way the original life is structured right now and the historical problem is you know the answer and you're trying to retroject it by breaking it down into the set of procedures where you're putting a lot of information in. And what we need to do is ask the question of how is it that the rules of how our universe is structured permit things like life to exist and what is the phenomena of life? And those questions are obviously essentially the same question. And so you're looking essentially for this missing physics, this missing explanation for what we are. And you need to set up proper experiments that are going to allow you to probe the vast complexity of chemistry in an unconstrained way with as little information put in as possible to see when things, when does information actually emerge? How does it emerge? What is it? And part of the sort of conjecture we have is that this physics only becomes relevant or at least this is my personal conjecture and it's sort of validated by this kind of theory experiment collaboration that we have working in this area. That this, you know, sort of I mean I made the point about like gravity existing everywhere, right? But when you study an atomic nucleus, you don't care about gravity, it's not relevant physics there, right? It's weak, it doesn't matter. And so this idea that there's kind of a physics associated with information, for me, it's very evident that that physics doesn't become relevant until you need information to specify the existence of a particular object. And the scale of reality where that happens is in chemistry because of the common tutorial diversity of chemical objects that can exist far outseed the amount of resources in our universe. So if you want to, you can't make every possible protein of length, you know, 200 amino acids, it's not enough resources. So in order for this particular protein to exist and this protein to exist in high abundance means that you have to have a system that has knowledge of the existence of that protein and can build it. So existence comes to be at the chemical level. So existence is most is best understood at the chemical level. It's most evident. It's a little bit like nobody argues that gravity doesn't exist in an atomic nucleus. It's just not relevant physics there, right? So the physics of information is everywhere. It exists at every common tutorial scale, but it becomes more and more relevant, the more set of possibilities that could exist because you're you have to specify more and more about why this thing exists and not the infinite, it's not you know, the set of undefined set of other things that could exist. So can you ask a weird question, which is, so let's look into the future. Try that every day, it never works. So say a Nobel Prize is given in physics, maybe chemistry, for discovering the origin of life. No, but not the historical origin. Some kind of thing that we're talking about. What exactly would what do you think that like what did you think that person maybe you did to get that Nobel Prize? Like what would they have to have done? Because you could do a bunch of experiments that go like within a ha moment. Like you rarely get the Nobel Prize or for like you've solved everything. We're done. Right. It's like some inkling of some deep truth. Right. Like what do you think that would actually look like? Would it be an experimental result? I mean, it will have to have some kind of experimental maybe validation component. So what would that look like? This is an excellent question. I want to, sorry, I'm going to make a quick point, which is just a slight tangent. But you know, like when people ask about the origin of mass, you know, and like looking for the Higgs mechanism and things, they never are like, we need to find the historical origins of life in the early, you know, although those things are related, right? So, so this problem of origins of life in the lab, I think is really important. But the Higgs is a good example because you had theory to guide it. So somehow you need to have an explanatory framework that can say that we should be looking for these features and explain why they might be there and then be able to do the experiment and demonstrate that it matches with the theory. But it has to be something that is outside sort of the paradigm of what we might expect based on what we know, right? So this is a really sort of tall order. And I think, I mean, I guess the way people would think about it is like, you know, if you had a bacteria that climbed out of your test tube or something and it was like, you know, moving around on the surface, that would be ultimate validation. You saw the original life in an experiment. But I don't think that's quite what we're looking for. I think what we're looking for is evidence of when information that originated within the balance of your experiment and you can demonstratably prove emerged spontaneously in your experiment wasn't put in by you actually started to govern the future dynamics of that system and specify it. And you could somehow relate those two features directly. So you know that the program specifying what's happening in that system is actually internal to that system. Like say you have a chemical thing in a box. Well, so that's that's one no-but prize when the experiment, which is like information in some fundamental way originated within the constraints of the system without you injecting anything. But another experiment is you injected something and got out information. Yes. So like you injected, I don't know, like some sugar and like something that doesn't necessarily feel like it should be information. Yeah. So actually, no, I mean sugar is information, right? So part of the argument here is that every physical object is, well, it's information, but it's a set of causal histories and also a set of possible futures. So there is an experiment that I've talked a lot about with Lecronin but also with Michael Lachman and Chris Kempese who are at Santa Fe about this idea that sometimes we talk about as like seeding assembly, which is you take a high high complexity like an object that exists in the universe because of a long causal history and you seed it into a system of lower causal history. And then suddenly you see all of this complexity being generated. So I think another validation of the physics would be say you engineer an organism by by purposefully introducing something where you understand the relationship between the causal history of the organism and this.
