 The following is a conversation with Ayanna Howard. She's a roboticist, professor Georgia Tech, and director of the Human Automation Systems Lab. With research interests in human robot interaction, assist in robots in the home, therapy gaming apps, and remote robotic exploration of extreme environments. Like me, in her work, she cares a lot about both robots and human beings, and so I really enjoyed this conversation. This is the Artificial Intelligence Podcast. If you enjoy it, subscribe on YouTube, give it 5 stars and apple podcasts, follow on Spotify, support it on Patreon, or simply connect with me on Twitter, a Lex Friedman spelled F-R-I-D-M-A-N. I recently started doing ads at the end of the introduction. I'll do one or two minutes after introducing the episode and never any ads in the middle that can break the flow of the conversation. I hope that works for you and doesn't hurt the listening experience. This show is presented by CashApp. The number one finance app in the App Store. I personally use CashApp to send money to friends, but you can also use it to buy, sell, and deposit Bitcoin in just seconds. CashApp also has a new investing feature. You can buy fractions of a stock, say $1 or worth no matter what the stock price is. Broker services are provided by CashApp investing, a subsidiary of Square and Member SIPC. I'm excited to be working with CashApp to support one of my favorite organizations called First. Best known for their first robotics and legal competitions. They educate and inspire hundreds of thousands of students in over 110 countries and have a perfect rating and charity navigator, which means that donated money is used to maximum effectiveness. When you get CashApp from the App Store, Google Play, and use code Lex Podcast, you'll get $10 and CashApp will also do an $8.10 to First, which again is an organization that I've personally seen inspire, girls and boys, the dream of engineering a better world. And now here's my conversation with Ayanna Howard. What are who is the most amazing robot you've ever met? Or perhaps the biggest impact on your career? I haven't met her, but I grew up with her, but of course Rosie. So, and I think it's because also Rosie from the Jetsons. She is all things to all people, right? Think about it. Like anything you want it, it was like magic. It happened. So people not only anthropomorphized, but project whatever they wish for the robot to be onto. On to Rosie. But also, I mean, think about it. She was socially engaging. She every so often had an attitude, right? She kept us honest. She would push back sometimes when, you know, George was doing some weird stuff. But she cared about people, especially the kids. She was like the perfect robot. And you've said that people don't want the robots to be perfect. Can you elaborate that? What do you think that is? Just like you said, Rosie pushed back a little bit every once in a while. Yeah. So I think it's that, so if you think about robotics in general, we want them because they enhance our quality of life. And usually that's linked to something that's functional, right? Even if you think of self-driving cars, why is there a fascination? Because people really do hate to drive. Like there's the Saturday driving where I can just speed. But then there was the, I have to go to work every day and I'm in traffic for an hour. I mean, people really hate that. And so robots are designed to basically enhance our ability to increase our quality of life. And so the perfection comes from this aspect of interaction. If I think about how we drive, if we drove perfectly, we would never get anywhere, right? So think about how many times you had to run past the light because you see the car behind you is about to crash into you. Or that little kid kind of runs into the street. And so you have to cross on the other side because there's no cars, right? Like if you think about it, we are not perfect drivers. Some of it is because it's our world. And so if you have a robot that is perfect in that sense of the word, they wouldn't really be able to function with us. Can you linger a little bit on the word perfection? So from the robotics perspective, what does that word mean and how is sort of the optimal behavior as you're describing different than what we think is perfection? Yeah, so perfection, if you think about it in the more theoretical point of view, it's really tied to accuracy, right? So if I have a function, can I complete it at 100% accuracy with zero errors? And so that's kind of, if you think about perfection, in the sense of the word. And in a self-driving car, where do you think from a robotics perspective, we kind of think that perfection means following the rules perfectly, sort of defining, staying in the lane, changing lanes. When there's a green light, you go, when there's a red light, you stop. That's the, and be able to perfectly see all the entities in the scene. That's the limit of what we think of as perfection. And I think that's where the problem comes is that when people think about perfection for robotics, the ones that are the most successful are the ones that are, quote, unquote, perfect, like I said, Rosie is perfect, but she actually wasn't perfect in terms of accuracy, but she was perfect in terms of how she interacted and how she adapted. And I think that's some of the disconnect is that we really want perfection with respect to its ability to adapt to us. We don't really want perfection with respect to 100% accuracy with respect to the rules that we just made up anyway. And so I think there's this disconnect sometimes between what we really want and what happens. And we see this all the time, like in my research, right? Like the, the optimal, quote unquote, optimal interactions are when the robot is adapting based on the person, not 100% following what's optimal based on the rules. Just a link around autonomous vehicles for a second. Just your thoughts, maybe off the top of head. How hard is that problem? Do you think based on what we just talked about? You know, there's a lot of folks in the automotive industry. They're very confident from Elon Musk to Waymo to all these companies. How hard is it to solve that last piece? The last mile. The gap between the perfection and the human definition of how you actually function in this world. Yeah, so this is a moving target. So I remember when all the big companies started to heavily invest in this. And there was a number of even roboticists as well as, you know, folks who were putting in the VCs and corporations Elon Musk being one of them that said, you know, self-driving cars on the road with people, you know, within five years. That was a little while ago. And now people are saying, five years, ten years, twenty years, some are saying never. I think if you look at some of the things that are being successful is these basically fixed environments where you still have some anomalies, you still have people walking, you still have stores, but you don't have other drivers, like other human drivers, or is it dedicated space for the cars? Because if you think about robotics in general, whereas always been successful is I mean, you can say manufacturing like way back in the day, right? It was a fixed environment. Humans were not part of the equation. We're a lot better than that. But like when we can carve out scenarios that are closer to that space, then I think that it's where we are. So a close campus where you don't have self-driving cars and maybe some protection so that the students don't get in front just because they want to see what happens. Like having a little bit, I think that's where we're going to see the most success in the near future. And be slow moving. Right. Not, not, you know, 55, 60, 70 miles an hour, but the speed of a golf cart, right? So that said, the most successful in the automotive industry robots operating today in the hands of real people are ones that are traveling over 55 miles an hour and in Ancestrains of Ironmatch, which is Tesla vehicles, so Tesla autopilot. So I just, I would love to hear sort of your just thoughts of two things. So one, I don't know if you've gotten to see you've heard about something called smart summon. Where Tesla system autopilot system where the car drives zero occupancy, no driver in the parking lot slowly sort of tries to navigate the parking lot to find itself to you. And there's some incredible amounts of videos and just hilarity that happens as it awkwardly tries to navigate this environment, but it's, it's a beautiful, not verbal communication between machine and human that I think is a from, it's like it's some of the work that you do in this kind of interesting human robot interaction space. So what are your thoughts in general about it? So I do have that feature. These are Tesla. I do. Mainly because I'm a gadget freak, right? So I say it's a gadget that happens to have some wheels. And yeah, I've seen some of the videos. Well, what's your experience like? I mean, you're, you're a human robot interaction robot assist your legit sort of expert in the field. So what does it feel for a machine to come to you? It's one of these very fascinating things, but also I am hyper hyper alert, right? Like, I'm hyper alert. Like my, but my thumb is like, oh, okay, I'm, I'm ready to take over. Even when I'm in my car, I'm doing things like automated backing into, so there's like a feature where you can do this automating backing into our parking space are bringing the car out of your garage are even, you know, pseudo autopilot on the freeway, right? I'm hyper sensitive. I can feel like as I'm navigating, like, yeah, that's an error right there. Like I'm very aware of it, but I'm also fascinated by it. And it does get better. Like I look and see it's learning from all of these people who are cutting it on. Like every time I come on, it's getting better, right? And so I think that's what's amazing about is that this nice dance of you're still hyper vigilant. So you're still not trusting it at all. Yeah. And yet you're using it. What on the highway, if I were to like what as a robot assist, go talk about trust a little bit. What, how do you explain that you still use it? Is it the gadget freak part? Like were you just enjoy exploring technology? Or is that the right actually balance between robotics and humans is where you use it but don't trust it. And somehow there's this dance that ultimately is a positive. Yeah. So I think I'm, I just don't necessarily trust technology, but I'm an early adopter, right? So when it first comes out, I will use everything, but I will be very, very cautious of how I use it. Do you read about it? Or do you explore it? But just try it. They do like, uh, crudely to put a crudely. Do you read the manual or do you learn through exploration? I'm an explorer. If I have to read the manual, then you know, I do design. Yeah. Then it's a bad user interface. It's a failure. Eilah Mosque is very confident that you kind of take it from where it is now to full autonomy. So from this human robot interaction, you don't really trust. And then you try and then you catch it when it fails to, it's going to incrementally improve itself into full, full, full, what you don't need to participate. What's your sense of that trajectory? Is it feasible? So the promise there is by the end of next year, by the end of 2020, it's the current promise. What's your sense about that journey that tests us on? So there's kind of three, three things going on now. I think in terms of will people go like as a user, as a adopter, will you trust going to that point? I think so. There are some users. And it's because what happens is when you're hypersensitive at the beginning, and then the technology tends to work, your apprehension slowly goes away. And as people, we tend to swing to the other extreme. Because I was hyper-hyper fearful or hypersensitive, and it was awesome. And we just tend to swing. That's just human nature. And so you will have, I mean, I, I, I, I, this is scary notion because most people are now extremely untrusting of autopods. They use it, but they don't trust it. And it's a scary notion that there's a certain point where you allow yourself to look at the smartphone for like 20 seconds. And then there'll be this phase shift where it'll be like 20 seconds, 30 seconds, one minute, two minutes. It's a scary proposition. But that's people, right? That's human. That's humans. I mean, I think of even our use of, I mean, just everything on the internet, right? Like, think about how reliable we are on certain apps and certain engines, right? 20 years ago, people have been like, oh, yeah, that's stupid. Like, that makes no sense. Like, of course, that's false. Like, now it's just like, oh, of course, I've been using it. It's been correct all this time. Of course, aliens, I didn't think they existed. But now it says they do. Obviously, 100% earth is flat. So, okay, but you said three things. So one is the human. Okay. So one is the human. And I think there will be a group of individuals that will swing. Right? I just teenagers. Tina, I mean, it'll be, it'll be adults. There's actually an age demographic that's optimal for technology adoption. And you can actually find them. And they're actually pretty easy to find. Just based on their habits, based on someone like me who wasn't a robot, or probably be the optimal kind of person, right? Early adopter, okay, with technology, very comfortable and not hypersensitive, right? I'm just hypersensitive because I designed this stuff. So there is a target demographic that will swing. The other one though is you still have these humans that are on the road. That one is a harder, harder thing to do. And as long as we have people that are on the same streets, that's going to be the big issue. And it's just because you can't possibly, I was saying, you can't possibly map the, some of the silliness of human drivers, right? Like, as an example, when you're next to that car that has that big sticker called student driver, right? Like you are like, oh, either I am going to like go around. Like we are, we know that that person is just going to make mistakes that make no sense. Right? How do you map that information? Or if I am in a car and I look over and I see, you know, two fairly young looking individuals, and there's no student driver bumper. And I see them chatted to each other. I'm like, oh, that's an issue. Right? So how do you get that kind of information and that experience into basically an autopilot? Yeah. And there's millions of cases like that where we take little hints to establish context. I mean, you said kind of beautifully poetic human things, but there's probably subtle things about the environment about is about that being maybe time for commuters to start going home from work. And therefore, you can make some kind of judgment about the group behavior of pedestrians, blah, blah, blah, blah, so on. Yes. Yes. Are even cities, right? Like, if you're in Boston, how people cross the street, like lights are not an issue versus other places where people will actually wait for the crosswalk. Yeah. Or somewhere peaceful. And but what I've also seen sort of just even in Boston that intersection to intersection is different. So every intersection has a personality of its own. So that certain neighborhoods of Boston are different. So we kind of end up based on different timing of day, at night. It's all there's a there's a dynamic to human behavior that we kind of figure out ourselves. We're not we're not able to introspect and figure it out, but somehow we our brain learns it. We do. And so you're you're saying is there a shortcut? Is there a shortcut, though, for everybody? Is there something that could be done? You think that you know, that's what we humans do. It's just like bird flight, right? This example they give for flight. Do you necessarily need to build a bird that flies or can you do an airplane? Is there a shortcut to you? So I think the the shortcut is and I kind of I talk about it as a fixed space where so imagine that there's a neighborhood that's a new smart city or a new neighborhood that says, you know what? We are going to design this new city based on supporting self driving cars and then doing things knowing that there's anomalies, knowing that people are like this, right? And designing it based on that assumption that like we're going to have this, that would be an example of a shortcut. So you still have people, but you do very specific things to try to minimize the noise a little bit as an example. And the people themselves become accepting of the notion that there's autonomous cars, right? Right. Like they they move into. So right now you have like a you will have a self selection bias, right? Like individuals will move into this neighborhood knowing like this is part of like the real estate pitch, right? And so I think that's a way to do a shortcut when it allows you to deploy, it allows you to collect then data with these variances and anomalies because people are still people, but it's a safer space and is more of an accepting space. I eat when something in that space might happen because things do because you already have the self selection like people would be I think a little more forgiving than other places. And you said three things do we cover all of them? Uh, the third is legal law. Oh no. Liability, which I don't really want to touch, but it's still it's still of concern. And the mission actually like would policy as well sort of government, all that that whole that big ball of mess. Yeah. Got you. So that's so we're out of time now. Do you think from a robotics perspective, you know, if you're kind of honest of what cars do, they they kind of kind of threaten each other's life all the time. So cars are very I mean, in order to navigate intersections, there's assertiveness. There's a risk taking. And if you were to reduce the tune objective function, there's a probability of murder in that function, meaning you killing another human being and you're using that. First of all, you have to be low enough to be acceptable to you on an ethical level as an individual human being, but it has to be high enough for people to respect you to not sort of take advantage of you completely and J walk in front of you and so on. So I mean, I don't think there's a right answer here, but what's how do we solve that? How do we solve that from a robotics perspective, one danger and human life is at stake? Yeah, as they say cars don't kill people, people kill people. People. Right. So I think now robotic algorithms would be killing. Right. So it will be robotics algorithms that are pro no, it will be robotic algorithms don't kill people. Developers of robotic algorithms kill people. Right. I mean, one of the things as people are still in the loop and at least in the near and midterm, I think people will still be in the loop at some point, even if it's the developer, like we're not necessarily at the stage where you know, robots are programming autonomous robots with different behaviors quite yet. Not just scary notions are to interrupt that a developer has some responsibility in the death of a human being. I mean, I think that's why the whole aspect of ethics in our community is so, so important. Right. Like because it's true, if you think about it, you can basically say, I'm not going to work on weaponized AI, right? Like people can say, that's not what I'm going to do. But yet, you are programming algorithms that might be used in healthcare algorithms that might decide whether this person should get this medication or not, and they don't, and they die. Okay. So that is your responsibility. Right. And if you're not conscious and aware that you do have that power when you're coding and things like that, I think that's, that's, that's just not a good thing. Like we need to think about this responsibility as we program robots and computing devices much more than we are. Yes. So it's not an option to not think about ethics. I think it's a majority, I would say, of computer science. Sort of, there, it's kind of a hot topic now. I think about bias and so on. But it's, and we'll talk about it. But usually it's kind of, it's like a very particular group of people that work on that. And then people who do like robotics are like, well, I don't have to think about that. There's other smart people thinking about it. It seems that everybody has to think about it. It's not, you can't escape the ethics. Well, there's bias or just every aspect of ethics that has to do with human beings. Every word. So think about, I'm going to age myself. But I remember when we didn't have like testers, right? And so what did you do? As a developer, you had to test your own code, right? Like you had to go through all the cases and figure it out. And, you know, and then they realized that, you know, like we probably need to have testing because we're not getting all the things. And so from there, what happens is that most developers, they do, you know, a little bit of testing. But as usually like, okay, did my compiler bug out? Let me look at the warnings. Okay, is that acceptable or not? Right? Like that's how you typically think about as a developer. And you're just assume that is going to go to another process. And they're going to test it out. But I think we need to go back to those early days when, you know, you're a developer, you're developing. There should be like this a, you know, okay, let me look at the ethical outcomes of this because there isn't a second like testing ethical testers, right? It's you. We did it back in the early coding days. I think that's where we are with respect to ethics. Like let's go back to what was good practices, not only because we were just developing the field. Yeah, and it's, I need to really have you burdened. I've had to feel it recently in the last few months. But I think it's a good one to feel like I've gotten a message more than one from people. You know, I've unfortunately gotten some attention recently. And I've gotten messages that say that I have blood on my hands because of working on semi-autonomous vehicles. So the idea that you have semi-autonomy means people will become, will lose vigilance and so on. That's actually be humans as we describe. And because of that, because of this idea that we're creating automation, there'll be people be hurt because of it. And I think that's a beautiful thing. I mean, it's, you know, it's many nice where I wasn't able to sleep because of this notion. You know, you really do think about people that might die because of this technology. Of course, you can then start rationalizing saying, well, you know what, 40,000 people die in the United States every year, and we're trying to ultimately try to save lives. But the reality is your code you've written might kill somebody. And that's an important burden to carry with you as you design the code. I don't even think of it as a burden if we train this concept correctly from the beginning. And I use, and not to say that coding is like being a medical doctor, but think about it. Medical doctors, if they've been in situations where their patient didn't survive, right? Do they give up and go away? No, every time they come in, they know that there might be a possibility that this patient might not survive. And so when they approach every decision, like that's in their back of their head. And so why isn't that we aren't teaching, and those are tools though, right? They are given some of the tools to address that so that they don't go crazy. But we don't give those tools so that it does feel like a burden versus something of I have a great gift and I can do great, awesome good. But with it comes great responsibility. I mean, that's what we teach in terms of if you think about the medical schools, right? Great gift, great responsibility. I think if we just change the messaging a little, great gift being a developer, great responsibility. And this is how you combine those. But do you think, I mean, this is really interesting. It's outside. I actually have no friends who are sort of surgeons or doctors. I mean, what does it feel like to make a mistake in a surgery and somebody to die because of that? Like is that something you could be taught in medical school sort of how to be accepting of that risk? So because I do a lot of work with healthcare robotics, I have not lost a patient, for example, the first one's always the hardest, right? But they really teach the value, right? So they teach responsibility, but they also teach the value. Like you're saving 40,000. But in order to really feel good about that, when you come to a decision, you have to be able to say at the end, I did all that I could possibly do, right? Versus a, well, I just picked the first widget and did, right? Like so every decision is actually thought through. It's not a habit. It's not a, let me just take the best algorithm that my friend gave me, right? It's a, is this it? This is the best. Have I done my best to do good? Right? And so, you're right. And I think burden is the wrong word. It's a gift, but you have to treat it extremely seriously. Correct. So I'm slightly related to know in a recent paper, the ugly truth about ourselves and our robot creations, you discuss, you highlight some biases that may affect the function in various robotic systems. Can you talk through if you remember examples of some? There's a lot of examples. I usually, bias first of all, yeah. So bias is this. And so bias, which is different than pressure. So bias is that we all have these preconceived notions about particular, everything from particular groups to habits to identity, right? So we have these predispositions. And so when we address a problem, we look at a problem, make a decision. Those preconceived notions might affect our outputs or outcomes. So there the bias could be positive and negative. And then it's prejudice. The negative. Precious is the negative, right? So prejudice is that not only are you aware of your bias, but you are then take it and have a negative outcome, even though you are aware. And that could be gray areas too. That's always gray areas. That's the challenging aspect of all ethical questions. So I always like, so there's there's a funny one. And in fact, I think it might be in the paper because I think I talk about self-driving cars. But think about this. We for teenagers, typically, we insurance companies charge quite a bit of money if you have a teenage driver. So you could say that's an age bias, right? But no one will, I mean, parents will be grumpy, but no one really says that that's not fair. That's interesting. We don't, that's right. That's right. It's everybody in human factors and safety research almost, I mean, it's quite ruthlessly critical of teenagers. And we don't question, is that okay? Is that okay to be ages in this kind of way? It is, and it is ages, right? It's definitely ages. There's no question about it. And so these are these, this is the gray area, right? Because you, you know that teenagers are more likely to be in accidents. And so there's actually some data to it. But then if you take that same example, and you say, well, I'm going to make the insurance higher for an area of Boston because there's a lot of accidents. And then they find out that that's correlated with socioeconomics. Well, then it becomes a problem, right? Like that is not acceptable. But yet the teenager, which is age is against age is, right? And the way we figure that out is society by having conversations, by a discourse. Let me throw out history, the definition of what is ethical and not has changed. Hopefully, always for the better. Correct. Correct. So in terms of bias or prejudice in robotic in algorithms, what examples do you sometimes think about? So I think about quite a bit the medical domain, just because historically, right? The healthcare domain has had these biases, typically based on gender and ethnicity, primarily, a little on age, but not so much. You know, historically, if you think about FDA and drug trials, it's harder to find a woman that aren't child-bearing. And so you may not test on drugs at the same level. Right. So there's these things. And so if you think about robotics, right? Something as simple as I like to design an exoskeleton, right? Which should the material be? Which should the weight be? Which should the form factor be? Are you who you're going to design it around? I will say that in the US, women average height and weight is slightly different than guys. So who are you going to choose? Like if you're not thinking about it from the beginning as, okay, I, when I design this and I look at the algorithms and I design the control system and the forces and the torques, if you're not thinking about, well, you have different types of body structure, you're going to design to, you know, what you're used to. Oh, this fits in all the folks in my lab, right? So think about it from the very beginning as important. What about sort of algorithms that train on data kind of thing? Sadly, our society already has a lot of negative bias. And so if we collect a lot of data, even if it's a balanced way, it's going to contain the same bias that a society contains. And so, yeah, is there, is there things there that bother you? Yeah. So you actually said something. You had said how we have biases, but hopefully we learn from them and we become better. Right? And so that's where we are now, right? So the data that we're collecting is historic. It's so it's based on these things. When we knew it was bad to discriminate, but that's the data we have. And we're trying to fix it now, but we're fixing it based on the data that was used in the first place. Exit and post. Right. And so, and so the decisions and you can look at everything from the whole aspect of predictive policing, criminal recidivism. There was a recent paper that had the health care algorithms, which had kind of a sensational titles. I'm not pro sensationalism in titles, but but again, you read it, right? So yeah, yeah, makes you read it. But I'm like, really like, you couldn't. What's the topic of the sensationalism? I mean, what's underneath it? What's, if you could sort of educate me and what kind of bias creeps into the health care space? Yeah. So, I mean, you already kind of mentioned. Yeah. So this one was the headline was racist AI algorithms. Okay. Like, okay, that's totally a clickbait title. Yeah. And so you looked at it. And so there was data that these researchers had collected. I believe I want to say it was either science or nature, it just was just published, but they didn't have the sensational title. It was like the media. And so they had looked at demographics. I believe between black and white women. Right? And they showed that there was a discrepancy in the outcomes. Right? And so it was tied to ethnicity, tied to race. The piece that the researchers did actually went through the whole analysis. But of course, I mean, the journals with AI are problematic across the board. Let's say. And so this is a problem, right? And so there's this thing about, oh, AI, it has all these problems. We're doing it on historical data. And the outcomes are uneven based on gender or ethnicity or age. But I am always saying is like, yes, we need to do better. Right? We need to do better. It is our duty to do better. But the worst AI is still better than us. Like, like, you take the best of us and we're still worse than the worst AI, at least in terms of these things. And that's actually not discussed. Right? And so I think, and that's why the sensational title, right? And so it's like, so then you can have individuals go like, oh, we don't need to use this AI. I'm like, oh, no, no, no, no. I went the AI instead of the doctors that provided that data because it's still better than that. Right? I think it's really important to linger on. The idea that this AI is racist is like, well, compared to what? Sort of the we the I think we set, unfortunately, way too high of a bar for AI algorithms. And in the ethical space, where perfect is our problem possible. Then if we set the bar of perfection, essentially, it has to be perfectly fair. Whatever that means is it means we're setting it up for failure. But that's really important to say what you just said, which is, well, it's still better than one thing. And one of the things I think that we don't get enough credit for just in terms of as developers is that you can now poke at it. Right? So it's harder to say, is this hospital, is this city doing something? Right? Until someone brings in a civil case, right? Well, with AI, it can process through all this data and say, hey, yes, there's some an issue here. But here it is. We've identified it. And then the next step is to fix it. I mean, that's a nice feedback loop versus like waiting for someone to sue someone else before it's fixed. Right? And so I think that power, we need to capitalize on a little bit more. Right? Instead of having this sensational titles, have the, okay, this is a problem. And this is how we're fixing it. And people are putting money to fix it because we can make it better. I look at like facial recognition, how joy she basically called out a couple of companies and said, hey, and most of them were like, oh, embarrassment. And the next time it had been fixed, right? It had been fixed better. Right? And then it was like, oh, here's some more issues. And I think that conversation then moves that needle to having much more fear and unbiased and ethical aspects. As long as both sides, the developers are willing to say, okay, I hear you. Yes, we are going to improve. And you have other developers like, hey, AI, it's wrong, but I love it. Right? Yes. So speaking of this really nice notion that AI is maybe flawed but better than humans. So just make me think of it. One example of flawed humans is our political system. Do you think or you said judicial as well? Do you have a hope for AI sort of being elected for president or running our Congress or being able to be a powerful representative of the people? So I mentioned and I truly believe that this whole world of AI is in partnerships with people. And so what does that mean? I don't believe or maybe I just don't, I don't believe that we should have an AI for president, but I do believe that a president should use AI as an advisor. Right? Like if you think about it, every president has a cabinet of individuals that have different expertise that they should listen to. Right? Like that's kind of what we do. And you put smart people with smart expertise around certain issues and you listen. I don't see why AI can't function as one of those smart individuals giving input. So maybe there's an AI on health care, maybe there's an AI on education and right? Like all these things that a human is processing. Right? I because at the end of the day, there's people that are human that are going to be at the end of the decision. And I don't think as a world, as a culture, as a society, that we would totally, and this is us, like this is some fallacy about us, but we need to see that leader, that person as human. And most people don't realize that like leaders have a whole lot of advice, right? Like when they say something, it's not that they woke up well, usually they don't wake up in the morning and be like, I have a brilliant idea, right? It's usually a, okay, let me listen. I have a brilliant idea of it. Let me get a little bit of feedback on this. Like, okay. And then it's a, yeah, that was an awesome idea. Or it's like, yeah, let me go back. We already talked through a bunch of them, but are there some possible solutions to the biases present in our algorithms? Be on what we just talked about. So I think there's two paths. One is to figure out how to systematically do the feedback and corrections. So right now it's ad hoc, right? It's a researcher identify some outcomes that are not, don't seem to be fair, right? They publish it, they write about it, and either the developer or the companies that have adopted the algorithms may try to fix it, right? And so it's really ad hoc, and it's not systematic. There's, it's just, it's kind of like, I'm a researcher, that seems like an interesting problem, which means that there's a whole lot out there that's not being looked at, right? Because it's kind of research driven. And I don't necessarily have a solution, but that process I think could be done a little bit better. One way is I'm going to poke a little bit at some of the corporations, right? Like maybe the corporations, when they think about a product, they should, instead of, in addition to hiring these, you know, bug, they give these, oh yeah, yeah, yeah. Like awards when you find a bug, they can put security hold. Yeah, security bug. Yeah, you know, let's put it like, we will give the whatever the award is that we give for the people who find these security holds, find an ethics hole, right? Like find an unfairness hole, and we will pay you X for each one you find. I mean, why can't they do that? One is a win-win. They show that they're concerned about it, that this is important, and they don't have to necessarily dedicate it their own like internal resources. And it also means that everyone who has like their own bias lens, like, I'm interested in age. And so I'll find the ones based on age, and I'm interested in gender, right? Which means that you get like all of these different perspectives. But you think of it in a data driven way. So like, sort of, if we look at a company like Twitter, it gets, it's under a lot of fire for discriminating against certain political beliefs. Correct. And sort of, there's a lot of people, this is the sad thing, because I know how hard the problem is, and I know the Twitter folks are working really hard at it. Even Facebook that everyone seems to hate are working really hard at this. You know, the kind of evidence that people bring is basically anecdotal evidence. Well, me or my friend, all we said is X, and for that we got banned. And that's kind of a discussion of saying, well, look, that's usually, first of all, the whole thing is taken out of context. So they're, they present sort of anecdotal evidence. And how are you supposed to as a company in a healthy way have a discourse about what is and isn't ethical? What, how do we make algorithms ethical when people are just blowing everything? Like, they're outraged about a particular anecdotal evidence piece of evidence. It's very difficult to sort of contextualize in the big data driven way. Do you have a hope for companies like Twitter and Facebook? Yeah. So I think there's a couple of things going on, right? First off, the remember this whole aspect of we are becoming reliant on technology, we're also becoming reliant on a lot of these, the apps and the resources that are provided. So some of it is kind of anger. Like, I need you, right? And you're not working for me. Yeah, it's not working for me. But I think, and so some of it, and I wish that there was a little bit of change in rethinking. So some of it is like, oh, we'll fix it in house. No, that's like, okay, I'm a fox and I'm going to watch these hands because I think it's a problem that foxes eat hands. No, right? Like, use, like, be good citizens and say, look, we have a problem. And we are willing to open ourselves up for others to come in and look at it and not try to fix it in house. Because if you fix it in house, there's conflict of interest. If I find something, I'm probably going to want to fix it and hopefully the media won't pick it up, right? And that then causes distrust because someone inside is going to be mad at you and go out and talk about how, yeah, they can the resume survey because it's rightly being us people. Like, just say, look, we have this issue. Community help us fix it. And we will give you like, you know, the bug finder fee if you do. Do you have a hope that the community, us as a human civilization on the whole is good and can be trusted to guide the future of our civilization into positive direction? I think so. So I'm an optimist, right? And, you know, there were some dark times in history always. I think now we're in one of those dark times. I truly do. In which aspect? The polarization. And it's not just US, right? So if it was just US, I'd be like, yes, a US thing. But we're seeing it like worldwide, this polarization. And so I worry about that. But I do fundamentally believe that at the end of the day, people are good, right? And why do I say that? Because anytime there's a scenario where people are in danger and I will use a, so Atlanta, we had a snowmageddon and people can laugh about that. People at the time, so the city closed for, you know, little snow, but it was ice and the city closed down. But you had people opening up their homes and saying, Hey, you have nowhere to go. Come to my house, right? Hotels were just saying, like, sleep on the floor. Like places like, you know, the grocery stores were like, Hey, here's food. There was no like, oh, how much are you going to pay me? It was like this such a community. And like people who didn't know each other strangers were just like, can I give you right home? And that was a point I was like, you know what? Like, like, that that that reveals that the deeper thing is, is there's a compassionate love that we all have within us. It's just that when all of that is taken care of and get bored, we love drama. And that's I think almost like the division is a sign of the times being good, is that it's just entertaining on a some unpleasant mammalian level to watch, to disagree with others. And Twitter and Facebook are actually taking advantage of that in the sense because it brings you back to the platform and they're advertised or driven so they make a lot of money. So you go back and you sleep. Love doesn't sell quite as well in terms of advertisement. It doesn't. So you've started your career at NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory. But before I ask a few questions there, have you happened to have ever seen Space Odyssey 2001 Space Odyssey? Yes. Okay. Do you think how 9000 so we're talking about ethics? Do you think how did the right thing by taking the priority of the mission over the lives of astronauts? Do you think how is good or evil? Easy questions. Yeah. How was misguided? You're one of the people that would be in charge of an algorithm like how. So how would you do better? If you think about what happened was there was no fail safe. Right? So we, perfection. Right? Like what is that? I'm going to make something that I think is perfect. But if my assumptions are wrong, it'll be perfect based on the wrong assumptions. Right? That's something that you don't know until you deploy and then you're like, oh yeah, messed up. But what that means is that when we design software such as in Space Odyssey, when we put things out that there has to be a fail safe. There has to be the ability that once it's out there, we can grade it as an F and it fails and it doesn't continue. Right? There's some way that it can be brought in and removed and that's aspect. Because that's what happened with how it was like assumptions were wrong. It was perfectly correct based on those assumptions and there was no way to change it. Changes assumptions at all. And the change the fallback would be to a human. So you're ultimately think like human should be, you know, it's not turtles or AI all the way down. It's at some point there's a human that actually makes it. I still think that and again, because I do human robot interaction, I still think the human needs to be part of the equation at some point. So what's just looking back, what are some fascinating things in robotic space that NASA was working at the time or just in general, what have you gotten to play with and what are your memories from working at NASA? Yeah, so one of my first memories was they were working on a surgical robot system that could do eye surgery. Right? And this was back in, oh my gosh, it must have been, oh, maybe 92, 93, 94. So it's like almost like a remote operation. Yeah, it was it was remote operation. In fact, you can even find some old tech reports on it. So think of it, you know, like now we have DaVinci, right? Like think of it, but these were like the late 90s, right? And I remember going into the lab one day and I was like, what's that? Right? And of course, it wasn't pretty, right? Because the technology, but it was like functional and you had this this individual that could use version of haptics to actually do the surgery and they had this mockup of a human face and like the eyeballs and you can see this little drill. And I was like, oh, that is so cool. That one I vividly remember because it was so outside of my like possible thoughts of what could be done. It's the kind of precision and I mean, what's what's the most amazing of a thing like that? I think it was the precision. It was the kind of first time that I had physically seen this robot machine human interface, right? Versus because you manufacturing it, you saw those kind of big robots, right? But this was like, oh, this is in a person. There's a person in a robot, like in the same space. The meeting them in person. Like for me, it was a magical moment that I can't, as life transforming that I recently met spot mini from Boston Dynamics. I don't know why, but on the human robot interaction. For some reason, I realized how easy it is to anthropomorphize. And it was, I don't know, it was, it was almost like falling in love with this feeling of meeting. And I've obviously seen these robots a lot on video and so on. But meeting in person, just having that one on one time is different. So do you have you had a robot like that in your life that was made you maybe fall in love with robotics? Sort of like meeting in person. I mean, I mean, I, I loved robotics. Yeah, so that was a 12 year old, like I'm going to be a robot. Actually, I called it cybernetics. But so my, my motivation was bionic women. I don't know if you know that. And so I mean, that was like a seminal moment, but I didn't meet like, that was TV, right? Like it wasn't like I was in the same space and I meant I was like, oh my gosh, you're like real. Just linking on bionic women, which by the way, because I read that about you, I watched a bit of it and it's just so no offense terrible. It's cheesy. It's cheesy. It's cheesy. I've seen a couple of reruns lately. But it's, but of course at the time, it's probably a cat's imagination. Especially when you're a young girl, just catch you, but what you ask back, did you think of it? You mentioned cybernetics. Did you think of it as robotics? Or did you think of it as almost constructing artificial beings? Like is it the intelligent part that that captured your fascination? Or was it the whole thing like even just the limbs and just the so for me, it would have in another world. I probably would have been more of a biomedical engineer because what fascinated me was the bionic was the parts like the bionic parts, the limbs. Those aspects of it? Are you especially drawn to humanoid or human-like robots? I would say human-like, not human-noid. And when I say human-like, I think it's this aspect of that interaction, whether it's social and it's like a dog, right? That's human-like because it understands us, it interacts with us at that very social level to human-nois are part of that. But only if they interact with us as if we are human. But just to linger on NASA for a little bit, what do you think maybe if you have other memories, but also what do you think is the future of robots in space? We mentioned how, but there's incredible robots and NASA's working on in general thinking about in our, as we venture out human civilization ventures out into space. What do you think the future robots is there? Yeah, so I mean, there's the near term. For example, they just announced the rover that's going to the moon, which, you know, that's kind of exciting, but that's like near term. You know, my favorite, favorite, favorite series is Star Trek, right? You know, I really hope, and even Star Trek, like if I calculate the years, I wouldn't be alive, but I would really, really love to be in that world. Like even if it's just at the beginning, like, you know, like voyage, like adventure one. So basically living in space. Yeah. With what robots? What are robots? Data. What role? Data would have to be even though that wasn't, you know, that was like later. But so data is a robot that has human-like qualities. Right. Without the emotion chip. Yeah. You don't like emotion. Well, so data with the emotion chip was kind of a mess, right? It took a while for that into a doubt. But and so why was that an issue? The issue is is that emotions make us irrational agents. That's the problem. And yet he could think through things, even if it was based on an emotional scenario, right? Based on pros and cons. But as soon as you made him emotional, one of the metrics he used for evaluation was his own emotions. Not people around him, right? Like and so we do that as children, right? So we're very ego centric. We are very ego centric. And so isn't that just an early version of the emotion chip then? I haven't watched much start track. Except I have also met adults. Right. And so that is that is a developmental process. And I'm sure there's a bunch of psychologists that could go through like you can have a six-year-old adult who has the emotional maturity of a 10-year-old, right? And so there's various phases that people should go through in order to evolve. And sometimes you don't. So how much psychology do you think a topic that's rarely mentioned in robotics? But how much does psychology come to play when you're talking about HRI human robot interaction? When you have to have robots that actually interact with you? Tons. So we like my group as well as I read a lot in the cognitive science literature as well as the psychology literature because they understand a lot about human human relations and developmental milestones and things like that. And so we tend to look to see what what's been done out there. Sometimes what we'll do is we'll try to match that to see is that human human relationship the same as human robot. Sometimes it is and sometimes it's different. And then when it's different we have to we try to figure out okay why is it different in this scenario? But it's the same in the other scenario, right? And so we try to do that quite a bit. Would you say that's if we're looking at the future of human robot interaction? Would you say the psychology piece is the hardest? Like if it's I mean it's a funny notion for you as I don't know if you consider yeah I mean one way to ask it do you consider yourself a roboticist or a psychologist? Oh I consider myself a roboticist that plays the act of a psychologist. But if you were look at yourself sort of you know 20, 30 years from now do you see yourself more and more wearing the psychology hat? Another way to put it is are the hard problems in human robot interaction fundamentally psychology or is it still robotics the perception manipulation planning and all that kind of stuff? It's actually neither. The hardest part is the adaptation and the interaction. So it's the interface is the learning and so if I think of like I've become much more of a roboticist slash AI person then when I like originally again I was about the bionics I was a good I was a electrical engineer I was control theory right like and then I started realizing that my algorithms needed like human data right and so that was like okay what is this human thing? Right how do I incorporate human data? And then I realized that human perception had that there was a lot in terms of how we perceive the world and so trying to figure out how do I model human perception for my and so I became a hri person human robot interaction person from being a control theory and realizing that humans actually offered quite a bit and then when you do that you become more artificial intelligence AI and so I see myself evolving more in this AI world under the lens of robotics having hardware interacting with people. So you're a world class expert researcher in robotics and yet others you know there's a few is it's a small but fierce community of people but most of them don't take the journey into the h of hri into the human so why did you brave into the interaction with humans it seems like a really hard problem. It's a hard problem and it's very risky as an academic yes and I knew that when I started down that journey that it was very risky as an academic in this world that was nuanced it was just developing we didn't even have a conference right at the time because it was the interesting problems that was what drove me it was the fact that I looked at what interests me in terms of the application space and the problems and that pushed me into trying to figure out what people were and what humans were and how to adapt to them if those problems weren't so interesting I'd probably still be sending rovers to glaciers right but the problems were interesting and the other thing was that they were hard right so it's I like having to go into a room and being like I don't know what to do and then going back and saying okay I'm going to figure this out I do not I'm not driven when I go and like oh there are no surprises like I don't find that satisfying if that was the case I go someplace and make a lot more money right I think I stay in academic because and choose to do this because I can go into a room and like that's hard yeah I think just for my perspective maybe you can correct me on it but if I just look at the field of AI broadly it seems that human robot interaction has the most one of the most uh number of open problems like people especially relative to how many people are willing to acknowledge that there are this uh because most people are just afraid of the humans so they don't even acknowledge how many open problems are but it's uh in terms of difficult problems to solve exciting spaces it seems to be uh incredible for that it is it is exciting you've mentioned trust before what role does trust from interacting with autopilot to in the medical context what role does trust play in the human robot interaction so some of the things I study in this domain is not just trust but it really is over trust how do you think about over trust like what is first of what is uh what is trust and what is over trust basically the way I look at it is trust is not what you click on a survey trust is about your behavior so if you interact with the technology based on the decision are the actions of the technology as if you trust that decision then you're trusting right um and even in my group we've done surveys that you know on the thing do you trust robots of course not would you follow this robot in an unburdening building of course not right and then you look at their actions and you're like clearly your behavior does not match what you think right or what you think you would like to think right and so I'm really concerned about the behavior because that's really at the end of the day when you're in the world that's what will impact others around you is not whether before you went on to the street you clicked on like I don't trust self-driving cars you know that uh from an outsider perspective it's always frustrating to me well I read a lot so I'm insider in a certain philosophical sense uh the it's frustrating to me how often trust is used in surveys and how people say make claims that if any kind of finding they make about somebody clicking on answer because trust is uh yeah behavior just you said it beautiful I mean the action your own behavior is is what trust is I mean that everything else is not even close it's almost like a absurd comedic uh poetry that you weave around your actual behavior so some people can say they're they they're trust you know I trust trust my wife husband or not whatever but the actions is what speaks of values right you bugged their car yeah you probably don't trust them I trust them I'm just making sure no no that's uh yeah it's like even if you think about cars I think it's a beautiful case I came here uh at some point I'm sure on either Uber or Lyft right I remember when it first came out I bet if they had had a survey would you get in the car with a stranger and pay them yes how many people do you think would have said like really you know wait even worse would you get in the car with a stranger at 1 a.m. in the morning to have them drop you home as a single female like how many people would say uh that's stupid yeah and now look at where we are I mean people put kids like right like oh yeah my my child has to go to um school and I yeah I'm gonna put my kid in this car with a stranger yeah I mean it's just a fascinating how like what we think we think is not necessarily matching our behavior and certainly with robots with the townspeakals and all the kinds of robots you work with that's it's uh yeah it's uh the way you answer it especially if you've never interacted with that robot before if you haven't had the experience you being able to respond correctly on a survey is uh is impossible but what do you uh what role does trust play in the interaction do you think like is it good to is it good to trust a robot what does overtrust mean is it is it good to kind of how you feel about autopilot currently which is like from a robot as a perspective is like so very cautious yeah so this is still an open area of research uh but basically what I would like in a perfect world is that people trust the technology when is working 100% and people will be hypersensitive and identify when it's not but of course we're not there that's that's the ideal world and but we find is that people swing right they they tend to swing uh which means that if my first and like we have some papers like first impressions in everything is everything right if my first instance with technology with robotics is positive um it mitigates any risk it it correlates with like best outcomes um it means that I'm more likely to either not see it when it makes a mistakes or faults or I'm more likely to forgive it um and so this is a problem because technology is not 100% accurate right it's not 100% accurate although it may be perfect how do you get that first moment right do you think there's also an education about the capabilities and limitations of the system do you have a sense of how do you educate people correctly in that first interaction again this is this is an open-ended problem um so one of the study that actually has given me some hope that I we're trying to figure out how to put in robotics so there was a a research study that had showed for medical AI systems giving um information to radiologists about you know here you need to look at these areas um on on on the um x-ray what they found was that when the system provided one choice there was this aspect of um either no trust or over trust right like I'm not good I don't believe it at all or a um yes yes yes yes and they would miss things right instead when the system gave them multiple choices like here are the three even if it knew like you know it had estimated that the top area you need to look at was he you know some place on on the x-ray if it gave like one plus others the trust was maintained and the accuracy of the entire population increased right so basically it was a you're still trusting the system but you're also putting in a little bit of like your human expertise like your human decision processing into the equation so it helps to mitigate that over trust risk yeah so there's a fascinating balance to have to strike yeah haven't figured out again right so when it's exciting open area research exactly so what are some exciting applications of human robot interaction you started a company maybe you can talk about the the exciting efforts there but in general also what other space can robots interact with humans and help yeah so besides health care because you know that's my bias lens my other bias lenses education I think that well one we we definitely we in the u.s you know we're doing okay with teachers but there's a lot of school districts that don't have enough teachers if you think about the teacher um student ratio for at least public education in some districts it's crazy it's like how can you have learning in that classroom right because you just don't have the human capital and so if you think about robotics bringing that in to classrooms as well as the after school space where they offset some of this lack of resources in certain communities um I think that's a good place and then turning on the other end is using these systems then for workforce retraining and uh dealing with some of the things that are going to come out later on of job loss like thinking about robots and NAI systems for retraining and workforce development I think that's exciting areas um that can be pushed even more and it would have a huge huge impact what would you say some of the open problems in uh education sort of it's exciting so young kids and the older folks or just folks of all ages who need to be retrained we need to sort of open themselves up to a whole other uh area of work well what what are the problems to be solved there how do you think robots can help we we have the engagement aspect right so we can figure out the engagement that's not a what do you mean by engagement so identifying whether a person um is focused is like that we can figure out what we can figure out uh and and there's some positive results in this is that personalized adaptation based on any concepts right so imagine I think about um I have an agent uh and I'm working with a a kid learning I don't know algebra two can that same agent then switch and teach um some type of new coding skill to a displaced mechanic like what does that actually look like right like hardware might be the same content is different two different target demographics of engagement like how do you do that how important do you think personalization is in human robot interaction and not just uh mechanic or student but like literally to the individual human being I think personalization is really important but um a caveat is that I think we'd be okay if we can personalize to the group right and so um if I can label you as along some certain dimensions then even though it may not be you specifically I can put you in this group so the sample size this is how they best learn this is how they best engage um even at that level it's really important and it's because I mean it's one of the reasons why educating in large classrooms is so hard right you teach to you know the median but there's these you know individuals that are you know struggling and then you have highly intelligent individuals and those are the ones that are usually you know kind of left out so highly intelligent individuals may be disruptive and those who are struggling might be disruptive because they're both bored yeah and if you narrow the definition of the group or in the size of the group enough you'll be able to address their individual yes it's not individual needs but really group needs are most important group needs right right and that's kind of what a lot of successful recommender systems do spotify and so on say sad to believe what I'm as a music listener probably some sort of large group it's very very sadly predictable you have been labeled yeah I've been labeled and successfully saw because they're able to recommend stuff yeah but applying that to education right there's no reason why I can't be done do you have a hope for our education system I have more hope for work for a development yeah um and that's because I'm seeing investments even if you look at VC investments in education the majority of it has lately been going to workforce retraining right and so I think that government investments is increasing there's like a claim and some of us based on fear right like AI is going to come and take over all these jobs what are we going to do with all these non-paying taxes that aren't coming to us by our citizens and so I think I'm more hopeful for that not so hopeful for early education because it's this it's still a who's going to pay for it and you won't see the results for like 16 to 18 years it's hard for people to wrap their heads around that but on the retraining part what are your thoughts there's a candidate Andrew Yang running for presidents saying that sort of AI automation robots universal basic income universal basic income in order to support us as we kind of automation takes people's jobs and allows you to explore and find other means like do you have a concern of society transforming effects of automation and robots and so on I do I do know that AI robotics will displace workers like we do know that but there'll be other workers that will be defined new jobs what I worry about is that's not what I worry about like will all the jobs go away what I worry about is a type of jobs that will come out right like people who graduate from Georgia tech will be okay right we give them the skills they will adapt even if their current job goes away I do worry about those that don't have that quality of an education right will they have the ability the background to adapt to those new jobs that I don't know that I worry about which will even more polarization in in our society internationally and everywhere I worry about that I also worry about not having equal access to all these wonderful things that AI can do and robotics can do I worry about that you know people like people like me from Georgia Tech from say MIT will be okay right but that's such a small part of the population that we need to think much more globally of of having access to the beautiful things whether it's AI in healthcare AI in education AI in and politics right I worry about that and that's part of the thing that you were talking about is people that build a technology had to be thinking about ethics have to be thinking about access and all those things and not not just the small small subset let me ask some philosophical slightly romantic questions all right people that listen to this will be like here he goes again okay do you think do you think one day will build an AI system that we a person can fall in love with and it would love them back like in a movie her for example oh yeah although she she kind of didn't fall in love with him or she fell in love with like a million other people something like that so you're the jealous type I see we humans are the jealous yes so I do believe that we can design systems where people would fall in love with their robot with their AI partner that I do believe because it's actually and I don't like to use the word manipulate but as we see there are certain individuals that can be manipulated if you understand the cognitive science about it right right so I mean if you could think of all close relationship in love in general as a kind of mutual manipulation that dance the human dance I mean many people are just a negative connotation and that's why I don't like to use that word particularly I guess another way to phrase is you're getting at is it could be algorithmatized or something it could be the relationship building part can yeah yeah I mean just think about it there we have and I don't use dating sites but from what I heard there are some individuals that have been dating that have never saw each other right in fact there's a show I think that tries to like weed out fake people like there's a show that comes out right because like people start faking like what's the difference of that person on the other end being an AI agent right and having a communication are you building a relationship remotely like there's no reason why that can't happen in terms of human robot interaction well so what role you've kind of mentioned with data emotion being can be problematic if not implemented well I suppose what role does emotion some other human like things the imperfect things coming to play here for good human robot interaction and something like love yeah so in this case and you had asked can a AI agent love a human back I think they can emulate love back right and so what does that actually mean it just means that if you think about their programming they might put the other person's needs in front of theirs in certain situations right you look think about it as return on investment like was my return on investment as part of that equation that person's happiness you know has some type of you know algorithm waiting to it and the reason why is because I care about them right that's the only reason right but if I care about them and I show that then my final objective function is length of time of the engagement right so you can think of how to do this actually quite easily and so but that's not love well so that's the thing it I think it emulates love because we don't have a classical definition of love right but and we don't have the ability to look into each other's minds to see the algorithm and I mean I guess what I'm getting at is is it possible that especially if that's learned especially if there's some mystery and black box nature to the system how is that you know how is it any different how is any different and in terms of sort of if the system says I'm conscious I'm afraid of death and it does indicate that it loves you another way to sort of phrase it be curious to see what you think do you think there'll be a time when robots should have rights you've kind of phrased the robot in a very roboticist way and just a really good way but saying okay well there's an objective function and I can see how you can create a compelling human robot interaction experience that makes you believe that the robot cares for your needs and even something like loves you but what if the robot says please don't turn me off what if the robot starts making you feel like there's an entity of being a soul there right do you think there'll be a future hopefully you won't laugh too much at this but the where there's a do ask for rights so I can see a future if we don't address it in the near term where these agents as they adapt and learn could say hey this should be something that's fundamental I hopefully think that we would address it before it gets to that point you think so that you think that's a bad future is like what is that a negative thing where they ask for being discriminated against I guess it depends on what role have they attained at that point right and so if I think about now careful what you say because the robot's 50 years from now be listening to this and you'll be on TV saying this is what robotists used to believe I love right and so this is my and as I said I have a bias lens and in my robot friends will understand that but so if you think about it and I actually put this in kind of the as a robotist you don't necessarily think of robots as human with human rights but you could think of them either in the category of property or you could think of them in the category of animals right and so both of those have different types of of rights so animals have their own rights as as a living being but you know they can't vote they can't write they can be euthanized but as humans if we abuse them we go to jail right so they do have some rights that protect them but don't give them the rights of like citizenship and then if you think about property property the rights are associated with the person right so if someone vandalizes your property or steals your property like there are some rights but it's associated with the person who owns that if you think about it back in the day and if you remember we talked about you know how society has changed women were property right they were not thought of as having rights they were thought of as property of like they're yeah assaulting a woman meant assaulting the property of somebody else exactly and so what I envision is is that we will establish some type of norm at some point but that it might evolve right like if you look at women's rights now like there are still some countries that don't have and the rest of the world is like why that makes no sense right and so I do see a world where we do establish some type of grounding it might be based on property rights it might be based on animal rights and if it evolves that way I think we will have this conversation at that time because that's the way our society traditionally has evolved beautifully puts just out of curiosity at enkee gibo mayful robotics with the robot curious if I works we think robotics were all these amazing robotics companies led created by incredible roboticists and they've all went out of business recently why do you think they didn't last long why is it so hard to run a robotics company especially one like these which are fundamentally HR are HRI human-reward interaction robots yeah each one has a story only one of them I don't understand and that was enkee that's actually the only one I don't understand I don't understand either it's no I mean I look like from the outside you know I've looked at the their sheets I've looked at like the data that's all you mean like business-wise yeah yeah and like I look at all I look at that data and I'm like they seem to have like product market fit yeah so that's the only one I don't understand the rest of it was product market fit what's product market fit just just that of the cut do you think about it yeah so although we we think robotics was getting there right but I think it's just the timing it just their clock just timed out I think if they had been given a couple more years they would have been okay but the other ones were still fairly early by the time they got into the market and so product market fit is I have a product that I want to sell at a certain price are there enough people out there the market that are willing to buy the product at that market price for me to be a functional viable profit-bearing company right so product market fit if it costs you a thousand dollars and everyone wants it and only is willing to pay a dollar you have no product market fit even if you could sell it for you know it's enough for a dollar because you can't you know hard is it for robots sort of maybe if you look at i-robot the company that makes rumors vacuum cleaners can you comment on did they find the right product market product fit like people willing to pay for robots is also another kind of question of the line-up. So do you think about i-robot in their story right like when they first they they had enough of a of a runway right when they first started they weren't doing vacuum cleaners right they were a millit they were contracts primarily government contracts designing robots yeah millit i mean that's what they were that's how they started right and they still do a lot of incredible work there but yeah that was the initial thing that gave them a lot enough funding to to then try to the vacuum cleaner is what i've been told was not like their first rendezvous in terms of designing a product right and so they they were able to survive until they got to the point that they found a a product price market right and even with if you look at the the room but uh the price point now is different than when it was first released right it was an early adopter price but they found enough people who were willing to to fund it and i mean they're you know i forgot what their lost profile was for the first couple of you know years but they became profitable in sufficient time that they didn't have to close their doors. So they found the right there's still there's still people willing to pay a large amount of money over a thousand dollars for for vacuum cleaner unfortunately for them now that they've proved everything out and figured it out loud now there's some competitors yeah and so that's that's the next thing right uh the competition and they have quite a number even internationally like there's some some products out there you can go to you know you're up and be like oh i didn't even know this one existed so so this is the thing though um like with any market i i would this is not a bad time although you know as a robot assist it's kind of depressing but i actually think about things like with the i would say that all the companies that are now in the top five or six they weren't the first to the stage right like google was not the first search engine sorry altavista right um facebook was not the first sorry my space right like think about they were not the first players those first players like they're they're not in the top five ten of fortune 500 companies right they proved they they started to prove out the market they started to get people interested they started the buzz but they didn't make it to that next level but the second batch right the second batch i think might make it to the next level do you when do you think the the facebook of robot sorry i take that phrase back because people deeply for some reason well i know why but it's i think exaggerated distrust facebook because of the privacy concerns and so on and with robotics one of the things you have to make sure is all the things we talked about is to be transparent and have people deeply trust you to let a robot into their lives into their home what do you think the second batch of robots look is it five ten years 20 years that will have robots in our homes and robots in our hearts so if i think about and because i try to follow the the VC kind of space in terms of robotic investments and right now and i don't know if they're going to be successful i don't know if this is the second batch but there's only one batch that's focused on like the first batch right and then there's all these self-driving x's right and so i don't know if there are first batch of something or if like i don't know quite where they fit in but there's a number of companies the co robot i call them co robots that are still getting VC investments they some of them have some of the flavor of like rethink robotics some of them have some of the flavor of like here e what's a co robot a co so basically a robot and human working in the same space so some of the companies are focused on manufacturing so having a robot and human working together in a factory some of these co robots are robots and humans working in the home working in clinics like there's different versions of these companies in terms of their products but they're all so rethink robotics would be like one of the first at least well-known companies focus on this space so i don't know if this if this is a second batch or if this is still part of the first batch that i don't know and then you have all these other companies in this self-driving you know space and i don't know if that's a first batch or again a second batch yeah so there's a lot of mystery about this now i of course it's hard to say that this is the second batch until it you know proves out right correct yeah we need a unicorn yeah exactly uh the why do you think people are so afraid at least in popular culture of legged robots like those work them boss and dynamics or just robotics in general if you were to psychoanalyze that fear what what do you make of it and should they be afraid sorry so should people be afraid i don't think people should be afraid um but with a coffee at i don't think people should be afraid given that most of us in this world understand that we need to change something right so given that now things don't change uh be very afraid what which is the dimension of change this need so changing of thinking about the ramifications thinking about like the ethics thinking about like the conversation is is going on right it's not it's no longer a we're going to deploy it and forget that you know this is a car that can kill pedestrians that are walking across the street right it's we're not in that state where a we're putting these roads out there are people out there yes a car could be a weapon like yeah people are now solutions aren't there yet but people are are thinking about this as we need to be ethically responsible as we send these systems out robotics medical self-driving and military to and military and military not as often talked about but it's really where probably these robots will have a significant impact as well correct correct right making sure that they can think rationally even having the conversations who should pull the trigger right but overall you're saying if we start to think more and more as a community about these ethical issues people should not be afraid yeah i don't think people should be afraid i think that the return on investment the the impact positive impact will outweigh any of the potentially negative impacts do you have worries of existential threats of robots or AI that some people kind of talk about and romanticize about and then you know in the next decade next few decades no i don't singularity would be an example so my concept is is that so remember robots AI is designed by people yes it has our values and i always correlate this with a parent and a child right so think about it as a parent what do we want we want our kids to have a better life than us we want them to expand we want them to experience the world and then as we grow older our kids think and know they're smarter and better and more intelligent and have better opportunities and they may even stop listening to us they don't go out and then kill us right like think about it is because we it's instilled in them values we instilled in them this whole aspect of community and yes even though you're maybe smarter and more have more money and that it uh it's still about this love caring relationship um and so that's what i believe so even if like you know we've created the senior larity and some archaic system back in like 1980 that suddenly evolves the fact is it might say i am smarter i am sentient these humans are really stupid but i think it'll be like yeah but i just can't destroy them yeah percent of mental value it's still just for to come back for Thanksgiving dinner everyone's in a while exactly a such this so beautifully put you've uh you've also said that the matrix may be one of your more favorite AI related movies can you elaborate why yeah it is one of my favorite movies and it's because it represents kind of all the things i think about uh so there's a symbiotic relationship between um robots and humans right that symbiotic relationship is that they don't destroy us they enslave us right but think about it even though they enslaved us they needed us to be happy right and in order to be happy they had to create this crudey world that they then had to live in right that's the whole purpose um but then there were humans that had a choice right like you had a choice to stay in this horrific horrific world where it was your fantasy in life with all of the anomalies perfection but not accurate or you can choose to be on your own and like have maybe no food for a couple of days but you were totally autonomous and so i i think of that as and that's why so it's not necessarily us being enslaved but i think about us having the symbiotic relationship robots and AI even if they become sentient they're still part of our society and they will suffer just as much as we and there there will be some kind of equilibrium that will have to find some some some symbiotic relationship right and then you have the ethicist the robotics folks that will like no this has got to stop i will take the other pill yeah in order to make a difference so if you could hang out for a day with a robot real or from science fiction movies books safely and get to pick here's a her their brain who would you pick gotta say it's data data i was gonna say rosy but i don't i'm not really interested in her brain i'm interested in data's brain data pre or post the motion chip pre but don't you think it'd be a more interesting conversation post-emotion chip yeah it would be drama and i you know i'm human i deal with drama all the time yeah uh but the reason why i went and picked data's brain is because i i could have a conversation with him and ask for example how can we fix this ethics problem right and he could go through like the rational thinking and through that he could also help me think through it as well and so that's there's like these questions fundamental questions i think i can ask him that he would help me also learn from that fascinates me i don't think there's a better place to end it yeah thank you so much for talking to us in honor thank you thank you this was fun thanks for listening to this conversation and thank you to our presenting sponsor cash app download it use code lex podcast you'll get $10 and $10 will go to first a stem education nonprofit that inspires hundreds of thousands of young minds to become future leaders and innovators if you enjoy this podcast subscribe my youtube get five stars and apple podcasts follow and spotify support on patreon or simply connect with me on twitter and now let me leave you with some words of wisdom from arthur c clock whether we're based on carbon or silicon makes no fundamental difference we should each be treated with appropriate respect thank you for listening and hope to see you next time okay