 The following is a conversational Vitalik buterin, his second time on the podcast. Vitalik is the co-founder of Ethereum and one of the most influential people in cryptocurrency and technology broadly defined. Quick mention of our sponsors, athletic greens, magic spoon, indeed, forsegmatic, and better help. Check them out in the description to support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that Ethereum, Bitcoin, and many other cryptocurrencies have been taking a wild ride of prices going up and down in the past few months. To me, the prices were never as important as the ideas, both technical and philosophical. Cryptocurrency has the potential to empower billions of people to participate in the global economy in a way that resists the manipulation by centralized power. Also, with smart contracts, layer 2 technologies, data pools, NFTs, and of course integration of artificial intelligence into the whole thing, we have the opportunity to build tools and worlds that transform physical and digital life as we know it, hopefully minimizing the suffering in the world and maximizing the fun. And now is the part of the program where I read the ads. You can skip them if you must. I even give you time stamps to make it super easy but please still check out the sponsors. We're very picky about which sponsors we take on. So hopefully if you buy their stuff and you definitely should, you'll find value in it just as I have, it really is the best way to support this podcast. This show is sponsored by Athletic Greens, the all-in-one daily drink to support better health and peak performance. It replaced the multivitamin for me and went far beyond that with 75 vitamins and minerals. The first thing I drink every day to break my fast, whether I'm eating twice a day or one meal a day, when I was doing the 72 hour fast I didn't do Athletic Greens. That was because I was going super strict. It definitely gives you a great base of nutrition where you can mess up and everything else, but you always have that little bit of health that you can count on. I usually like to mix it with really cold water. Shake it up really well in their Athletic Greens container. I think I easily fall in love with things that both taste good and create a kind of ritual, a daily ritual. It creates a structure for the day where you can inject the chaos through exploration, but you always can count on the basic structure of ritual to be there. They give you fish oil. When you sign up at Athletic Greens.com slash legs, that's the other supplement I take as fish oil. Anyway, Athletic Greens.com slash legs, go get them. This episode is also sponsored by Magic Splint, low carb keto-friendly cereal. It has zero grams of sugar, 13 to 14 grams of protein, only 4-net grams of carbs, and 140 calories in each serving. They keep releasing new flavors. I think it's worth a cake this time, but friends, my favorite flavor is still the flavor of champions is Coco. Also they now ship to Canada, which is great for Canadian friends. Some of my friends keep sending me pictures of cereal boxes that they bought in support of me. This is how you show love by buying cereal. I think there's a lot of ways to show love, but one of them is buying keto-friendly cereal. I honestly do think that cereal represents joy for a huge number of people, because it's the thing they ate in childhood, but they kind of ran away from it because it's like really I'm healthy for you because it has so much sugar. That Magic Splint allows you to bring back the joy and still stay healthy because it has zero grams of sugar. There you go. It's a low carb way of showing love. These adreads are getting more and more ridiculous every time. Anyway, Magic Splint has a 100% happiness guarantee. So if you don't like it, they refund it. Go to Magic Splint.com slash lex. Link and use code lex to check out, to say 5 bucks off your order. This magic splint.com slash lex and use code lex. Okay, this episode is also brought to you by Indeed, a hiring website. I've used them as part of many hiring efforts I've done for the teams I've led. They have tools like Indeed Instant Match giving you quality candidates whose resumes are indeed fit your job description immediately. Basically, they really speed up that whole early candidate selection process. It's nice. And if you listen to this podcast, you may have heard me mention that I'm currently hiring for a bunch of positions related to the podcast actually. So not related to any startup work, but more for video editing, camera operator, even virtual assistant robotics engineer. If you're interested in that, I'm going to be closing those job posting soon, but you can apply on the website. And I'll probably use Indeed to help me out on that as well. Anyway, right now you can get a free $75 sponsored job credit to upgrade your job post at Indeed.com slash Lex get it at Dean.com slash Lex terms and conditions apply offer valid through June 30th. Indeed.com slash Lex. My voice can be so frustratingly monotone sometimes. What are you going to do at some point you have to accept who you are? This show is also sponsored by four sigmatic, the maker of delicious mushroom coffee and plant based protein. The coffee doesn't taste like mushroom, which is the first question I would ask speaking of mushrooms. There is no psychedelics mushrooms in this coffee for better or worse, but I am having a bunch of conversations about psychedelics, including slow-sliding coming up. So look forward to that. I should probably talk to a coffee expert. That'll be really interesting conversation. Just the amount of coffee that's consumed every day. Just think about it. What do a lot of people do every single day? Let's see. Have sex. Drink coffee. Go to the bathroom. Sleep. But the funny thing is coffee is one of them. Drink water. So water and coffee. I feel like it would be fascinating to explore coffee from both the chemistry, maybe even the distribution, the supply chain, the taste. This world is full of beautiful knowledge to discover. Get up to 40% off and free shipping and mushroom coffee bundles if you go to 4sigmatic.com slashlex. That's 4sigmatic.com slashlex. F-O-U-R, sigmatic.com slashlex. This episode is also sponsored by BetterHelp. People with H-E-L-P help, they figure out what you need to match you with a licensed professional therapist in under 48 hours. Kind of think of podcast as a form of talk therapy. So through talking, you can explore ideas in your mind. If you dig deep enough, you can deal with some of the trauma that keeps you trapped in the past. If you can let go of that, you can be free. Be to live in the future, to define your future, to pave whatever the hell path you want. My path seems to be increasingly likely to still run through Mr. David Goggins, even though I got injured a couple of months ago. So we decided not to do the 48 hour challenge together, decided to delay it. Probably to the summer, we'll do something crazy together. So that's going to be a kind of therapy. Before I get to meet my demons, get to meet his demons and make friends. Anyway, BetterHelp is easy, private, affordable, available worldwide. Check them out at BetterHelp.com slashlex. That's BetterHelp.com slashlex. This is the Lex Friedman Podcast, and here is my conversation with Vitalik Butorin. Let's first talk about Shiba Inu, if you can. Also known as ShibaToken, CodeShib. For context, Shiba Inu was created in August 2020, modeled off of Doshcoin by the anonymous founder known as Riyoshi. A May 10th, this year, it had a market capitalization of over 13 billion. And maybe you can explain this, but in a crazy move, you were given half of Shib's total supply. You burned a K.A. destroyed 90% of it. That's worth $6.7 billion. When you donated 10%, that's worth $1.2 billion at the time to India COVID-19 relief fund. Saying you don't want to be the locust of this much power. This is fascinating. Why and how were you able to walk away from this much money and this much power? So I should probably start by giving some of the backstory around these coins and this concept of giving me coins. So first of all, Shiba Inu, as you said, is this knockoff of Doshcoin. And Doshcoin was this initial kind of fun coin that was created back around 2014 or so. And it was just created by Jackson Palmer and put it out as a joke for a couple of hours and a community formed around it. And at the beginning, people didn't take it very seriously. I actually remember putting about $25,000 into Dosh sometime around 2016. And I just remember thinking to myself, like, okay, how am I going to explain to my mom that I just invested $25,000 into dog coins? What even are dog coins? The only interesting thing about this coin is that there's a logo of a dog somewhere. But of course, that ended up being one of the best investments I've ever made. And it did really well. And then at the end of 2020 Elon Musk, of course, I started talking about Doshcoin and the market cap just like shot up to about $50 billion. Actually, it shot up multiple times, right? Like the first time it went up from about 0.8 cents to about like $0.7. And this just happened all in one day. And I remember this was when I was still in Singapore in the middle of COVID. And I saw that the price just went up by 1,000%. And I was like, oh my God, my Dosh is worth a lot. And so I immediately called up some of my friends and told them to like, drop everything in scramble. And I sold half the Dosh. And I got $4.3 million donated the proceeds to give directly. And a few hours after I did this, the price dropped back down from about $0.7 to $0.4. Right? So I managed to sell the Dosh at the top. I remember just feeling like I was such an amazing trader. But then of course, you know, the price went up from $0.4 then to $0.7 and then $0.50. And just like Dosh becoming this big phenomenon where there's even a lot of people that have heard of Dosh that have not heard of Ethereum is just like something even I wasn't predicting. Right? And so after that, of course, you know, we have Dosh and then people are thinking, well, you know, if the leading dog token is worth $50 billion, then surely the second largest dog token deserves, you know, at least $7 or $8 billion. Right? I feel like that's kind of what the mindset of these Shiba people is. So that of course, they did this other gimmick, right, where they gave me half the Shiba token supply. They were actually not the first projects to do this. So around the end of 2020, there was this weird project called Teller, like TELLR. I think they're a chain link competitor or something like this. But I remember they just like dumped $50,000 worth of their token into my wallet. And then they had their Twitter RBI just like basically run around saying, look, look at Fatalix wallet. Fatalix holds Teller's. He's one of us. He's a supporter. And as soon as I discovered this, I just like publicly sold the Teller tokens on you to swap and this created a bit of a Twitter splat. Now the Shiba people were more clever. The Shiba people instead of dumping to that wallet, they dumped to my cold wallet. So in cryptocurrency, right, there's this concept of like cold wallets and hot wallets, basically, like the thing that actually owns your money is like this 80 digit number called a private key, right? And a hot wallet is why not private key is just stored in memory on your computer, on your phone. Really easy to access. Cold wallet means that's either written down on a piece of paper or it's on a computer that's just never accessed the internet, right? So cold is very inconvenient, but cold is also much more secure, right? Just even if that computer has some like viruses on it and like it's it's like air gap. It's not actually going to be able to upload it. So this cold wallet and like all the money is out of the cold wallet. So it's safe for me to talk about my setup now, right? But it was a laptop that was sitting in Canada and I also had two pieces of paper where I wrote down two numbers on those two pieces of paper. One was with me. One was in Canada. And if you add those two numbers together, you get the private key. So because of COVID travel restrictions and you know, this is a cold wallets in Canada, it's very difficult for me to actually access it, right? And I'm not sure if they knew this. Maybe they just got lucky. But basically they sent a lot of these dog tokens into this wallet where it was very difficult for me to access it. But then I saw these dog tokens. I saw more and more people talking about them and then at some point I realized that like, hey, these things are worth billions of dollars. And like, no, there's lots of really good things that you could do with that amount of money. And it would actually be a waste to just like see a go. So I made the decision that like I would actually power through and figure out how to like safely like basically get my private key. I actually had to call up my family, tell them to read out their number off of the air piece of paper. I entered that into a fresh laptop that I bought from Target. And I put in my other number on my piece of paper, added the two numbers together on the computer. There's the key. And at the same time, like just scrambled for two days, setting up a new wallet for to where I can move my eth too safely, getting people to be multi-sake partners, just like doing all sorts of like stuff that, you know, 10 years ago you would expect to just be part of a cyberpunk, you know, science fiction novel. But you know, now it's all real. So you're doing this all by yourself essentially. Most of it by myself. I need to keep it secret. Right. And I needed my family to actually like go and read the number on their piece of paper. And then I am in my new multi-sake wallet. Like there's other people that are signatories. But you know, obviously we're not going to reveal any details beyond that. So I did this, right? And I actually managed to like get the private key, make the first transaction that would just move all my ether to the multi-sake wallet. So it's safe. And then second transaction, I put the private key on my main computer, then started, you know, like going in and just selling some of the dog tokens and then just like giving them to these different charities. Now at the time I actually did not even like have any idea of how much you would be able to get, right? Because like on paper, the dog tokens are $7 billion dollars. But like in reality, it's a very liquid market, you know, are you going to crash it by getting, after you sell one million worth, you're going to crash it after 10 million. Or you might you actually be able to get like an entire 200 million. I had no idea. So I definitely was just over the mindset like, okay, I'll sell a bit, maybe I get some eth and then donated some eth to give well donated some to other groups. And then, okay, have some dog tokens. Like I don't have an easy ability to sell more myself. Then I'll just like give them to these groups and like hopefully they'll do good things with them. It was actually, I actually donated at 20% and dump to 80%. Yeah. So the COVID, I'm India group got one badge and then there's another group that got another badge. I don't want to say who they are because I think that they want to announce themselves at some point. Yeah. But you can see the fact that these transactions were made on the blockchain. But it was just very interesting and unexpected and just an insanely crazy situation. It's been a couple of weeks. First of all, thank you for helping me hang out with some Kurds. This is a first for the podcast and shows that you're a truly a special person to be willing to help. But now a couple of weeks later, do you regret any aspect of that decision? I'm sure there are some things that I probably could have done better. I was actually talking to some of these charities and I was impressed by just how much money they managed to get out of selling some of these coins. So I probably could have done better by just like talking more with the traders and actually ensuring that they can do a better job of maximizing the value of all of them. It was a very stressful time and I did have to act quickly. I did manage to make a lot of the donations before a few days before the Great Crypto Crash happened. It's difficult to obviously there's parallel universes in which I did better, but at the same time, there's also lots of parallel universes where because I hesitated more and tried to spend more time thinking I missed the opportunity. So I'm netted like a lot of the draw and I'm just happy that everything was able to turn out as well as it did. But psychologically, you mentioned stress. How hard was it? It was stressful, right? I think one of the really stressful parts was just the fact that I had to basically move all of my funds, including the 325,000 ether from one cold wallet into another hot wallet or sorry, into another multi-sig wallet. Maybe the multi-sig wallet had a bug in it. Maybe there's some mistake I'll make in the middle that causes the funds to get lost. That part was stressful and I was definitely stressing out for two days. A triple checking the new wallet I even did a bit of an audit of the code myself. I wrote my own JavaScript to adapt to make confirmations because Gnosis Safe didn't work with the status wallet. That whole thing was definitely a bit of a marathon. I was also kind of definitely a bit worried about uncertain, I guess, how the public and including the coin community is what perceived the whole thing. But I was actually impressed. For every poster that was saying, no, why did Vitalik, like a rug pull on his skin, as well as supposed to be a baron address? There's like 10 people that are like, oh, I thought I was just in this because it's a fun pyramid gambling thing. Instead, I ended up being part of this great public good thing for humanity and that's even more amazing. The amount of that that I got was very impressive. All in all, I think the dog people did great. Not the dog people. Is there something you can extend to the bigger picture of it in the principles you apply to making this decision? Is there some principles, philosophies that you apply also to the decisions you make around Ethereum? I think a big one for me is just this idea that crypto isn't just an opportunity to give people slightly better ways to save value in all of these things. It's also an opportunity to basically create these new digital institutions that could serve the public good in new ways. That's something that I've been interested in for a long time. I actually even have this article in Bitcoin magazine back in 2014 where I basically suggested this idea that you would have coins that represent causes and people would just buy and accept those coins because they support those causes. I think it's called markets, institutions and currencies and new forms of social unsanivization or something like that. I'm sure you can find it in the road in the links. That was interesting to see becoming real. In general, I think public good serve are very important and on the internet, public good serve even more important. Every single like Friedman podcast is just on YouTube and anyone can go and see it. There's no way for you to sell it so that some people can see it, but other people can't see it. You could do that, but then you'd obviously be reducing your impact. Thank you for making the amazing LuxFeeb and podcast still freely available. That's actually a tense thing is how do you do it in a way that's not controlled in a centralized fashion because actually YouTube feels free and open, but it nevertheless is one company making centralized decisions. The first time I realized YouTube was not forever is when a lot of the Joe Rogan experience library was pulled from YouTube as part of the Spotify deal. It made me realize we need to, it's like the realization that Fiat money is centralized is realizing that this is not forever and you might want to come up with schemes to distribute it to decentralize the control of it in a way that audio for podcasts is just an RSS feed. Exactly. I think one of the philosophical things that I hope you achieve is kind of decouple the concept of public goods, which are incredibly important and are the lifeblood of modern civilization from the idea that there is or can be one central organization that represents the public and perfectly understands and can impose their idea of what is the good. When people talk about public goods, it just often comes with this baggage of either centralization or conformism. It doesn't have to. Often the most important public goods are the ones that are created by the crazy individual that disagree with everyone else. You're going to make this kind of synthesis where you combine the values of decentralization and the values of open source, but you're not naive about it and you realize that for these things to be produced, there needs to be a way for it to be sustainable. There needs to be some way of supporting people who are working these projects, but at the same time you want to avoid that turning into a vector of centralization, trying to get all of the good things without the bad things. To me, that's a big part of what my grand experiment in crypto is about. We are doing different kinds of things for this. There's the GICOIN grants quadratic funding in the Ethereum ecosystem. There's obviously these dog coins that just happened, I guess, accidentally. There's other projects that, for example, UNISWAP has their UNISWAP Dow that just has a huge amount of funding. We haven't seen yet how that's going to be deployed, but it could be potentially deployed to do a lot of really good and amazing things. Do you see Ethereum as essentially a mechanism to fight for social causes? I definitely see Ethereum as being a mechanism to fight for some specific things that are social causes. Just the fact of creating an open financial system that anyone can participate in no matter where they are in the world. That's a social cause, just giving people the ability to organize and create projects even if it's five people in five different countries. That kind of inclusiveness, I think, that's a social cause and it's a core crypto value. But then at the same time, the other important part of the magic of Ethereum that you have to balance that against is that it is also this open platform where ultimately the things that are on Ethereum is just the things that the community makes of it. You briefly open the door, so let's go there. When it comes to government regulation of crypto, what's the best case scenario? What's the worst case scenario? In terms of, as you've kind of mentioned, Ethereum challenges the power centers of the world. How do you see the interplay between governments and this new technology that resists centralized power, the best case and worst case? The best case is that blockchain is continued to prosper and we figure out scalability so that people can actually start doing things on block. All of the amazing use cases that people have been talking about instead of today where a lot of the great stuff gets priced out because transaction fees are at five to ten dollars. We see a lot of different amazing applications happening on blockchains. It could be Dow is creating new ways for people to interact and organize with each other, new ways for artists to get funded. All sorts of these amazing things. There's just enough public support and just enough people that see that look crypto is clearly doing a lot of good things. There are definitely areas where there's tensions, but in areas where there are tensions, there could be some kind of creative and interesting approaches that get figured out. The concept of corporate taxes, for example, that would disappear as a revenue stream if theoretically corporations just all get replaced by Dow's. Maybe there's some other creative way by which Dow's themselves can kind of be co-edged, have some kind of encoded governance that ensures that they have at least some bias towards serving the global public good. Maybe Dow's can do enough of that that people are happy with it. There are going to be things that people are unhappy about. There's always going to be the people that wants to survey everyone. The effect of crypto from just empowering people is greater than that and greater than that in a way that people can just easily see, then that would be a good scenario. We'll just become kind of incorporated and accepted the same way as happened with the internet. The worst case scenario would be people suddenly flipping and going into moral panic mode and just, oh my god, this technology is used by insert bad group of the day. I don't think governments have the ability to ban crypto to the extent of just preventing blockchains from existing, but they definitely have the ability to really marginalize it. If you just ban all exchanges, like in ban all links from the Fiat's ecosystem to crypto, and ban all mainstream employers from accepting or paying in cryptocurrency, then you can successfully turn it into a fairly niche counterculture thing that has much less impact than otherwise would. Somewhere between the good scenario and the bad scenario, I'm obviously hoping for the good. That's interesting also the tension between governments and companies. If you have a bunch of billionaires or a bunch of companies like Tesla investing in Bitcoin and then governments resisting that, it's interesting who wins out in that worst case scenario. Almost when companies and rich, quote unquote, respectable people embrace cryptocurrencies, Bitcoin, Ethereum, so on, even the dog coins, it's almost sends a signal to everybody else that this is a revolution it's here to stay. On this one little tangent that you brought up, this is almost an outdated idea, but it's still with us, which is cryptocurrencies are used for illegal activity, for drugs, for crime, and so on. Is there some sense that worries you that if cryptocurrency, Ethereum runs the world, then crime making money from crime will be easier. There's always that possibility, but at the same time, I think if you look at the world as a whole and the way all the other technological trends are going, in-person surveillance is just going up every year. If you commit a crime in a meat space, it's getting harder and harder to get away with it. If you want to do something, and this is something that's just happening as a result of better technology information and information transparency, a lot of it's hard to prevent even if you really tried. The world where things go dark to such an ex, as the police hawks sometimes like to say, to such an extent that, oh my god, the criminals are committing crimes with impunity, and we can't see anything. That just seems unlikely. On the other hand, the world where there just is no privacy, for example, or the world where there is no ability to act outside of the confines of mainstream institutions. That's something that's more realistic and that seems like something that could lead to a lot of scary things. Even from a government's point of view, I think governments over the last few years, a lot of them are very worried about sovereignty. They're worried about if their country's economy is in social environments, they're just completely dependent on basically foreign tech companies controlled by foreign governments. Governments are not on team government. Indian government is on team India, the Russian government is on team Russia and so forth. They don't want the US to be able to have this big back door into everything. I do think that a balance is needed, but at the same time, I do think, I guess I definitely worry more about the possibility that just without things like crypto, acting outside of institutions becomes too imposterous. I don't even know what to see on me outside of governments, even outside of corporations. Becomes too impossible and there's terrible things that come as a result. Things going in the other direction. Obviously, it is a risk, but at the same time, I think, in the long term, a crypto can potentially even offer defenses as much as attacks against that sort of thing. Many throughout history, many of the most destructive things came from centralized institutions versus sort of from the people operating in the shadows. I've been talking to a bunch of psychedelics folks that people doing research is like Rodoblin in Johns Hopkins. There's a lot of exciting research on psychedelics. One thing you could say about operating at the edge of legality, it could actually accelerate the adoption of particular things like whether it's marijuana or psychedelics. They can help people out. It almost accelerates the policy. It forces the policy to catch up to where the people stand. There's a positive way of doing things that are in the gray area of legality and creating a market that allows people to in a safe way be able to participate in this gray area. The other thing to keep in mind, of course, is that the set of the kinds of things that just payment processors as companies try to restrict people you from is much larger than the set of things that's illegal. Part of that is because they want to be super conservative and the more layers you have, the more they're conservative because they're scared of what the layer below them will do to them. Sometimes they have their own moral opinions of various kinds. They go after lots of people. They make life really hard for sex workers, for example. Psychedelics, as you mentioned, there's a lot of activity, including stuff that is totally legal. There's this shadow, like paypal credit card governments or whatever you want to call it. It makes it just hard to participate in this stuff. I think reducing the number of intermediaries is definitely a good thing. Let's talk about one of the most exciting technologies, technically philosophically, socially, financially, in every way, which is Ethereum 2.0. There's a million things to talk about. Step one is probably a good thing to do, which is can you briefly summarize your vision? How Ethereum 2.0 will make Ethereum more scalable, secure, and sustainable? Sure. I think recently we've actually been kind of deemphasizing the E2.0 branding, I guess. The reason behind that was that originally we envisioned something more like a big grand event where all the good things would happen at the same time. It would be a new blockchain. It would be a new protocol, and people would have to take a lot of effort to migrate over. Later, we've slowly changed the roadmap over to something that's much more incremental. Proof of stake happens over time, and then sharding it's added over time, and all these features get added over time. The experience for a regular Ethereum user still feels very seamless. It's maybe a little bit more complex than the hard forks that we've already done from a user's point of view, but not by that much. The big two things that are happening, these are what used to be considered the two flagship features of E2.0, and now they're just the flagship features of the next devolution of Ethereum as proof of stake and sharding. Proof of stake is a consensus algorithm. It's not just mechanism, I should say. The difference is that an algorithm is something that you run by yourself. A mechanism is like interactions between people, and it could even include incentives and all of that. A consensus mechanism, by which nodes in the network agree on which blocks came in, which transactions came in and what order, make sure that once a block gets accepted, it can't get reverted and all of these things that we expect from a blockchain. Existing blockchains, including Bitcoin, including the Ethereum of today, and including a lot of them, they use proof of work. The reason why we need proof of anything is because they serve this function that I call an economic, a civil resistance. That's obviously a big word for, especially if you've never heard of civil as before, but the basic idea is that you have a network and you have lots of computers that agree on which block to accept. Sometimes you get two blocks that get published at the same time, and you just have to agree on an order. There has to be some kind of voting game. Then the question is, in this voting game, who gets a vote? You can't say one person one vote. The reason why you cannot say one person one vote is because you need some kind of authority or some kind of mechanism to say who the humans are. If you don't have that, then a bad guy could just come in with a virtual machine or with a computer that has on it 10 billion virtual machines that have 10 billion virtual nodes. Then just like say, look, I'm 99% of the network. I should control everything. To prevent this, what proof of work and proof of stake both do is they basically say, the weight of your vote, like how much influence your votes have in the consensus, is proportional to what quantity of economic resources you bring in. In the case of proof of work, you prove what economic resources you have because your economic resources are computers, and you prove that you have them by just running them 24, seven using these hash algorithms. This does solve the problem because in order to attack the network, you have to come in with more computers and more money invested into computers and electricity than the rest of the network puts together. That's extremely expensive. In proof of stake, instead of relying on people with computers that are just constantly cranking out hash as 24, seven, you as your unit of economic resources, you just use holdings of coins inside the system. All of these blockchains, they have some kind of coin in them. Bitcoin has Bitcoin, Ethereum has Ether, they all have a coin. Why not just use that as the economic resource that you're using to measure participation? That's the core distinction between proof of work and proof of stake. I like proof of stake and I've liked proof of stake for many years, basically because it just requires much less ongoing resource consumption. It was proof of work. You have to actually go and buy these physical computers. These days, they have specialized hardware, ASICs, application-specific integrated circuits. You have to go produce them and you have to go buy them. Unless you have millions of dollars, you have to buy them from one of these other people who creates them. Those other people often end up taking a huge cut of the profits themselves. Then you have to plug them in. You have to just burn all of this electricity that's just running 24-7. It consumes a huge amount of energy. It's not just energy, it also just to create the hardware. People focus a lot on energy, but actually about half the cost of proof of work mining is the cost of the hardware. Hardware is a very big deal too. You need this really big and powerful, very specialized hardware that fills up these big warehouses. So proof of stake, you don't need that much electricity. You just need a little bit to run a regular computer. You can run proof of stake validators on computers that you already have. It's just much less resource-intensive. This is good for a few reasons. One is the environmental rationale that you're not breaking the environment. The second is that you're not taking away electricity and other resources from other people. Right? I think just today I saw a story about Iran wanting to shut down some Bitcoin mining because it was just grabbing up so much electricity that it was outbidding the nearby towns and it didn't have enough. Then there is a chea that the one that's doing proof of hard disk mining. It's just grabbing up so many hard disks that there's a shortage. That's the second reason. Then the third more selfish reason is that because participating in consensus does not require so much energy expenditure, you don't need to pay people as much to participate. Bitcoin and Ethereum, they both issue somewhere around 4% of the total supply area right now to miners. Ethereum is about 4.7 million ether and the current supplies about 150 million. With proof of stake, we expect it will be somewhere between 500, 1 million per year. That means the supply doesn't have to increase so quickly. One of the pros that the people argue for the proof of work is that it is secure because it's much more difficult to, as you've highlighted, it's difficult to participate. What are your thoughts about the security of the proof of stake mechanism? Is there a way to make it secure? I think proof of stake is very secure because in order to be able to attack the system, you need to have basically as much stake as the rest of the network. That means right now, for example, we have 5 million e-staking so you have to come up with 5 million e-staking and join the network. The other 5 million e-stakes is a lot. It's like how much is it now? 15 billion dollars. That's actually more than I believe the cost of attacking the Bitcoin network. The second thing is that recovering from attacks is much easier in proof of stake than in proof of work. Because in proof of stake, for many kinds of attacks that you do against this network, we have this concept automatic slashing, which basically means that in order to revert a finalized block, so if there's one block that's accepted by the network and you try to convince the network to revert that block and accept a different block, in order to make that kind of attack, you basically have to have your validator, a big portion of your validator, signed to conflicting messages. This is something that once these messages are on the network, you can go and prove. Look, these people did it. And so we have this feature in the protocol called slashing, where you basically take all these people who provably misbehaved and you burn their coins. And you don't burn anyone else's coins. Now, there are other cases, like for example, if instead of reverting blocks, the attack just tries to censor everyone. Then what you do, everyone who got censored would just like basically create the minority chain. And then the community would basically have to do a soft fork. They would just have to say like, what could this chain is clearly attacking us? This chain is the one not attacking us. And so we're going to join this chain. And then what happens is that on that new chain, the attacker is also always a lot of coins. So the difference between proof of stake and proof of work is that in a proof of stake system, you can identify specific participants. And you can say, this isn't like human going in and saying, I don't like you, I don't like you, this is like automated. The slashing process is automated. Yes. Is there ways it can go wrong? So that's a painful process where the coins are burned. It is painful. Yes. I think the one big unknown, of course, is like if an attack actually happens, and like if an attack happens that requires the community to actually choose one of these minority forks, then like what would the community actually successfully coordinating on this look like? Right? Like it's like, we can talk about it and we can write to like science fiction novels about it. But like until it's happened, you don't really know the details of like what it looks like and how difficult it is. What are the channels of communication for the community if you can enlighten me a little bit? Like where? You know, in many ways in the political realm, Twitter is often used as a way to kind of have these emerging phenomena of large groups of people coming to a consensus, bought a particular idea, and then there's battle for consensus. What's in the Ethereum community, how do people, what are the sources of natural language-based communication that have an emergent belief structure that you would say? Or is it all through money? Is it all through trading that the communication happens? There's definitely talking as well. Like we have to agree on protocol changes somehow, right? Like there's Twitter, there's Reddit, there's GitHub, there's all of the various Ethereum forums, Ethereum magicians, Ethereum research, there's just in-person communication, then there's just kind of like the hidden web of everyone talking to everyone on Telegram or Signal. So it's like some of everything, right? But I think the thing to emphasize around like can you actually come to consensus on, you know, whether or not to fork the chain because the attacker is censoring someone, everyone just for example is like you, everyone who's running a node is going to see almost the same thing, right? Like they're going to be off by a few seconds and like maybe they'll be off by a few minutes, they'll disagree by a few minutes, but like if it's a serious attack, you know, people are going to know, right? It's not like one of those things where, you know, oh, we're trying to agree on like, I don't know, did Epstein kill himself or like some, you know, read the political facts where like in reality, no one knows a single thing about what that was actually going on in the role speculating. Like it is much more visible, right? So we do have that. But you know, at the same time, I'm happy to admit that like these are fairly untested mechanisms. But like at the same time, they're also untested mechanisms and proof of work, right? And like in proof of work, it's even harder because in proof of work, you don't have the ability to like identify and say, like, you know, I'm going to these miners attack. And so we're not going to let these mine, these miners and these miners not attack. So we're going to keep them in. Like you have to pretty much, you know, either take out none of the miners or you do a fork that changes the proof of work algorithm, which takes out all of the miners, right? So the economics of recovering from attacks and proof of work, at least to me, actually do seem like more unfavorable. But you know, I'm sure the proof of work people you talk to will give a very different and contradictory opinions. And that's totally fine and amazing. Some people describe M-E-V, minor extractable value as an existential risk to Ethereum. What is M-E-V? How important is it to solve M-E-V if it's important? What ideas do you have? Sure. How about after this one, we'll also talk about charting. That's amazing. And it's part of your turn back to charting. And we'll return to the big picture of the scaling problem as you mentioned. I love this conversation. You know, depth first search instead of breadth first. So basically, okay, M-E-V, minor extractable value. It is not different in proof of work and proof of stake, right? So like if you want to call it, you know, block proposal extractable value, like it sounds less flexible, you know, you can call it B-Pev instead of M-E-V who cares. But the B-P. So this is a problem in both proof of work and proof of stake? Yes. So the basic idea is that if you have the ability to choose which transactions go into a block and in what order, then you have the ability to like take advantage of that position for economic gain in a lot more ways than just collecting transaction fees, right? Like for example, there's decentralized exchanges on chain like Uniswap. And like let's say the price of ETH to versus USDC was 2700. The previous block, but then there was a bit of a market drop and now it's 2680, where you can go on Uniswap and you can just like gobble up the entire part of, you know, the automated order book that's like between 2700 and 2680, right? And that's, and then at the same time, you'll like run a bot and you know, you buy some ETH back at 2680 and you've just like made about 10 dollars of profit, right? So, or well, 10 dollars times, you know, whatever the depth is, right? So and so there's a lot of little things like that. There's also things that involve like front running other people's transactions. So one example of this would be that if someone sends a transaction that says, like, you know, buy me five ETH for whatever price that you can get, then but with a maximum of, let's say, yeah, $15,000, then you can go and like you can send each put a transaction right in front of that transaction and you can like buy up that ETH first and then you resell it to him at, you know, $15,000 minus one. So there's, you get to make a little bit of money, that's exactly. So there's a lot of these different like arbitrage front running, back running, these different tricks that allow block proposers to get some percentage on top, like overhead. Exactly. And the reason why this is a challenge is because it's, I mean, like first of all, it's sometimes degrades user experience because users get, you know, less favorable trades, but there are sometimes ways to like mitigate that for applications. Sometimes it's not that bad. But like the bigger risk that I think some people consider more existential is that there's just much more economies of scale in figuring out how to extract all this revenue. I mean, because if you're just collecting transaction fees, there aren't really economies of scale. There aren't really benefits to centralizing, right? Because it's a very simple formula. You just like grab up the transactions that pay you the most. But with MEV, you know, there's all these sophisticated algorithms. And if you have lots of money, then you can hire really smart people to make amazing algorithms. And then you can use the other half of your money to get a lot of mining power, a lot of stake. And you get a lot of opportunities to use your even better algorithms. So there is this risk that, like, as a result of this mining is basically or even validating proof of stake is going to centralize. So I think the ecosystem is best replied to this sort of risk. And it's the direction where projects like flashbots are going already is if you can't eliminate the centralization, then you try to firewall it. And the way that you firewall it is, you basically say, we're going to try to deliberately create a marketplace where people can just do the complicated work of creating what are called bundles, like bundles of transactions that are very profitable. And then at the other side of the market, you just have like block proposes reminders that are just dumb nodes. And they go and ask the what are called searchers, the bundle creators. And they just ask like, hey, how much can you give me a fly put in your bundle? And then they just take the highest offer. So you sort of separate out the task and you have the easy part and then you have the hard part and you have like this special class of actor called a searcher that does the hard part. And then the easy part, the people doing the easy part, which is just miners and validators, they kind of just talk to all the different people doing the searching and they just accept the highest better. So this is all just like interesting, an interesting example of like economic design philosophy, right? Like sometimes you can't just like make centralization go away. Sometimes it's inevitable. But no, at least you can try to kind of contain it. You can direct it or you can even sort of firewall it away from you know core consensus, the parts that really do need to be decentralized. So you don't see it as an existential risk. It's just a little it's a bit of a problem. It has to be constantly dealt with. It's a I mean, it's a risk like there's obviously a risk that you know, it's a very severe problem and that even this flashbots approach has some fatal floor or whatever. But I'm definitely we're definitely approaching it with the mindset of you know, this is a problem. And like, yes, we do have to do some work to solve it, but we're doing it. And so far it's being solved. Okay, let's talk about the other really, really fascinating part of the future of Ethereum. Let's not call it a theorem 2.0, but the future of Ethereum that also may require hard fork. I don't know, you can correct me on this. Is well broadly ideas for scaling. Yes. And more specifically sort of layer 2 or layer 1 and 2 intersection ideas of how to achieve scaling. And at the core of that is the idea of sharding. So first, what is sharding? Okay. So there's two major paradigms for scaling block shins, right? As you said, layer 1 and layer 2. And layer 1 basically means make the blockchain itself like capable of processing more transactions. By having you know, some mechanism by which you can do that despite the fact that there's a limit to the capacity of each participant in the blockchain. And then layer 2 says, well, we're going to keep the blockchain as is, but we're going to create clever protocols that sit on top of the blockchain that still use the blockchain and it's still kind of inherit things like the security guarantees of a blockchain. But at the same time, a lot of things are done off chain. And so you get more scalability that way. So in Ethereum, the most popular paradigm for layer 2 is rollups. And the most popular paradigm for where one is sharding. So one way to achieve layer 1 scaling is to increase the block size. Yes. Hence the block size, wars, what I'm quote. And you actually tweeted something about people are saying that Vitalik changed his mind about the in he he went from being a small. No, one for being big to small. They're big to small. And but you said I've been a medium blocker all along. So maybe you can also comment on where on the very basic aspect before we even get the sharding of will you stand on this block size debate. Sure. So the way that I think about the tradeoff is I think about it as a tradeoff between making it easy to write to the blockchain and making it easy to read the blockchain. Right. So when I say read, I just mean, you know, have a node and actually verify it and make sure that it's correct and all of those things. And then by right, I mean, send transactions. So I think for decentralization, it's important for both of these tasks to be accessible. And I think that they're like about equally important. Right. If you have a chain that's too expensive to read, then everyone will just trust a few people to read for them. And then those people can change the rules without anyone else's permission. But if on the other hand, it becomes really expensive to write, then everyone will move on to like basically second layer systems that are incredibly centralized. And like that takes away from decentralization and self-sufferancy as well. So this has been my viewpoints like pretty much the whole time, right? That's that like, you know, you need this balance and going in one direction or the other direction is very unhealthy. In the Bitcoin case, basically what happens was that Bitcoin originally, like at the very beginning, it didn't really have a block size. It just had an accidental block size of 32 meg or block size limit of 32 megabytes because that just happens to be the limit of the peer-to-peer messages. But then I didn't even know that part. Yeah, but then Satoshi back in 2010 was worried that even 32 megabyte blocks would be too hard to process. So he put the limit down to one megabyte. And, you know, I think the I put, you mean, sneaked in there. Yeah, just like made an update to the Bitcoin software that made blocks bigger than when I think it's a million bytes in valid. And I think the impression that most people had at the time is that, you know, this is just a temporary safety measure and over time, you know, though as we become more confident in the software, that limit would be raised somewhat. But then when the actual usage of the blockchain started going up and then started going up, first to 100 kilobytes per block, then to 250 kilobytes per block, then to 500 kilobytes per block. You know, they're started kind of coming out of the woodworks, this opinion that like, no, that limit should just not be increased. And, you know, then they're all of these attempts at compromising, right? You know, first there's like a proposal for 20 megabyte blocks. Then there was the 248 proposal, which is a bit ironic because the 248 proposal started off being like a small block negotiating position. But then when the big block people came back and said, like, hey, aren't we going to do this? They're like, oh, no, no, no, we don't want the block size increases anymore. So, you know, there were these two different positions, right? The small blockers, I think they valued one megabyte blocks for two reasons. One is that they just like really, really believe in the importance of being able to read the chain. But two is that a lot of them really believe in maintaining this norm of never heart-forking, right? So the difference between a heart fork and a soft fork is basically that in a soft fork, blocks that were any block that's valid under the new rules was still valid under the old rules. So if you have a client that verifies according to the old rules, then you'll still be able to accept the chain that follows the new rules. Whereas with a heart fork, like you have to update your code in order to stay on the chain. And look, they have this belief that, you know, soft forks are kind of either less coercive than heart forks, which by the way I can really disagree with. I actually think soft forks are more coercive because like basically they force everyone who disagrees to sort of go along by default. But or they have this opinion that there's like, it's more difficult to abuse soft forks to do really mean things like or that completely violate people's expectations like increasing the supply, which is like, I think they're as sumptuous to that. So because of these reasons, they just say we're only going to do soft forks and we don't we want to just not do any heart forks. And they eventually discovered this idea called segregated witness that allows for a very tiny block size increase to like the equivalent of about two megabytes with a softwork. It's it's just a really like weird and devious trick like basically what they do is they take the signatures of transactions and then they put them outside of the block. And then they add an extra rule that says that like every for a block to be valid, the block has to come with a separate like basically extension block that contains all of the transaction signatures. Right. So you know, when you measure it according to the old rules, like, no, hey, it adds up to less than a million, but actually there's this extension block that the old protocol doesn't even know about. So it's a hack that that seemed to work to do in a small way extend the block. So small block side was like happy with these very low levels of block size and then the big block side wanted to expand, you know, at the very least go to four megabytes and you know, maybe go maybe eight, 20, there's disagreements so within there as well. I definitely was favoring the big side, the whole way through as you can probably tell. But even though so the argument against the big is that it makes things more centralized. Yes, because fewer people can run and know the very high as the chain and also because any of these things would require a hard fork and hard for concern here at only risk. Do you think there's truth to that? I'm pro hard fork. I think hard for course are actually like in a political economic sense they're better than soft forks. Well, let's okay, okay, I think that's a beautiful principle as stated that soft forks may be more coercive than hard forks. This is not just the bulk of cryptocurrency. This is about politics in life. That's fascinating. So you're okay with hard forks. In fact, you think hard forks is the right way to make changes because then everybody's forced to make a decision. Do you accept this change or not as opposed to ideas being sneaked in behind the door and your and the decisions forced on you? Exactly. Yeah. Okay, so but you know, hard forks, some people say this is when they talk about sort of a theorem. Is there's some aspect to a hard fork where you're trying to upgrade what is it airplane while it's flying? I think soft forks are also upgrading an airplane while it's flying. But it's a small heart rate. There's some truth to that. There's definitely a bit more risk of a split as a result of a hard fork than as a result of a soft fork. And the split is highly undesirable, right? Well, it depends. If it's a split because of a bug, then that's horrible. If it's a split as a result of political differences, then I think like a split is better than, you know, one side being forced to basically just like suck it up and accept the majority position even if it really hates it. Well, there's also political connections throughout the history of the United States. It's like sometimes groups of people that strongly disagree with each other should be forced to work it out, even if they even when a split seems like an easy thing in the short term. It depends. And I think like well, for blockchains in particular, the costs of people being able to like peacefully do their go off and do their own thing are much lower, right? Like, you know, okay, if you have a country and you have two groups, then like often enough like fighting out the new rules requires, you know, a civil war requires everyone to move and so forth, but no, not on a blockchain, like, you know, the costs are lower. And so so if you were to look at the way things worked out with the block size wars and then what is the split? What is the Bitcoin cash and Bitcoin? Yeah, which like you looking, putting on your history and you mentioned offline, you like Dan Carlin. So if Dan Carlin wanted to do an episode on the block size wars, do you think you could have turned out better or do you, are you okay with the way it turned out? I'm definitely disappointed with what happens with the block with the big block side. I think the source of my disappointment is that like one of the things that you notice when just looking at like this political disagreements generally, especially when you have environments where you know, they're authoritarian or like single party dominated and then there's some opposition party and the opposition often has like virulogenment grievances, but at the same time the thing you notice is that often enough the opposition just sucks, right? Like it just doesn't have, you know, political capacity. It doesn't have like the ability to come up with policy because it's entire culture is like designed around resisting much more and then it's designed around like, you know, actually debated serious policy trade-offs. And I worry or I guess not so much worry because it's already happened. I yeah, unfortunately think that Bitcoin cash ended up being a victim of this, right? Like first, there was a split with Bitcoin cash and then of course, Craig Wright came in and you know, Craig Wright was this basically scammer who just keeps on pretending that he is Sonsan Akamoto, the inventor of Bitcoin. Hey, Craig Wright's legal team, do you hear me? Yes, I still think you're client as a scammer. So, sue me. This is definitely going to be depth first, sir, because I got to ask you, Paul Craig, I guess this people have been contacting me and I'm trying to figure out like what is up with this human being. So for people who don't know, there's somebody who is, let's start this Toshina Akamoto who is the creator of Bitcoin, who's anonymous and actually most really big people in the cryptocurrency space do not like, like yourself and others do not dare claim that they are even for funds Toshina Akamoto. In fact, the Sonsan Akamoto is still alive and is like, if you say you were a Sonsan Akamoto, it seems like the thing he would do is probably or she is trying to remain anonymous. On the flip side of that, there's a guy named Craig Wright who continually keeps claiming that he is in fact Sonsan Akamoto and keeps suing a lot of people. So on him, if we could just linger on him, what do you make of this character? What are we supposed to make of this character? Should he be ignored? Is there any possible truth to his claims? What do you make of them? The analogy that's at the top of my head will get a bit political, but that's fine. You've had Michael Bales. So I guess I view Craig Wright as being kind of like a Donald Trump figure. And that he's not very intellectual, but I think he gets a big audience because he says things that play to the resentments that people have and he says things that people want to hear. In the wake of this block size war, the big blockers did feel very disenchanted. They felt that Bitcoin always had this vision that we were supposed to just keep increasing the block size and Bitcoin is pew to pew cash and says so in the white paper. And then this elitist clique of core devs just like came in and said, no, no, no, no, we're going to impose this totally different vision. And if you ever want your scalability, you'll have to wait for us to create this totally unproven fancy technology called the Lightning Network that works on your completely different principles. And they were very angry at this. And I think a lot of that anger is justified. But at the same time, when people are in that mental state, it's very easy for you to just kind of latch on. And if you find someone who expresses anger at the same things that you're angry at, and also seems like someone who's strong and seems like someone who might be good to rally around, it's very easy to just get behind that. But that extra part about where he's supposed to go, I don't understand why that's necessary. I think that's, he could have done it without that, but that's just it's a marketing strategy. Like it sort of gives him more salience. Like there's other big block personalities, right? Well, what's the difference between with Greg, right? He's not just a big, a big block personality. He's potentially Satoshi. And he did say all the big block things, right? Like he talked about how the concept of a fee market is fundamentally like economically wrong. And it should be, it should be a free market. And you should be able to have blocks as big as you want. Like he repeated all the talking points. And so a lot of people were kind of stuck into that, right? And so he unfortunately was able to basically dominate a big part of the Bitcoin cash community for a long time. And then eventually, of course, more and more people started to catch on. He would just say technical things that are completely wrong, right? Like one example of this that I remember is that he mixed up the concept of 256 bits and two to the power of 256 bits. So the difference is like the difference between 80 and the concept of 80 digit numbers. Right? And because of this, like he made this, made this argument that said that Bitcoin's elliptic curve is friendly to cryptographic pairings. Like you don't have to understand what that is. But if you want to know, I have articles on both at battaloc.ca. But basically, he made this like technical argument that really hedged on this point. And then when people pressed him on it, it's like, yes, what no, no, like what, look, exactly. The height is like what to two to the 256 bits. That's a very, a very tiny amount of information. No, no, no, no, no, two to the 256 bits is more than the amount of information in the universe. And like you, you know, equivocated and kind of prayed on people's inability to understand that mathematical nuance. And I call it him out. And eventually, I even call it him out in person at this conference and so like I just stood up and asked, you know, hey, you know, conference organizer, why are you letting this fraud speak of this conference? And I remember even some big blockers at the time getting angry at me. But, you know, eventually they did get rid of him and then Craig, well, basically Craig, right, was forced to split off because the rest of the community refused to accept some network change that he wanted. And so then there was the BCH and BSB. And then in the Bitcoin cash community, there was this drama of are they going to add a developer funds where they redirect 12.5% of the revenue from the minders to the devs and according to the libertarian, not a aggression principle is this technically theft. Like his understanding of the technical depths of cryptocurrency was lacking in a way that you satoshi and come out of certainly would not. Yes, exactly. But the point is that even after Craig Wright got expunged, the Bitcoin cash community kept having these disagreements, right. And now after this development funds dispute, there was a further split between Bitcoin cash and ABC. So, you know, the the breaching tree could still use to extend, right. So, so in that way, it's disappointing to see those kind of splitting. There was never a result. It is. I would have definitely like wanted to see more of a kind of like principled coin with a like tries to be Bitcoin, but you know, follows consistent big block values. But I know maybe I should just like stop expecting projects that I have no involvement in to be care at all about what my values are. And you know, like maybe Ethereum just like is. I think you have a powerful voice and you can inspire other projects to do to to to live up to their best possible selves. Okay. So, that's the level. That's the layer one. Uh-huh. Approach the other layer one within Ethereum is the idea of sharding. Yes. What the heck is sharding? Okay. What does the future of sharding look like? Right. So to summarize that big, long tangent that we just want to be beautiful tangent. That's a sort of it's the basic tangent. And I think like crypto is just one of the most underrated aspects of crypto is I think how you can like analyze the you know, the sociology and the politics and the anthropology and like, yeah, I'm sure the car would have fun exploring the space at some point. But like the core tradeoff, right, is that if you scale blockchains the dumb way just by increasing the parameters, then eventually you just make it harder and harder to participate as a node and you end up with a system where there's like 20 computers running the whole thing. Yeah. And it's just very centralized. Um, so sharding basically says, well, instead of just increasing the parameters, what we're going to do is we're going to change the blockchain architecture in such a way that each individual node in the blockchain only needs to store a small portion of the data and only needs to process a small portion of the transactions. So we can think about it as being like inspired by BitSorrent, right? Like on BitSorrent, there's no such thing as a BitSorrent full node that has every movie, right? You know, the work is like split up among a huge number of computers and like that makes sense. That's you know, the only sane way to scale a system like that. Um, and if they actually tried making a version of BitSorrent that required full nodes, that story of every movie, then you know, it would have like zero censorship resistance and it would just like, you know, be dead in an instant. Uh, so the challenge with taking that model and applying it to blockchains, right, is that blockchains aren't just about like spreading data around. They're about agreeing on exact to what data was spread around and ensuring that everything that you agree on actually is correct. And so we have this paradox where let's say you want to have a system that supports 10,000 transactions a second, but each computer in the network can only personally verify 100 transactions a second. So how can each computer get a guarantee about the other 9,900 without actually going and verifying them themselves? Yep. And it turns out that there are some, um, like a bundle of different tricks that can do that, right? So like one of them is just random sampling. So the idea behind random sampling is like let's say for simplicity, this is a proof of stake chain and you have 10,000 validators, validators, so like, you know, the stakers. And like first and foremost, they will assume they all have the same number of coins, right? If someone has more coins, we'll just kind of split them up and pretend they're 10 stakers. Then you use, you do like some random shuffling and you basically say these random hundred validators are assigned to validate this block. These random 100 validators are assigned to validate this block. These random hundred validators are assigned to validate this block. And so each individual computer only gets assigned to validate like a small piece. But then the way that the information about like what's a valid gets passed around, right, is that when these hundred participants validate a block, they all sign a message basically saying like yes, we agree that this block is valid. And then like they combine that signature into one and then they broadcast that signature. And then everyone else instead of verifying the blocks directly just verifies that signature, right? And so if I see the signature, I'm not directly convinced that that block is valid. But what I am convinced of is that out of this committee of this randomly selected group of 100 validators, let's say at least 70 of them agree that this block is valid. And so if I trust that the majority of these participants are all honest, then because it's all randomly selected, the attacker can't just like force themselves into one committee. And so the attacker is going to be even we spread out too. And so if the entire set of validators is most honest, every committee is going to be most honest. And so like bad blocks are not going to go through. Right. So that's like one simple form of sharding. There's also other more clever things that you can do. So for example, there's this concept of zk-snarks, right? No, it's called zero knowledge proofs. So this is the idea that you can make a cryptographic proof that says I verified or I ran some complex computation on this piece of data and I got this answer. And so if you make these kinds of proofs, then like if you see a zk-snark that says some block is valid, then you're convinced that that block is valid. And even if everyone in that committee is evil, they have no way of making a valid proof for a bad block. Because the proof itself, it is a proof that you did the computation where that proof is much easier to verify than just running the computation yourself. And there's once again, super awesome mathematical cryptographic magic behind making zk-snarks work. So it gives you a little bit of a leg up over the 51% honest assumption. So it's a little hack that improves upon the random sampling thing. Exactly. And there's other hacks. There is another hack called data availability sampling that allows you to make sure that the data in the blocks was actually published. But basically, if you stack a couple of these tricks on top of each other, you can create a system where like I, as an individual participant, can be convinced that everything that's going on in this distributed blockchain thing is correct without actually personally checking more than like a percent of it. So that's charting. But as I understand, maybe correct me on this, is in this space of Ethereum, the charting happens on some fixed number. Like the split is on some fixed number. I think it's 64 is the currently sort of proposed number. So how does that help scaling? Is it just the fixed constant scaling by 64? And is that a way to achieve those crazy, the crazy amount of scaling that seems to be required to use cryptocurrency for purchasing? So doing like competing with credit cards and visa and so on. So first, I think like the 64 can be hard forked up over time. So we've stated so that like there's theoretically space in the data structure for a thousand and 24 shards is just that 64 of them are turned on. There are challenges with having more shards because like you have to have logic that just like checks and manages all of those shards. And if there's too many of them, then that becomes too expensive. But you know, even still you can improve quite a bit. And then the other thing that we're doing is if what we're getting maximum scalability by combining roll ups and sharding. So this might be a good time to talk about roll ups. What are roll ups? Okay. Now we're moving into layer two ideas. Yes. So the idea behind a roll up is basically that so instead of just publishing transactions directly on chain and having everyone do all of the checking of those transactions. What you do is you create a system where users send their transactions to some like central party called an aggregator. And like well theoretically you can have a system where like the aggregators which is around or where anyone can be an aggregator. So you know, it's still like permissionless to send things. Then what the aggregator does is they strip out all of the transaction data that like is not relevant to helping people update the state. So when I say the state, this is like a this is a very important kind of technical surround from watching. I mean account balances, code, things that are like memory internal memory of smart contracts. Like basically everything the blockchain actually has to keep track of and remember. Right. So you just put in that you take all these transactions, strip out all the data that's not relevant to telling people how to update the state. And then you take the data that's needed to update the state and then you're like really compress it. Right. So like for example, if we say, you know, I've Italian like have an account that's 0x AB58 blah blah blah blah blah blah blah and it's 20 bytes. Well, instead we can say, well, I have an account that is number 1874224 in the tree. And that goes down from 20 bytes to just like an index and a position which is three bytes. So you use all sorts of these fancy compression tricks and you basically just instead of publishing all these transactions, you publish this tiny compressed blob. So the amount of data that goes on chain goes down by maybe about a factor of 10. Right. And then the second thing is that you don't do the computation on chain. Instead, you do the computation off chain. And there's one of two ways to do this. Right. One is called a ZK roll up, which is you just provide a ZK snark that basically says, hey, look, I did this computation. And I have this proof that here's the here's the you know, some hash of the result and it's correct. And then you stick it on chain and everyone verifies this one proof instead of verifying all these transactions. And then the other approach is called an optimistic roll up, which is basically made of this scheme where like first someone says like, hey, this is what I think the result of the of applying these transactions is. And then someone else can say, I disagree. The result is different. And only if two people disagree, do you actually do it on it? Do you actually just like publish all of the data and run the whole that whole block on chain. So if there's disagreements, then you just like run everything on chain. And whoever was wrong, like loses a lot of money. So like disagreements are very rare and they're very expensive. And in a ZK roll up, you don't even rely on this like challenging game at all. You just rely on a proof. So the core principle is basically that instead of lots of transactions and all the transit everyone verifies every transaction, it is you take the transactions, you strip a strip of the outing can press them as much as possible. Then stick that on the blockchain. You do need to stick something on the blockchain just so that everyone else can like keep up to date with the state. So they know, you know, what all the contracts are, what all the balances are in all of this. But it's a very small amount of data. And then you use some one of these other off chain games, you know, could be this optimistic game could be a ZK snark to just prove that somebody out there did the computation and the result is correct. So you're pushing like 90% of the work off chain and then, well, 90% of the data and 99% of the computation off chain and then you still have 10% of the data and 1% of the computation on chain. And so, you know, your scalability goes up by a factor of about 100. So these systems are already alive for for some applications, right? So there's something called loopering, which is just a ZK roll up for payments, right? So you can have, you know, assets inside of inside of the loopering system and you can go around and transfer them. But what you, and you get like much lower transaction fees, right? Like instead of five dollars, you'd have to pay less than five cents. But the only problem is that this only supports a couple of applications right now, like making one that supports anything that you can do on Ethereum, just takes a bit more work. But that's being done as well, right? So like within a few months, I'm expecting, you know, fully Ethereum, capable roll-ups to be available as well. So then, it's a roll-ups just summarizing, you know, do most of the work off chain put only a little bit on chain, factor of 100 scaling, sharding, another factor of 100 scaling, 100 times 100 factor of 10,000, you know, hundreds of thousands of transactions a second and like, you know, there's your scalability. Okay. So you choose scalability. You can do a large number of transactions very quickly and the cost to do those transactions is a much lower. You wrote that in the long term, ZK roll-ups are going to win in terms of layer two technology. Specifically, you wrote, in general, my own view is that the in the short term, optimistic roll-ups, as you were saying, are likely to win out of general purpose EVM computation and ZK roll-ups are likely to win out for simple payments, exchange and other application specific use cases, just as you were saying. But in the medium to long term, ZK roll-ups will win out in all use cases as ZK snark technology improves. Why do you think ZK roll-ups are going to win the big picture battle over layer two technologies? So I think ZK roll-ups, like once you accept that the technology works, are just like conceptually simple or they have nicer properties. The reason is that they do not have this concept of a challenge game. Like as I mentioned, in an optimistic roll-up, the way that you ensure that the results are correct is that you let one person submit and they just submit with no proof. They just say, here's what I think the result is. And then if someone else disagrees, they make their own submission. And then if you have to disagreeing submissions, then you actually publish it on chain and you see who's right. But for this to work, you need to actually wait for someone to disagree. So like, for example, if I have an asset inside of an optimistic roll-up and I want to withdraw it, then I actually have to wait a week to withdraw it because if the block that contains my withdrawal turned out to be invalid, then there needs to be space for someone to disagree with it. But as with ZK roll-up, like you don't need time for disagreeing because you just have a proof, right? As soon as a block is submitted, there's a proof and it's correct. So if this agreement's especially in the long term or sparse, then you don't want to do the optimistic, the game-theretic thing. You want to do the ZK stock. Right. The ZK stuff is just like, you can, in a ZK roll-up, you can withdraw immediately. You don't have to worry about the economics of proving as much. There's just like fewer issues. The reason why ZK roll-ups are not winning everywhere today is because ZK's darks are still a crazy new technology, right? Like this is something that 10 years ago, it existed only in theory and there was not in practice. Then eight years ago, people were just getting excited about it. Bitcoin conferences for the first time, four years, starting four years ago, or three and a half years ago, even. That was the first time you were able to make any ZK's dark based anything on Ethereum. And then people started making them, and ZK technology has only really become efficient enough to do a lot of things within the past, maybe one and a half years. So it's new technology. It's crazy technology. It's admittedly scary technology. If you want to learn more, I also have an article about this on Vatelog.ca. It's actually really, really good. Most of you are writing, it's technical, but it's accessible. I highly, highly recommend to check out Vatelog's articles and blogs, whatever you call them. It's brilliant summary of the work. Actually, Ethereum documentation period is really good. I think that's somewhat crowdsourced. That documentation is really, really accessible and brilliant. But let me ask about other approaches to layer two, like side chains. One popular one is Polygon. What are your thoughts about Polygon, which is a layer two network? Is it positive? Is it negative for Ethereum? Is it both? Does it have a future? Is it's own chain? But it's using Ethereum. It's based on Ethereum essentially. Or maybe you can describe what it is. So I think there is a really big and important difference in security models between roll-ups and side chains, which is basically that roll-ups inherit from the security of Ethereum. If I have coins inside of loopering or optimism or arbitrage room or ZK sync, then even if everyone else in the world who is participating in these ecosystems hates me and wants to steal my money, I can still personally make sure that no matter what happens, I get my money out. It might be a bit expensive for me to get my money out. I have to do transactions on the main chain, but I'll be able to do it. Whereas in Polygon, which is a side chain, and so instead of being secured by Ethereum, it's also in part secured by its own proof of stake in census with its own token. So if 71% of the holders of Polygon tokens wanted to take my money in Polygon, they can. So that's the, and to be fair, there aren't even the supply. I don't think it's even that why we distribute it. Potentially, you could, this idea 51% of the token holders come in together and stealing everything. It's not impossible. Where does the scaling of Polygon come from? Why is it able to process much more transactions than Ethereum main chain? What's the idea there? I think in part, I imagine, I'm not sure exactly what its capacity level is, but I imagine it has a higher capacity because it's a bit more willing to take centralization trade-offs. And then another thing is that if the Ethereum ecosystem, even if it did not do that, if you think about an Ethereum ecosystem hypothetically scaling with side chains, then you would have 100 copies of Polygon. They would each have their own tokens, they would each have their own chains. And so even if each one of those chains was only as scalable as Ethereum, you could still, the total sum of them would still be 100 times more than Ethereum. The thing that I want to say in Polygon's favor, just to be very fair to them, I can really, I definitely really respect the work that they're doing. So start with a bit with that word of not criticism caution. It's that they made this kind of deliberate trade-off for very pragmatic reasons, which is that the Ethereum ecosystem needs to scale now. And there are applications that want to do something now. And if there aren't Ethereum friendly options for them, then they're not going to just wait peacefully and do nothing for 12 months. They're going to go to either Binance Smart Chain or one of some other system, or potentially something that just has totally no alignment with Ethereum values whatsoever. With Polygon, the best thing that you can say in Polygon's favor and against Optimism is that Optimism is not live in Polygonious Life. It just takes more work to create a system that has these extra roll-up security features. And so Polygon just said, we're going to be the system that makes the pragmatic trade-off. We're going to go functionality first. And then we can talk about adding back the security later. So I've talked to them. In principle, I think they're very open to the idea of adding more security and becoming a roll-up or at least adding a Polygon chain. Let's say roll-up at some point in the future, which is definitely something I think they absolutely should follow through one. But the fact that they exist now and so applications can kind of bootstrap now on a chain that even though security isn't perfect, at least it exists, that people can go use it. And then over time, the chain matures as the application's mature. I think a very reasonable strategy. And I'm definitely really happy that they're part of the ecosystem. Yeah, it's kind of interesting. The history of cryptocurrency has this tension of really good ideas that are hard to implement. So they take longer to implement. And ideas that are not as good, but are faster to implement. This is like the story of like, you have like JavaScript that basically took over the world because it was quick to implement within 10 days and then like later kept fixing itself. I don't know what to make of that. So from the engineering perspective, I'm more and more becoming comfortable in accepting the fact that our whole world will run a technology that's not as good as it could have been. Just because the crappy solution is faster to implement and it sticks. What do you make of that tension? I think the compromise that we've been taking within Ethereum is like when we have to take the crappy solution, we look for crappy solutions that are forward compatible with becoming good over time. Like when you build the quick and dirty thing, you would still already have ideas in your head about what the more complete thing with all the security features that it all would look like. Even if it requires a hard work. Yes. Even so, for example, we're shorting. I think it's likely that the first version of shorting that comes out is not going to have ZK Snark's and Data Availability sampling, for example. But we know what these technologies are. We feel like we have wrapped our heads around them. And so we know how to build a system where we can put all the pieces in place so that it becomes very easy to bolt those components on the future. If you do things that way, at the beginning, you can have your system that has the functionality, but say it has less security or less sustainability or less of something else. But then over time, it's designed in such a way that it has this easy on ramp to adding those things. If you don't think explicitly about being future-capatable, then you do often end up with a quick and dirty solution that backs you into a corner. There are definitely cases where, I think the Ethereum ecosystem has suffered from that. And we have had to expand pretty significant effort on, for example, removing features that we didn't realize that we actually can't sustain. One big example is just increasing the gas costs, so making some operations more expensive because they should be expensive because they actually take a lot of time in the process. Making something more expensive, taking some functionality away. If you can be cognizant of where you're likely going into the future, and if you don't know, even be cognizant of both the most likely paths that you'll take in the future, and thinking about your roadmap and coming up with a roadmap where you know that if you want to do either of those things, then you have a clean path toward it. That's probably the best practical way to get the best of worthwhile ones that we have. Let's talk about this wonderful process of merging. Okay, so there's the main net, which is the Ethereum 1.0 chain or the chain. What should we say? The chain that uses Pufa work as a consensus mechanism, and then there's what is it called? The beacon chain that uses the Pufa stake mechanism. I believe the beacon has been deployed successfully, as it's working, so that was in December 2020. There's a bunch of questions around that that's fascinating as well, but I think the most fascinating question is about merging those two. When do the two chains, one that's Pufa work, one that's Pufa stake merge? What are the most difficult parts of this process? As you've said, the way that we have set up this Pufa stake transition is that at first the Pufa stake chain is just a launch is on its own. This is the thing that happened in December. The Pufa stake chain has been running for close to six months now. By the time people watched this, it might actually be six months. It isn't actually coming to consensus on anything except for itself. The idea behind that is to just give the Pufa stake chain time to mature, time for people to build the ecosystem around it, time to make sure that there aren't any bugs, and just like proof to the community that Pufa stake actually is real. A full transition is realistic because the thing that you're transitioning to already exists and already works. At some points in the future, you have this event called the merge, where you basically take the activity that's being done inside of the Pufa work chain and you actually move it over into the Pufa stake chain so you get rid of the Pufa work side completely. The way that the merge will work is it's definitely gone through a few different iterations. The earlier versions of this actually required more work for users and more work for clients. It was much more like, oh, there's this new chain, there's this old chain, and then everyone has to migrate from the old chains in the new chain and then at some points, well forget about the old chain. The new version is designed to be much more seamless for users. Basically, what actually happens is that the old chain basically becomes embedded inside the new chain. Starting from the merge transition block, every Pufa stake chain block is going to contain a block of what we consider now to be the Ethereum chain today, but we'll call it the execution chain. Then at the same time, to create one of these blocks, you're not going to need Pufa work anymore. Basically, at the same time, you both get rid of the Pufa work requirements for one of these blocks to be valid, but instead, you require these blocks to be embedded inside of the Pufa stake blocks. You basically have a chain inside a chain. This is from an architecture perspective, you might think it's a little bit suboptimal, but it actually has some nice properties and makes it easier to think about the consensus and think about what we call the execution layer, transactions and contracts separately and upgrade them separately. It also just means that the upgrade process is extremely seamless. Because from the point of view of a client that's following the chain, you basically have to update nothing. You're still following the same chain and follows the same rules, except instead of checking Pufa work, you'll switch to checking that these blocks are embedded inside of blocks of the Pufa stake so there'll be this merge block that will mark this transition and over time, I guess the new chain will contain the full record of all the transactions that's ever happened on the previous chain on the old chain. Maybe I'm asking a dumb question here, but in this process, is the new chain going to have all the information of the past transactions? The new chain is not going to hold the information from what happened in the Ethereum chain before the merge. Ethereum clients of the people are going to use around the time of the merge and soon after the merge, they're probably just going to sync and check the Pufa work chain up to the merge and then they're going to check the Pufa stake chain. But at some point in the future, I think people will just stop bothering checking the Pufa work before the merge. So that old history information is not important for the future, like if you're operating actively on the new chain, that history is not important to you. It's not strictly important for any smart contract or just like applications that run on the blockchain. It can be important to users and it can be important for some applications, but we're basically saying that maintaining and serving that is not going to be simultaneously the responsibility of every Ethereum node. If you want that information, there can be separate protocols for backing it up. And these other protocols actually exist. There's something called the graph, which is doing some history retrieval. Potentially you can just take that entire chain and take it on BitSwar and there's lots of ways to archive it and create customized search protocols for it. So what's your sense why so there's a Python 2 and Python 3 and it took forever for people to switch? What's your sense why this merge has been taking longer than perhaps was expected? I think the biggest reason is just we've been underestimating the technical complexity. There's a lot of technical complexity in making a successful proof of stake chain. There's a lot of technical complexity in actually figuring out the transition process. There's... So that's bigger than social complexity. So the technical complexity you would say is the bigger reason for the any delays than the social complexity? I actually think so. I think we've been very fortunate to not have too much social complexity around the merge. So not much drama? No. I think the biggest part of the reason is just because we have been talking about proof of stake and charting as being part of the roadmap since almost a very beginning of the project. The very first proof of stake blog post is from January 2014, which was two months after the project started and maybe even a day after the announcement. So proof of stake was not something that we kind of put on anybody by surprise. And then when the Dow fork happened and the people on the ETC side split off, I think it also just happens that a lot of the people that were not willing to stomach the Dow fork and then join the ETC side, they were the more Bitcoin-y types and the more Bitcoin-y types do also tends to like proof of work more. And so that also sort of ended up sort of purifying the communities on both sides, I guess. So if the RAM classic is not switching to proof of stake and they're happy with their setup and by the time that it came to the beacon channel launching and now I think the community is the very strongly in favor of the proof of stake switch. But let me ask the question that no engineer wants to hear, which is the question of timeline. When do you think the merge will happen? Do you have a sense it might happen this year? Do you have a sense it might be pushed towards next year 2022 or even beyond? I think early it's one in 22 is the most realistic. There's definitely still an optimistic case of it happening this year, but the realistic thing to count on is definitely the year I'm early part of next year. Is there specific things that stand out to you? They'll make you feel good about progress if you see it happening. So the thing that we had last month is we had this online hackathon called Rayanism, where basically a bunch of the different client developers that are going to be part of the transition hacks together some test nets of the post merge if there are M chain. So these were only test nets of what would happen after the merge. They were not test nets of the transition itself. So the thing that people are working on now actually is the transition. So having a full specification of both the transition and post transition, I mean we have specifications now, but in a realistic way, they'll probably needs to have a couple of changes and have things that continue to be ironed out. And then have a test net that does both the transition and the post transition. And then like once you have a test network, then you just have to do a lot of testing and audit it. And then do some runs on not just a specialized test network, but on say an existing test network, Rob Center, Rinkerbe that if there are people already significantly used. And if it works, then you can deploy the transition on main net. Just as a quick comment because this is fascinating. In August of last year, there was this Modala. I believe it's pronounced Mendesha. It's a yes, South American subway station, I forget where. But spelled the two Ls. Yeah, yeah, because that's the Spanish works, right? Like the two Ls have with Nasha. Yeah, okay. Cool. Anyway, but I read about it in middle of August, August 14th, there was an incident on that test net. What how does this process work? Like what do you learn from those kinds of incidents when stuff goes wrong in the test process? I think that incident was that there was a consensus failure of some kind as I remember. Basically just different clients and interpreting things in different ways. And then one of them getting kicked off the network. And then it ended up taking a while to actually like get everyone to get back online. Like a big part of the reason why it took weeks to resolve, right? It's because it's on a test network like the coins are valuable. And so there's not really this big push of any kind for people to actually, you know, going down with a new client so they can start participating again. And so, you know, it definitely took a while until the chain started finalizing again. But and then also like there was, I think, another round of just not finalizing in October as I remember. That I mean, there were definitely things that we learned. Like there were a lot of things, especially that client developers just learned about like optimization and how to build their clients in a way that they can process things efficiently. There's a lot that we learned from just like seeing the full lifecycle of what happens when more than a third of the validators go offline and then finalization stops. And then that kind of weird unusual state of the chain continues for a while. And then eventually everyone who was not participating just gets enough of their stake. We don't use the word slash, we use the word leaked for this. But like basically also burned until, you know, the people who are participating go back up to two thirds and then goes back to finalizing. So just seeing all of those edge cases play out live, I think actually we helped a lot and probably helped really contribute to making us feel better about main net. I mean, there's also an incident just recently in April 24th of 2021 where this was on beacon, I guess, that was a bug discovered in the software client prism that prevented roughly 70% of validators on the network from producing blocks. I mean, maybe you can comment on what happened, but broadly like the big picture, what kind of stuff are you worried about in terms of problems that might arise? I were talking about small bugs. I were talking about like emergent, social, unexpected social bugs. You know, what are the things that worry you about the future of Ethereum you want to make sure you construct mechanisms that prevent those things from happening? So one of the lucky things there was that this particular bug only prevented proposes all self blocks. It did not prevent attestations. So attestations is just a mechanism for voting on blocks and it's the attestations that are actually responsible for the chain finalizing. So it coming to this more permanent agreement on blocks. So the chain was actually quite stable all the way through. I think the thing that we generally learned from these experiences is just how valuable it is to have this multi-client network. So this is one of these areas where I think Ethereum distinguishes itself from Bitcoin, for example, that in Ethereum, we don't have one single client that everyone just runs. There's multiple implementations of the protocol. And these multiple implementations, they all process and verify the blocks that each other can verify. So they all speak the same language. Now sometimes when there's a bug, they disagree. When two clients disagree because of a bug, we call this a consensus failure. And consensus failures are pretty serious. When you have a client's monoculture like Bitcoin does, then it's more rare to have consensus failures. You still have them actually. Bitcoin had a consensus failure between two different versions of the same client back in 2013. But they're also likely to happen. But the interesting thing is that the multi-client architecture has actually, I think, saves Ethereum much more than it's heard it. So even in this most recent incidents, like, Prism was not producing blocks, but all the other clients were still producing blocks. There's four others, right? Yes, it's Prism, Nimbus, Tecru, and the Lighthouse. And then also, Ethereum back in 2016 had this fun events that we call the Shanghai DOS attacks. They're called that because the attacks started right on the first day of our annual conference at Defcon that happens to be in Shanghai that year. So what happened, so basically was that someone came up with a way to create blocks that were very slow for one client to process, but not the other clients. So at that time, they were basically two Ethereum clients. They were called Gath and parody. Right now, I think the top three ones are Gath and Nethermind and Bezu. But what happened as a result of us having two clients is that the attacker was just not able to come up with blocks that both clients were completely failing at processing. And so a lot of the miners and a lot of network participants, they just kept on switching between the two implementations, depending on which one worked. And that actually really helped the chain, the chain, I kind of survived through that month of attacks as the attacker just like kept on hammering at our system and identifying all of the weaknesses and just like forcing our clients to do this, you know, rapid sprint of just like optimizing the hell out of everything and make sure there aren't any of those dots blocks and dots bugs remaining. So that was another example. And then like as accounts report, as a counter example, so like something that also shows the point from the other side, Bitcoin had this bug in 2010, right? The balance overflow bug. Basically, someone created a transaction that had two outputs and those outputs had like were both of a few billion Bitcoin. So like about to the power of 63 Satoshi's. And then if you add those numbers together, you go above to the power of 64. And of course, you know, computers like once you go above to the power of 64, you wrap around. And so the Bitcoin nodes thought that there was enough money to pay for the transaction because it was asking for let's say like a billion Satoshi's or something, but actually it was asking for to the power of 64 plus a billion. And so, you know, the attacker just managed to create like billions of Bitcoin out of finair. And this was not only discovered and fixed after something like 12 hours. But you know, if there had been a Bitcoin had been a multiple implementation system, then what if almost certainly happened is like one of the clients would have bugged out, but the other clients would have probably, you know, actually had a check for that, right? And so there would have been a consensus failure, but at least that would have like awarded everyone that there is a problem very quickly. And it also would have given everyone just like obvious social permission to go and, you know, pick which whichever one of the chains is correct and solve the problem. So like that's I think a big learning that we've had from multiple of our experiences in the Ethereum ecosystem, just like validating this multi client model. And to be fair, it's a model that we get criticized for a lot, right? Like Bitcoin people talk about, you know, the risk of consensus failures that this creates. VC types are like, well, you know, isn't it expensive and wasteful to funds through software teams where you could just be making, you know, one quote-focused effort. They love the word focused. And Ethereum is not that, but it's amazing despite not being in that. Yeah. Yeah. The, basically, yeah, so that was interesting. And then there have definitely been other warnings as well, just from like seeing the chain live and seeing what actually is the staking experience, like what are the actual inside-difts for all the different participants. So I definitely feel like we're gaining a lot from this sort of one year of trial running the chain before we actually make all of Ethereum depend on it. Let me ask perhaps a strange question, but, you know, proponents of Bitcoin will say things like Bitcoin fixes everything. So why do we need Ethereum versus like Bitcoin plus lightning network for scalability? And then using Bitcoin for it with its Bufel work for security. So in this kind of, it is perhaps sort of a strange question, but it's a high level question. Why do we need another technology? Yes, there's a bunch of nice features, but like doesn't Bitcoin fix everything already? So the thing that always attracted me about Bitcoin is, you know, these values of, you know, decentralization creating these open, provisional systems that anyone can participate in, and that aren't just going to flop over and die if whoever created them gets bored. And like, that are resistance to like whoever runs them breaking the rules and all of these things, right? And I think that pretty strongly that these principles are really valid and important to much more things than just money, right? Like Bitcoin is the blockchain for money, and Ethereum is built from the start as a general purpose blockchain, right? It's, you know, there is ether the asset on Ethereum, but then you can also make, you know, decentralized financial things, what we call defi today, you know, you can make like E and S the decentralized domain name system. You can put make prediction markets on it. You can make totally non-financial systems that just like keep track of whether or not some certificate was signed or whether or not some like cryptographic key got revoked. There's this big long list of like just interesting things that you could use of what blockchain's to do, right? Like basically they are sort of the missing piece that we are without them, the kinds of things that a decentralized computer network can do is we are limited. And once you have them and a lot of those limitations end up going away. And so Ethereum was like always from the beginning about that, right? It's about like, hey, this isn't just money. There's so much more that you could do if you could just go ahead and make any infrastructure or, you know, digital institution or dour, whatever you want to call it, where you the kind of the base layer of the logic is just executed in this open and transparent way where everyone can see what's going on. Or, you know, if you like your zero knowledge proofs, at least everyone can see proofs that prove to you that what's going on follows the rules. And you don't need to just constantly keep trusting centralized actors. And hence the smart contracts. As being a sort of a core technology as part of Ethereum. Yes, exactly. Smart contracts, the computer programs that are running on Ethereum, they are like the core of what makes Ethereum general purpose. So I think like I do think that, you know, there's a lot more that are wrong with the world than just money, right? Like I'm not one of these people who thinks that, you know, if you get rid of the currency and you replace it with cryptocurrency, then suddenly wars are going to go away, right? Because like first of all, you know, like seniorage revenue is only a small portion of government revenue, right? It's like what, 5, 10%, something like that. Second of all, like if you are the sort of, this is one of the things I don't even get about their philosophy. Like, let's say you're the sort of person who is a, like, inextreme and very distrusting libertarian. And you think that these governments are terrible, right? Like we know today that governments find a combination of, you know, things like welfare and things like, you know, the military that, you know, goes in like bombs people in Afghanistan, right? And so the question you have to ask is like, okay, you, with your new, you know, magic newfangled cyber currency that takes over the world, take away the government's ability to have seniorage revenue. And so you reduce the government's revenue by 10%. If the government is that evil, which portion of its expenses is it going to take that 10% from? Is it going to stop the bombing people in Afghanistan or is it going to cut welfare? If you think it's the first, you have a very optimistic view of the government, right? So that's, I guess my perspective on like why the whole, you know, we're going to save the world and create, create peace by like denying governments the right to stealth taxation kind of perspective. Does it really make much sense for me? And I do think that there is real value that comes from a yeah, decentralized and open currency. Like just the fact that there is a financial infrastructure that anyone in the world can, you know, go ahead and use, right? Like it's, uh, that's something that can easily be a big boon for people, right? There's a lot of places where the currency is much less stable than the dollar. And you know, these people like they don't, well, if they use Bitcoin, their only option is to get Bitcoin's, right? Which, you know, are also pretty volatile. If they use Ethereum, then, you know, they can get Ether, but then they can also get stable coins, right? And you might think that, you know, oh, you're not being ideologically pure. And now you're giving them stable coins, which are mirroring dollars. And obviously, dollars are going to collapse too. But the reality is that dollars are fast, we're more stable than the Venezuelan Boulevard. Uh, so like there are really, like meaningful and beneficial things that you can give to people by creating having a global and open financial system. But I think if you want to actually do that, like you have to have much more than just a currency, right? And then if you want to go beyond financial things, then, you know, I have to obviously have much more than a currency and then, you know, you also have to actually take scalability seriously, because the non-financial applications, like nobody's going to pay five dollars a transaction for them. Can we return to dogs? Sure. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. The other ones categorically forbidden? Yeah, categorically. Is there any cryptocurrency based on cats actually? I think there are, like, was there was cat coin, there was Nyan coin. For some reason, they just didn't catch on as much as the dog coins did. Okay. So let's talk about Dogecoin and Elon Musk. Elon said that quote, ideally, Doge speeds up block time 10X, increases block size 10X and drops fee 100X. Then it wins hands down. End quote. You said in the blog post partially responding to that, that there are subtle technical reasons why this is not possible. To this Elon said that you quote, fear the Doge. So let's talk about this. What are the technical hurdles for Dogecoin that prevent it from becoming one of the primary cryptocurrencies of the world and do you in fact fear the Doge? I definitely feel obligated to correct the record. I definitely do not fear the Doge. I love the Doge. I actually visited the Doge in a Japan a few years back. She's an amazing dog. This is still alive. Wait, the original Doge? Yeah. So we accept Doge every year for our annual DEF CON conferences. So I definitely don't think Ethereum is opposed to Dogecoin. I kind of want to feel like Ethereum is at least a little bit in spirit itself a Dogecoin. And then as I mentioned, I love Doge. I bought a bunch of Doge. I still hold a bunch of Doge. On the scalability question, the challenge basically is the limits scalability and the trade-offs with centralization. If you just increase the parameters without doing anything else, then it just becomes more and more difficult for people to validate the chain. It just becomes more likely that the chain becomes centralized and becomes vulnerable to all kinds of capture. So does it need some of the layer two technologies that we've been talking about? I personally think that if Doge wants to somehow bridge through Ethereum and then people can trade Doge thousands of times a second inside of loopering, that would be amazing. If they want to just take ZK roll-up style technology and just have thousands of transactions a second on their own chain, then that would be a great outcome as well. So is there a ways for Ethereum and Dogecoin to work together? So there's a power behind a person like Elon Musk pushing the development of a cryptocurrency. Is there a ways to leverage that power and that momentum to improve Ethereum, to improve some of the cryptocurrencies that are already technologically advanced and pushing forward that kind of technology? I definitely think there's room for that meme of Doge taking over that store. Yes, I've seen it. Is there a way to ride that storm that wave of the Doge taking over? I think if we can have a secure Doge to Ethereum bridge, then that would be amazing. And then when Ethereum gets its scalability, any scalability thing that works for Ethereum assets, you would be able to also trade wrapped Doge with extremely low transaction fees and very high speed as well. Is there a precedent for building secure bridges between cryptocurrencies? Is that, I mean, how difficult is this kind of task? That's definitely something that's in its infancy. There definitely have been some cross-chain interaction things that I've been done before. So the earliest is probably the concept of merge mining, right? When a chain just makes its entire proof-of-work algorithm dependent on the proof-of-work algorithm of another chain. So I think famous Dogecoin actually merge mines to Litecoin, which is I think in retrospect, it's not looking like a very good choice because now Dogecoin is bigger than Litecoin. But if there's potentially some way for Dogecoin to merge mine with an Ethereum proof-of-stakeance of some kinds, then that could be an interesting alternative. So that's one type of chain interaction. As far as bridges, like one chain reading another chain, early in Ethereum's history, there was this project called BTC really. It's a smart contract on Ethereum that just verifies Bitcoin blocks. I think people stopped really carrying about in maintaining it because there just weren't enough applications that were actually interested in using it at the time and the transaction fee has got too high to actually maintain it. So I think if we want to make a BTC relay 2.0 that becomes cheaper because you know, it uses an arcs or something like that, then you probably could. But maybe now is the time when you actually can do that sort of one wave verification. But the one challenge though is that if you want to have a bridge that allows you to move assets between chains, then you don't just need one wave verification, you need two wave verification. Ethereum can verify anything because Ethereum smart contracts can just run arbitrary code. But if you want Bitcoin to be able to do things based on what happens in Ethereum lands, then Bitcoin would have to basically, well, they can do everything with soft forks because that's their religion, but they'll do it that way. If Doge wants to make a fork where that allows to weigh a large transfer ability with Ethereum, then they could. I think that would be a lovely collaboration to make if there's interest. I think there might actually even be some multi-seag funds that have some funding. It's just a bounty for someone to make a bridge between the two. Could you maybe try to psychoanalyze Elon Musk for a brief second? So what are your thoughts about Tesla and Elon Musk's journey through the cryptocurrency world? So first with Bitcoin and then with Dogecoin. So acquiring and large, acquiring, holding a large amount of Bitcoin, and I believe at least considering the acquiring and holding a large amount of Dogecoin, positive as negatives. What do you think the future for Tesla and SpaceX in the cryptocurrency space looks like? Do you think they'll consider Ethereum? I'm sure that if they stay in the cryptocurrency ecosystem at all, then they have to at some point. Bitcoin, number one, Dogecoin, number three, and then, or number two, and then Ethereum can be whatever that other number is. If Ethereum only becomes a Dogecoin, somehow maybe change the logo to incorporate a dog as I'm sorry. I almost like doors sneak in behind. That would be fascinating. What would the merge happen? I think Elon, you definitely would make a mistake if you were to kind of ascribe too much sophisticated, malevolent, or any deep intentionality to the whole process. He's just a human being and he likes dogs. I think that is literally the reasoning behind the whole Dogecoin thing. There is some aspect to which the guy helped launch a car into space. You could ask, what is the purpose of that? I think the purpose of that is fun. I think he truly is more and more, especially lately, embodying the whole idea that the most the most entertaining outcome is the most likely and he's fully embracing the most entertaining outcome. In many ways, Dogecoin is the most entertaining cryptocurrency. As cryptocurrency becomes more and more impactful in the world, people are getting more and more serious about it. He's selecting the cryptocurrency that is the most the least serious and the most fun. There's something to that, coupling fun with technological sophistication and somehow figuring out a way to do that. I want the world to be fun. I think the world being fun is great. Let me ask about a couple of other technologies. What are your thoughts about Chainlink and Hybrid Smart Contracts that utilize off-chain external data sources? I think it's definitely necessary for a smart contract so that you do a lot of things to use off-chain data of some kind. If you want to have a stable coin, you need a price work also. You know what price you're targeting. If you want to have some fancy crop insurance gadget, I think Etherisk has been doing a lot of good work with that. I think it was either Kenya or Sri Lanka are both like they're making a lot of good progress in some of those places. You need some kind of Oracle to tell you did it actually rain in this particular area. If you want to have assets that mirror other financial assets, you need an Oracle. If you want to have a prediction market, you need an Oracle. So projects that provide Oracle's are definitely really important. There are definitely different kinds of use cases like Auger is more about events. The Oracle is designed differently from Chainlink. I can like and facizes the whole. We have a fast automated thing that just gives you data quickly. Whereas Auger is more, we don't give a crap about speed. We don't need to give a crap about speed because if you want to get your money out on a prediction market, where in reality it's resolved, you can probably just sell your coins for 99 cents anyway. I think Chainlink is definitely taking a good and the important part of the Oracle design space. I'm definitely happy that there is that project taking the task on. At the same time, I do think that their frog army on Twitter can get a bit intense at times. Is there a way to incorporate Oracle network type of ideas into Ethereum? I personally would prefer the Ethereum base layer. Stay away from trying to provide too much functionality because once you have the Ethereum base layer making a claim about the US dollar Ethereum price. At some sense, you're basically saying that Ethereum as a base platform starts making what could be geopolitical statements. For example, imagine if there was some simple war in the US split up and you had two currencies that both claims to be the US dollar. Ethereum would have to pick one for the sake of everyone who was already using that work also. Does that mean that the blockchain would be taking a position in this big, mega-political debate? I think for just those kinds of reasons, I would prefer Ethereum itself to be more of this pure platform that just analyzes transactions mathematically using the deterministic incentives roles. If you need the Oracle, that can be a layer too. I think Ethereum benefits from not trying to do everything out layer one and having this very robust way or two ecosystem where you have all these projects doing interesting things. Focus on the basic technology of way the politics. Gotcha. Let me ask a bit of a human question. Charles Hoskinson, someone you've worked with in the early days of Ethereum, there appears to my outsider view to have been a bit of a falling out. Is there a positive, inspiring human story to be told about why you two parted ways? I kind of want to let the various books about Ethereum speak for themselves. But I feel like since that time, Charles has clearly progressed in the matured in a lot of ways. In people who follow Charles closely, we have definitely told me that 2021 Charles is very different from 2014 Charles. I'm sure it's 2021 Vitalik, as much different from 2014 Vitalik as well. I'm kind of interested how the 2030 and 2040 Vitalik and Charles look like as well. Oh, interesting. Like the progression of the humans. Is this going to be one of those things? Are everyone comes full circle and then 2030 Vitalik and Charles are best friends? Yeah, I mean, not the best friends, but some kind of are able to reminisce in ways that puts some of the tension of the past behind. I think such things are possible. I think people definitely absolutely have a right to and they should strive to just constantly change and reinvent themselves. Is there something you could say about your thoughts about the Cardano project that Charles Hoskinson leads? They've worked on some interesting ideas that mirror some of the ideas in Ethereum, proof of stake, working on smart contracts and all those kinds of things. Is there something again positive inspiring that you could say? Are they a competitor? Is it complimentary technology? There's definitely interesting ideas in there. I do think Cardano takes a bit of a different approach than Ethereum and that they really emphasize having these big academic proofs for everything. Whereas Ethereum tends to be more okay with heuristic arguments and in part because it's just trying to do more faster. But there's definitely very interesting things that come out of IOHK research. Can you comment on the idea? I sort of having a foot in research enjoy Charles's kind of emphasis on papers and like deep academic rigor. Is there what's the role of deep research rigor in the world of cryptocurrency? Interesting. I'm actually the sort of person who thinks deep rigor is overrated. The reason why I think deep rigor is overrated is because I think like the in terms of like why protocols fail. I think the number of failures that are outside the model is even more important. It is like bigger and more important than the failures that are inside the model. Right. So if you take selfish mining for example, like that original discovery from 2013 that showed how Bitcoin does like even if it has a 50% fault tolerance assuming everyone's honest and when we has a zero to 33% fault tolerance depending on your network model if you assume rational actors. And like to me that was a great example of like an outside the model failure. Because traditional consensus research just up until before the blockchain days did not think about incentivization much. Right. There was a little bit of thought about incentivization. There's like a couple of papers on the Byzantine altruist rational model but it wasn't that deep. It was mostly operating under the assumption that this we're going to make consensus between 15 participants and these are institutions. And if something goes wrong then if it was still we can figure out whether or not it was deliberate offline and if they did something evil we can sue them. Whereas in the crypto world you can't do that. Right. And so like that whole discovery basically arose just because like you know the model of traditional consensus research just like didn't cover the responsibilities and then like once you go out of the model those like other issues do exist. Right. So but then at the same time like they're definitely are protocols that turn out to be insecure that do have failures inside the model. Like this reminds me of the time when I think I found a bug in a proposed consensus implementation from either BitShares or EOS this happened around the end of 2017. So that was definitely inside the model because like they had a very clear idea of what they were trying to achieve. They had a very clear description and like there's a very clear mathematical argument for why the description doesn't lead to what they're trying to achieve. But ultimately what you're trying to achieve can never be fully described in formal language. Right. Like this is the big discovery of you know the AI safety people for example right. Like just having a specification of what you want is an insane we hard problem. And like the more powerful the optimizer that you're giving the instructions to the more you have to be careful. And so you know I think there are the kind of these two sides. And then the other thing is that a lot like a lot of the academic approach ends up like basically optimizing for other people inside of the academic system. And it doesn't really optimize for like curious outsiders. Whereas like I personally met like totally optimized for curious outsiders or at least I feel like I strive to. So I guess like that's my case for why I like tends to behave in ways that you know occasionally traditional academic types criticize as being reckless. But I mean on the other hands you know there's definitely real benefits that come from like just taking a rigorous approach especially when you know what the thing like you know what the specification is of what you're trying to get. And like you're trying to kind of improve your way or provide protocols that actually provide that. And like you know exactly what you're looking for. I feel like realistically you probably want to do both kinds of analysis. And like sometimes even want to do both kinds of analysis and stages right like you have you want to do more quick and dirty things and even want public feedback on the quick and dirty stuff. And then later on you formalize it more and then you get more feedback. Like in general I guess I feel like the norms of research in the future like the internet has just changed so much there's no way that it's not going to and you know it's it's even changed like collaboration structures and like the patterns in which we work with each other. There's no way that the correct structure for collaborative research is the same as what it was 15 years ago but like what combination of these existing components and of newly ideas it is like that's something that's you know totally legitimate to kind of fight it out. And I think it's great that there is a different ecosystems that have different attitudes of things. Like I think you know there's a big possibility that you know things that the Ethereum may waste at the Ethereum ecosystem approaches some problems is totally wrong. If there's other ecosystem of different principles and they do well that's something that we can learn from. In the spirit of the depth for search can you comment on AI safety and some people are really worried about the existential risks of artificial intelligence. Is there something you could say that's hopeful about how we avoid in the same kind of line of reasoning about creating former models versus kind of looking outside the model to what the real world actually is like. Is there some lessons from that we can take and map onto the AI safety world where the potentials of the technology whether it's in autonomous weapons systems or just the paper clip problem that we can avoid AI destroying the world. So my impression is actually that like this is more of a kind of far away impression and it could be wrong that it might even be that one of the challenges that AI is not formal enough. Like because AI does is very like practitioner oriented right like it's all about like hey I found a couple of hacks and look I ran them and look you know they seem to improve classification accuracy from you know 0.684 to 0.773. So a lot of the time look there just isn't actual science behind like why this hack works and why this other hack doesn't work you just sort of like trial and error your way into it. But and like I could see how that approach works but at the same time like that approach is not good for a legibility for example. It's not good for like understanding what the hack is actually going on like how these kinds of systems can see if it might fail. Like there's even you know a debate on like can you take GPT-3 like things and just scale them up and their intelligence will continue to improve or is there just like some types of reasoning that they're fundamentally bad at and like yeah they're not going to get good at no matter how much you like scale this exact same approach and add more hardware to it. So having like thinking about what's going on more explicitly I mean my understanding is that a big part of a AI safety research is trying to do that sort of stuff right and formalize. Yeah formalize try to improve just AI legibility like trying to understand you know if the AI makes some classification so we can actually see like what happens and look what's going on in the middle. I mean whereas with crypto or with traditional cryptography you know it's like very much not well okay and I should quite say that it's traditional cryptography is this interesting mix of being very formal and being very informal because it's very formal with given these security assumptions prove that the protocol works under these security assumptions. The voices where it's very informal is like well how do we even know that there isn't any fish and algorithm for factoring numbers yeah we kind of tried it for 40 years and then you know so far no one's found anything better than the general number field sieve and like okay fine we'll just assume it's fine. You know how do we know you can't find the discrete log between two elliptic curve points like that there's a couple of decades no one's found anything faster than like baby step-join step-step so that's and like there's definitely ways in which that approach really makes sense right because at least you can concentrate your analysis on a small number of building blocks and like you know you do have some intuitive reasoning about those building blocks but like at least there's a small number of building blocks and lots of people are looking at them and then everything else just sort of gets formally built on top and you actually can like mathematically reduce the security of big things to building blocks right like you can have mathematical proofs that say you know if you make a zkson arc of a yes statement when in reality that statement is false then you can use that to like extract information out of elliptic curves that you know it completely breaks the problem or something like that so to see it gets not because an example where formalism is beneficial absolutely yeah and so maybe you can have the same kind of stuff in the AI safety within what within AI systems that you can get get a hold of some kind of aspect of the systems that you can control right provably yeah and then in group blockchains and cryptocurrency I think the one area where consensus like mechanisms is still more an art than a science is that these aren't just like technological systems they're crypto economic systems right and they make assumptions about people and which assumptions you can make about people is not something that you can prove with math right that even just the basic 51 percent exactly people are honest yeah can you trust the 51 percent if you can't trust the 51 percent can you trust the other 49 percent to be able to coordinate on like making their own fork what will happen to coin prices like how do people as human beings react to these events like there there's all of these assumptions yeah but no at the same time look if you can write down the assumptions then you can like do formal things with them I almost forgot to ask you about one of the most exciting aspects of Ethereum I mean it's non-technical I think it's a societal it's social which is NFTs so what do you think what do you think about the explosion of NFTs in the recent months especially in the art world and beyond and what does the future look like so this is maybe the social impact on the world on the individual creators of all kinds like is that something you've actually expected to see an FT's having this kind of impact and beyond what do you think will happen in the in the digital space with NFTs in virtual reality and gaming all those kinds of things I was definitely surprised by like NFT is in particular like I even actually I think might be on records somewhere on some tech conference panel like they were asking you know it was one of those overrated or underrated sections and ask about NFTs and I thought and I said like hey I think NFTs are overrated yeah and you know in retrospect that's her now to be quite wrong I think like I guess I just personally can't really relates to this concept of like spending a lot of money on a thing like there's nothing you know there's no queer kind of understanding of why that thing would maintain its value uniqueness of a thing having value right exactly yeah that's like I definitely am like cannot really understand you know the psychology behind like buying you know paying 200 thousand dollars for original art painting I'd be like you know if I had a mansion just like give me photo copies of everything you can hang three photo copies of the Mona Lisa actually why would even have the Mona Lisa I think I'd probably just like have some Yancats or something that's one thing more mathematics or theoretical computer science cannot formalize why the heck NFTs are valuable but the thing that I and that makes me very happy about the space now that it has happened is that I mean let's get back to the conversation that we had at the beginning right like I'm interested in this concept of decentralized public goods funding right like I want things that are good and valuable to as much as possible also be things that can you know economically sustain the people who produce them right because if you don't have that then either the public goods just don't get produced at all or people make like centralized versions that have some of the properties and try to be substitutes but actually just like concentrate control in a very small group and you know both of those things are not very nice so the nice thing about NFTs would be well if you're an artist and you can just mint NFTs and this is a source of revenue it's like great that's another stream of revenue for you know creative work that often does still get get underfunded and that's amazing okay let me ask you a weird question we talk about Craig Craig right a little bit but a lot of people write to me one of two emails one email is calling any coin outside of Bitcoin a scam and then the other email is saying my my favorite coin is the best coin it's going to save the world whatever that coin is and so I sit back and I look at I have no idea I trust I try to figure out like the humans that I trust in the space just basic human qualities but do you think some coins are scams do you think some coins maybe another way to ask it are scammyer than other coins how are people they're looking outside of the space where there's all these cryptocurrencies supposed to figure out what is a scam and not or how to use the right kind of language when talking about them because there's the harshness of the language from the Bitcoin Maximus that doesn't just say everything's a scam including a theorem but they use terms like shit coin that says it's not only a scam it's like a waste of time I mean every word you can use they say that that's very harsh and then some people are just apply the word scam a little much much more conservatively and just refer to coins that are legitimately are trying to scam people out of their money as scams so what do we do with this word scam should it ever be applied to coins and is it a binary thing or is it a gray area? Hmm it's I think it's definitely a gray area like there's definitely things that are really in actual we scams like mean bit connects would be one example of something that's a way on the scam's spectrum did you see there it's 2017 promotional video by the way oh big connect yeah hey hey what's that what's up what's up big connect oh this was there was this three-bid at 48 second video that was just of this guy making this totally crazy rad today was that some conference in Vietnam where they were of course like trying to convince so much of people to buy this coin and they had this claims about how it would go to go up and value yeah that was definitely like the peak of these pure completely scammy coins and you know the that was definitely really terrible and I actually I feel like we have a less despite cryptocurrency as a whole being bigger we actually have quite a bit less of that now but then of course you know there's this bit this spectrum of things that are not completely scams and then things that are not scams and that are technically totally fine projects but where the their community is just incredibly sketchy and then all the way to you know things that are where the community is nice but maybe the what the project is just fundamentally incapable of achieving what it's trying to do or the community doesn't realize and then you know really good projects right so like if you want to go a step like well if that's 100% scam then like you know what would I call like say 80% scam well like Bitcoin SV is one example this is a Craig writes work of Bitcoin like theoretically it's a blockchain right it's a fork of Bitcoin it has you know 512 megabyte blocks if you really wanted to you could use the blockchain you know it's it satisfies the properties that you can send transactions onto it you can probably you know use it does as a backup to store your files if you really wanted to just because it has so it has so much space and it might fail but like it's the but at the same time like you know as we basically said like Craig writes is a scammer and like half the you know community is just totally that should insane so the humans the humans of a particular cryptocurrency is what makes for a scam and not like the humans at the top that have a voice right guiding the community yeah like I think you know in the case of BSV of the humans they yeah make just completely wrong and just obviously wrong claims about like what BSV is capable of accomplishing and you know what it can say we could accomplish and like there's just a lot of aspects of it that make it feel like a money grab so that's one example and then you know you gotta go a bit further and then you know you have like the trunks of the world and like you know that's a platform you know you can use it you can do you can do stuff on it but at the same time like you know they did plagiarize the IPFS white paper and then you know they have so there's scammy qualities yeah see the thing that throws me off a lot it's make it's very difficult for me is that most coins but the ones that make me feel like are scammy have a large community of people that are super positive about it like and they'll write to me hmm now that said sort of on the flip side of that Bitcoin people are also very positive hmm there's some sense and the reason I was having like squinty eyes looking at Bitcoin for quite a while is like why is everyone so positive I was getting total cult vibes like like the ideas are not grounded in truth but are grounded in an obsession of like when you can artificially conjure up a truth which is why I was a little bit like worried about Bitcoin I think I've learned a lot since then to where like I learned to separate the community from the ideas and I think Bitcoin is a revolution idea on many fronts but still a community that's like dogmatically excited about something whatever that is makes me skeptical maybe it's just like my upbringing but whenever everybody's really excited about something it makes me it makes me skeptical and it makes but it also makes me difficult to decide what is this camera not because some of the most exciting ideas in this world have a community of people who are excited about it right because it's I don't know I think space exploration is super exciting and and there's people I know a lot of them that are exceptionally excited about space exploration does that means a scam no so I don't know what to do with that and so most I just try to stay away I suppose but it's unfortunate because I'm sure there's a lot of exciting technologies in that space you know like in the case of Bitcoin like I would definitely not call Bitcoin a scam right that's right I would not I would also not call white coin a scam there's people who call white coin a scam because they just like say oh look you know it has no fundamental use case and the concept of being silver to Bitcoin gold Bitcoin's gold is just like stupid and you know like mille Bitcoin is the silver to Bitcoin's gold but the at the same time like if you have these people who just you know they do seem to earn us to believe this and like they are trying to just like make a like coin be a light coin as best as they can then like let's tell me that's enough for it to not be a scam yeah that's and then so yeah I think the the biggest gray area is definitely between like projects that are earnest and but you know they have just all sorts of these like different combinations of flawed qualities to them yeah yeah I mean the ones that legitimately the scam is when the key people that are at the head of the project are intentionally lying and I think as long as they're the intent is to try to do good in the world even if the your actual implementation of that is flawed I think that's not a scam like you flawed ideas it could be wrong ideas but that's not a scam I'm learning to navigate this space yeah it's definitely a very challenging space to navigate you know it's in some ways the reflection of the world at large yeah and as we've said maybe offline that the fact that money is involved makes it a little bit more complicated that you know lives can be ruined by by by the choice of technologies that are taken on so it makes it more real more painful more like elevated the impact of this like imagine like Mac versus PC wars if everyone who bought a MacBook had 10 Apple shares inside of it and everyone who had a PC had 10 Microsoft shares inside of it and then you had you know the elites who bought their Macs back in 1983 and that they spent 500 dollars that and now they have 40 billion dollars that they yeah just think that they're these gurus who understands the future of finance and geopolitics and they make theories about why you know Apple is the one that's gonna bring freedom to the world and Windows is like you know secretly aligned with the axis of evil oh that's brilliant so yeah this is so brilliant so I think the right way to think about this is we map the some of the cryptocurrency battles into the space of like Emax versus VIM or Apple versus PC if there were some stock that came along with each each implementation of the you know each PC each Mac that's fascinating this is a hundred percent correct a hundred percent correct because then that really energizes the armies of people debating over this in a way that something without money does not okay let me ask you about something really fascinating that you are also excited about which is longevity anti-aging you have donated money to the Suns Foundation so you have an interest in this whole space of lifespan research what's your vision here or what do you hope to see in anti-aging and longevity research I think I hope to see the concept of what of seeing your parents and grandparents die just slowly disappear from the public consciousness as an experience that happens over the course of half a century the same way that getting lost in in a city slowly disappeared over the public consciousness over the last 15 hours that we have smart phones the the thing you have from Nick Bostrom the essay pinned in your Twitter is argues that essentially that you know death is almost unethical like the fact that we don't do something about this thing that this in the essay is is a dragon that keeps like murdering everybody around us including our parents and grandparents is like the fact that we don't try to do something aggressively about that dragon is does making any sense so you think this is a battle worth fighting a battle for immortality or at least longevity I'd say absolutely and I'd say it's a battle where we're really have started over the last five years in particular to see the first cracks of no humanity and me starting to make things that look like the return into victories do you think humans can eventually live forever and maybe as a side comment to that what technology do you think will enable that as a genetic modification it's a cloning is it uploading your mind it's fine forever like are we talking a thousand years a million ten to the 14 ten to the 45 well let's start as I tweeted today eventually everything the universe will be filled with supermassive black holes so that that forever maybe like about tracking to work we'll have we'll have 10 to 11 16 years to figure it out yes yeah maybe travel between between the multiverse between the different universes the multiverse I mean but the forever meaning like you know millennia hmm I definitely think that we can get there I definitely think that it's the sort of thing that's going to take an insanely huge amount of work and I definitely think it's the sort of thing where you know once we figure out the first crop of Bob problems and like people start living to 150 we'll just realize that there's like 10 other problems that kill you half a soil and it'll have to do more work but you know the good news is that this is you know Aubrey's one jade escape velocity argument that if you get everyone to lift to 150 now then you know you have half a century to fix to all those other problems as well so yeah I'm optimistic for that reason I think it you definitely do not want to underestimate human ingenuity especially over the long term or just to look at what happens to computers between you know the any act in 1950 and where we're around 2020 right like that's a span of 70 years so like you know both of us I think with you know even just present day technology you know I have I guess at least 70 more years to left so just like you mentioned what kind of sea change will happen in bio medicine during that time and the other thing that made me optimistic is that I actually think COVID has been this kind of event that's really a kind of pushed bio medicine and especially like activist approaches to biomedicine really into the public consciousness right like it basically it's put people into this mindset that you know wait but like you know it's not just like you know the bits and tweets that are going to save the world but you know the bio is actually like super important and huge and you know ultimately what's ending the ending COVID basically you know is the vaccines and the vaccines have just been you know amazing and if you can take that energy and just start out and also like this I think philosophical attitude that I've noticed and I think the way that I would describe the philosophical attitude here this is going more depth first is that I think the way that I kind of interpret part of what I would call late 20th century ideology is that there is this mentality that you know nature is good and disruptions from nature are bad and generally you want to minimize disruptions from nature and like this exists everywhere in the political spectrum right so there's nature as in literal nature and my view is that like the right wing version of that is markets as nature right markets as nature yeah like you know the the way that that like that kind of philosophy talks about you know markets and like the goal of not interfering with them like you know it's it is very and like nature styled and then of course you know the conservative one which is like traditional culture that existed before the activists started controlling everything as also being kind of nature but the 21st century attitude and like really covid you know it has like flipped a lot of minds because with covid what's happened is that well no like it's not nature is not safe right the default is that is like you know untold misery and suffering in tens of millions of people dying the only way out for us is through like basically human ingenuity and that frame of mind is one that's like much more friendly to one the this other change of minds that I want to see which is like basically treating aging as an engineering problem right like the default is all 7.8 billion human beings that are currently on this earth are going to die and they're going to live their last decade of life and debilitating pain and the only way to stop that is human ingenuity and you know we don't we don't have that solution yet but you know if we work hard we will and more and more people on the biology side competition are basically converting the mess of the human biology into an engineering problem and once that conversion is happening look at the the genetical the proteins all those kinds of things once that conversion happens you can now apply the tools that we know how to solve engineering problems to solve it that way and then there's also the other version which is you know why do we romanticize this meat vehicle that ultimately is just the thing that carries the brain maybe we can more more convert ourselves into the digital realm this is where like neural link yeah I have the brain-captured interfaces and then achieve immortality in the space of information and the digital space versus the biology space that's stuff's interesting too I agree I mean I think you know we we have enough resources and we should just try all the parallel tracks you know it's great that we have people just trying to make our bodies work it's great that we have people trying upload like or improve brain scanning it's also great that we have just like people improving cryonics like we could just like you know go to sleep in the freezer and eventually hopefully sometime in the future you know health and he's going to be able to wake up all of these you know anyone who gets a cryocrine quickly frozen today will be able to wake up but you know that's all that's a bad right that's the last resort and then the other interesting thing about the like extreme uploading approach right is um like we're excited about space and one of the points that a lot of exscience or like hard science fiction types make is that you know if you want to explore space that's a lot easier if you're not a human right like one example of this is that you know in the context of humans we're talking about like oh we're going to be able to go to the moon oh we're going to be able to go to Mars but there's this project called star shot I believe right that's basically trying to send spacecraft to mini spacecrafts to alpha centauri and they literally believe that they're going to be able to get spacecraft over to alpha centauri like four light years away by like the 2060s no I mean that traveling close to the speed of light yeah exactly like so the way it works is you know you have these light sales like you basically take these as a spacecraft and you shine a laser at it and the laser is insanely strong quickly accelerated at 100 g's for or I think it was 10,000 g's until it gets to 20% of the speed of light and then you know it goes on your merry way right so if you want to be in um it like personally explore the alpha centauri system within like two centuries or one or one century then you know being a robot is like by far the most practical way to do it because there's no way that a human being can survive 10,000 g's so it's it's definitely interesting long term but at the same time the there's definitely a lot of like psychological hang ups and a lot of like deep philosophy that we'll just have to grapple with well I think that I think what it hangs on the topic of whether we can convert consciousness into an engineering problem so like is consciousness tied to our biology because the moment we can convert consciousness into a digital form then we can send it with that light sale to the alpha centauri until then a robot is not caring anything except maybe some basic knowledge like Wikipedia it's not caring the flame of human consciousness I have high hopes for converting consciousness into an engineering problem in fact I think it's not as difficult as people think I'm my I grew up out I'm definitely in the camp that I'm conscious this is a property of the algorithm and not a property of a brain structure the other fun like the kind of philosophical things we'd have to grapple with grapple with is like once you upload yourself like you can hit control C you know like it wouldn't be lovely to have like 10 copies of a like experiment and then like we can just interview everyone so this is I mean this is I have to ask this question is the difficult one which I don't think it'd be wonderful first of all um sure so in the following way and this has to do with immortality as well there's something about scarcity that creates value or there's a bunch of philosophers Victor Franco Bernard Williams Ernest Becker they argue that death or the scarcity of life creates meaning the reason we life is beautiful the reason so many moments of experience of uh uh of love or delicious food all those things are made delicious because they're finite because they end and because we don't have that many of them and there's a kind of worry that if we extend the human lifespan if we achieve a mortality or if we got forbid clone me multiple times then you lose the richness of what it means to have this life to have this experience is that worry you at all do you think there's some aspect to which death does in fact give meaning to life I guess like the one historical parallel and this might be a bit unfair is that you know there have been philosophers that say that have said things like you know war gives like meaning to human collectives and this struggle for supremacy between you know nations and races is this like big driver of progress that like that ensures that everyone strives to be their best and you know of course this viewpoint got into the head of a crazy Austrian guy and 20 years later his soldiers were shooting at my grandparents um so you know these days we don't really have that but yet life still feels meaningful there's we've still found the other ways to uh or the like there's still a striving for technological progress there's still um you know a stri- a striving for self-improvement in general and it turns out that you know you don't actually need to have existential conflicts in order to in order to have that now maybe you need conflict but we have other kinds of conflicts right like we have you know competition between businesses competition between political ideologies competition between between projects and so you know these are like what whatever the psychological needs are like they're just our substitutes for it so I guess like yeah so if we yeah um trying to say I feel like once we start living to to the age of 200 then like I'm just intuitively expecting that we'll see a sub substitute emerge in the same way yeah that we'll create conflicts of other sorts that lead to less human suffering than wars do like it we'll we'll just start playing Diablo 4 5 6 and because you die in video games so maybe we'll get some of the inkling of scarcity through the activities we partake in as opposed to our own body dying I mean I feel shitty when I like you can the I remember in Diablo 3 you can play in hardcore mode where if you die in the game your character's dead maybe we'll get the the richness of like what that we currently get from life by having like little artificial versions of ourselves that die interesting enough as I've just like personally it spent more time in this world I've started realizing that you know there is a concept of like real fight and that finiteness that still like exists and it might even still be a thing that provides meaning that doesn't require anyone to actually die like for example like how many people from middle school or even high school of yours like do you still talk to regularly I'm happening to close friends with like four or five of them okay well like in my case the answer is zero for middle school and two for high school you're right right right like it's dropped exactly it dropped a lot right and so like there's a lot of these just like relationships that end up being very finite a person changes their I feel like a person changes enough of their world view after 25 years was that they're even a study about this something like a person and themselves 25 years later about as different as like two different people people or something like this um so you know like I mean just like you can have conflict without bloodshed I think you know you can you can have finiteness and even you know the the necessary sorrows of a finiteness that give meaning without like literally anyone having their life and hopefully if we do extend our life we'll figure out ways to extend the period of time where there's new your new plasticity yes to where we could change our world views continually throughout that time so you have these different phases of life I thought it would be fun to hear you speak a lot of Russian you speak yes of course how do you Russian roots help you it's an interesting question for you what can you say about Russian about what can you say about my Russian roots I when well just with a battery on it well other projects other people in this blockchain industry sometimes when I look at just the fact that there are Russian people doing this that other people do it I can sometimes feel that there are people who are Russian there is something that feels like me but I don't know how to explain it you think there's so for people who don't speak Russian that Vitalik said that there's that there is something to the spirit of the people that are Russian that are working in the cryptocurrency world that's a little bit different and it's something that connects to some kind of aspect of your own self some kind of roots there and it's it's kind of interesting do you think that there's does it make you sad that there's these two different worlds that are sort of in part disconnected by language and I'm sure the same could be the case with China and other parts of the world or the language slows the transmission of the beauty of the culture in a certain kind of way where you can't truly collaborate like you can all speak English that you're collaborating on maybe a technical level but you're not collaborating on the level of like some deep human connection do you see that being able to speak both languages there's definitely benefits I think to be able to like speak multiple languages and like once you can right like you you discover that my given your mindset changes while you're in the speaking in one language versus the other like people have told me this like when I speak Russian I sound more like I guess like to the points in pragmatic when I speak Chinese I sound more cute when I speak English I'm something else I guess so there's definitely like a richness that you're missing if you're only like in one of these language bubbles but you know I guess the arguments on the other side would be that you know if everyone spoke the same language then like there would just be one bubble this is the challenge I think like if there are actually benefits to having cultural diversity and you definitely don't want the entire world to be too conformist and well one of the interesting things about crypto is that it's just a culture that actually like manages to somehow you know have its uniqueness and preserve it's independence from all of all of these surrounding countries despite being embedded in all of them so it spans outside of the geographic boundaries and language in some way does as well and then in the way these cultures these bubbles are created I mean they overlap in interesting ways it's almost like a hierarchy and the same is the case with the crypto world there's communities associated with each cryptocurrencies there's communities within those communities and it's yeah and I think like you know it's definitely sad whenever these groups are fighting each other you know like it's definitely good for them to like if people can cooperate more but no at the same time like just having like groups of people that have you know different kinds of life experiences like you know there's definitely something benefit from that so let me ask one last question I don't think I asked you last time there's a dickiest question about the meaning of life you know does the yeski said beauty will save the world krasataspayotmiyr some people believe money is a big part of happiness and you've turned first of all you've made a lot of money you turned away a lot of money you turned away a lot of power so you're a fascinating person to ask what do you think is meaning to life the thing that I've realized with money as I yeah and the have experienced both having a little of it and I'm having a lot of it is that the benefit of like like you can get the most out of money if you think of it not as something that like what's you do and have more things but as something that lets you worry about fewer things right like if you have if your savings are just you know non-zero at all then you don't have to worry as much about losing your job and you know if you feel like you're you have a job that just like really conflicts with your values then like if you have even six months saved up that just makes it easier for you to say bye bye I'm going to do something else if you have more money than you can you know not worry about like even what you're doing the I'm needing to be profitable at all once you get more money than like you can know choose transportation options and fruit options that just like have less hassle in your life and allow you to be a way easier so if you like this aspect of just like reducing troubles and like opening up room for other things I think is a big part of it like if you just if you instead think of money as being like this positive or this thing that like gives you stuff and you try to derive meaning from the stuff I think that's much more likely to be like a road to like basically squandering that opportunity so yeah and I guess my my philosophy is on there is definitely more subtractive than additive there but once you have enough money that you don't have to worry about the money you're burdened with another question which is of meaning I do you think there's meaning to it all or it seems like your own life you're trying to build cool stuff that alleviates some level of suffering in the world well I mean one way to think about it is like think of think back to like how you thought about life when you were in school right in school this is interesting to think about right because in a lot of ways like it's just totally outside of bounds of you know the kinds of systems that are like social systems that we live in as adults or maybe not like maybe things like academia are intended to replicate parts of school like first of all school is very totalitarian right like you know you have to follow the teacher the teachers instructions the bulk of your schedule is like forced to be in particular areas and you know you can control um no they're real you from you know weaving the grounds during this period this period of time um you know assign a lot of homework but at the same time also you know school is a bit of a bit of a post-care city utopia in that you just don't have to worry about getting resources for yourself and you know we've both like lived through 12 years of that right so you know like what does that say about us and I think like in one thing of aspect obviously is that in it does like there's definitely like an easiness to living life if all of your decisions are made for you and one of the challenges of adulthood I guess is moving to this uh world where like all your choices are much more self-directed and you just have to like learn to live and deal with that yeah dealing with the burden of freedom in some sense uh actually interesting and because I in some ways I feel like even my first like five years of doing ethereum things uh yeah my life was not even all that self-directed because for a lot of it was just you know responding to obligations like someone said oh you know come to speak at this event in uh career okay you know come to speak at this thing in Taiwan okay um oh like we meet up for ethereum to launch we need um you know this particular piece to be done and tested okay work on that right we know we need some uh a proof of stake algorithm work on that and the last year of uh covid life um like basically I was like hold up and sing a poor for much of it right and it gave me a lot more alone time you know I had much less travel and that was definitely a very new and interesting experience for me would you characterize it by sadness melancholy hope uh dreaming like innovative period like how would you characterize that alone time some of all five um definitely some self-discovery um I definitely did like take this uh make this very deliberate decision that like okay I have this time and I'm going to like actually make something meaningful out of it um so like one example of the things I did is I just like actually started re- uh um listening to or audio books and podcasts much more like just this year I basically kind of discover that the podcast space is real for the first time I guess like before that you know there would be things that I would get interviewed for but yeah I yeah I was not really kind of like mentally incorporate I did not mentally incorporate this um idea that like podcast are a thing that you can go listen to and this year I did like I and I my yeah friend uh um Carl a flour show one of the the optimism people uh recommended hardcore history to me and so I went ahead and just to listen to all the hardcore histories um but that after that like yeah listen to like 10 looks read bits and that a bunch of others and after that I also got into um audio books um oh I listened to the entire um the rise and fall of the third Reich the whole thing 45 hours that that was fascinating so what uh we asked about Dex Dan is gonna love hearing this I'm gonna tell uh do you have uh do you have a period of history whether it's Dan or in general that you draw for your own life like kind of thinking about the world about human nature that you go to is it World War II is it uh wrath of the cons the in genkis Khan is it some other more ancient history is it World War I is there something that kind of echoes with you in the voice of Dan or or anyone else that you connect to I feel like the 1930s and 40s are fascinating because they force you to like really grapple with the the question of like you know where does evil come from right like the the sort of mental puzzle that I've always had um had in my head is like on the one hand um you know things like the Holocaust happened but on the other hand if you just go in like have a coffee with with uh people then like a hundred times out of a hundred everyone just seems so nice yeah so yeah exactly yeah I like how do you kind of reconcile the macro and the micro there right and that's the sort of thing that's very difficult if you don't have um a lot of I guess the right kind of personal experience like especially if your personal experience starts off being sheltered like it was for me right like I you know the state I know the stereotype is that the nerds get bullied in school but like actually for me in my school experience was just being treated with kindness by everyone yeah and uh so that definitely made that harder to understand things I remember actually being pretty blindsided when I started a theory and then within six months they're started being fights over like who would get more shares if if a theory I'm turning out to be a company and then I suggested we should just make it a be an on profit and somehow that ended up upsetting people um so so the so the fascinating thing for me is that like I've been you know obviously reading and listening to the history and then at the same time just like observing things happening in the crypto space and so one of my interesting more um like mental intuitions that I've gotten is that I think like most evil doesn't come out of greed it comes out of fear and like one example of this in Ethereum lands right is um like I think the part of Ethereum history where I thought that the Ethereum community was at its lowest and even when I personally was at my lowest and if you go back to the Dow fork in 2016 right so you know the Dow hack happens and then we made this controversial decision to change the Ethereum protocol uh and we um you know then there was that Ethereum class exploit and as soon as that Ethereum class exploit happened no there was like a lot of anger everywhere and they're started they're started especially being anger when the price of ETC started like taking up right so this was the time when Ether started off being $13 in an Ethereum class it started at zero but then suddenly there's this one day when like ETH dropped its 12.5 ETC went up to 0.5 and then they dropped more and people were saying things like um you know oh this whole thing Ethereum classic is just a like a sia by you know the Bitcoin community and just the wealthy Bitcoiners trying to destroy Ethereum and like in the back of my mind I knew that that wasn't entirely true like there were definitely word Bitcoiners but at the same time like I think blaming political like internal dissing or blaming disagreements on foreign interference right like this is a sort of thing that you know like country is uh governments do all the time like it's a very convenient excuse right because it allows you to just like blame these things that are happening on the foreigners and avoid actually grappling with the facts that like well no actually you have people in your very own community who just did disagree with you and have a different belief and I think no I feel like the Ethereum community like during that time did not do a very good job of grappling with that and if you're like like I during that time did not do a very good job of grappling with that and so there was a lot of like blaming the Bitcoiners there were also even a lot of people calling for us to use trademark law and like basically sue exchanges and like try to prevent them from a listing Ethereum classic and like to me that was very unethical right like this uh like using like basically using the government as a weapon to try to attack the other cryptocurrency and like destroy it as like goes completely against them you know the ideals of freedom and you know like things that at least in theory we're supposed to stand for um but you know like in that particular time like basically what was happening was that you know the ETC price was rising at the same time the ETC price was dropping in lockstep and it really and there are a lot of Bitcoin people basically saying and this is the end of Ethereum and I think a lot of people really were afraid that Ethereum would be just like completely destroyed ours the results of this and so like never they and good came exactly yeah exactly it came from the fear and like that's what I like allowed people to rationalize like an abandonment of principles that I think they would not accept it in other circumstances and I mean I definitely like to some extent play along with this myself right and I do definitely regret that to some extent well and I I definitely regret like the the excesses completely um but so that and then obviously you know Bitcoin block size war similar sort of stuff happens uh so like that that insight was interesting um because like it does mentally make a lot of sense right like when you're actually afraid that you know unless you act in some way that you know your entire world is going to collapse so like it's much easier to just rationalize you know forgetting your principles and doing whatever you have to just save the specific thing that you care about it feels like the right thing to do the the brave thing to do is in the face of fear to still have compassion to still have love as opposed to hate so the the darkest moments the toughest moments of human history are those where fear is everywhere and despite that like the way to get out of that is uh is through love not giving into the fear and again that's the lesson that you draw from all those moments of history yeah well I I like you have in terms of those coffee and the kindness that people have it does seem that everybody has the capacity for evil and everybody has the capacity for love and you just have to create mechanisms and incentives that uh prioritize the ladder over the former but tall like you're one of the most interesting people I've gotten a chance to talk to thank you so much for talking to me I hope we get a chance to talk again I hope I can at least be a some small part this would be awesome in a podcast with you and Dan Carlin that'll be an awesome conversation um thank you so much for doing so much incredible technical innovation that inspires the computer scientists uh the economist inspires the world and what uh technology can do and now with longevity um I do hope we live a very long time and uh play Diablo to make that long time fun thank you so much for talking to me so thank you to Alexis was great thanks for listening to this conversation with Vitalik buterin and thank you to athletic greens magic spoon indeed for sigmatic and better help check them out in the description to support this podcast and now let me leave you with some words from neslan mandela when a man is denied the right to live the life he believes in he has no choice but to become an outlaw thank you for listening and hope to see you next time you