The following is a conversation with Michael I. Jordan, a professor of Berkeley and one of the most influential people in the history of machine learning, statistics and artificial intelligence. He has been cited over 170,000 times and has mentored many of the world-class researchers defining the field of AI today, including Andrew Eng, Zubin Garamani, Bantascar, and Yoshio Benjio. All this, to me, is as impressive as the over 32,000 points in the six NBA championships of the Michael J. Jordan of basketball fame. There's a non-zero probability that I talked to the other Michael Jordan, given my connection to and love with the Chicago Bulls of the 90s, but if I had to pick one, I'm going with the Michael Jordan of statistics and computer science. Or as Janla Kuhn calls him, the Miles Davis of machine learning. It is blog post titled, Artificial Intelligence, The Revolution Hasn't Happened Yet. Michael argues for broadening the scope of the artificial intelligence field. In many ways, the underlying spirit of this podcast is the same, to see artificial intelligence as a deeply human endeavor, to not only engineer algorithms and robots, but to understand and empower human beings at all levels of abstraction, from the individual to our civilization as a whole. This is the Artificial Intelligence Podcast. If you enjoy it, subscribe and YouTube, give it 5 stars at Apple Podcast, support it on Patreon, or simply connect with me on Twitter, at Lex Friedman spelled F-R-I-D-M-A-N. As usual, I'll do one or two minutes of ads now and never any ads in the middle that can break the flow of the conversation. I hope that works for you and doesn't hurt the listening experience. This show is presented by CashApp, the number one finance app in the App Store. When you get it, use code Lex Podcast. CashApp, unless you send money to friends, buy Bitcoin and invest in the stock market with as little as $1. Since CashApp does fractional share trading, let me mention that the order execution algorithm that works behind the scenes to create the abstraction of the fractional orders is to me and algorithmic marvel. The big props for the CashApp engineers for solving a hard problem that in the end provides an easy interface that takes a step up to the next layer of abstraction over the stock market, making trading more accessible for new investors and diversification much easier. So once again, if you get CashApp from the App Store, Google Play, and use the code Lex Podcast, you'll get $10 and CashApp will also donate to $10 first. One of my favorite organizations that is helping to advance robotics and STEM education for young people around the world. And now here's my conversation with Michael I. Jordan. Given that you're one of the greats in the field of AI, machine learning, computer science, and so on, you're trivially called the Michael Jordan machine learning. Although as you know, you were born first, so technically MJ is the Michael I. Jordan the basketball, but anyway, my favorite is Yanlequin calling you the Miles Davis of machine learning, because as he says, you reinvent yourself periodically and sometimes leave fans scratching their heads after you change direction. So can you put at first your historian hat on and give a history of computer science and AI as you saw it, as you experienced it, including the four generations of AI successes that I've seen you talk about. Sure. Yeah, first of all, I much prefer Yon's metaphor. Miles Davis was a real explorer in jazz and he had a coherent story. So I think I have one, but it's not just the one you lived. It's the one you think about later, what a good historian does is they look back and they revisit. I think what's happening right now is not AI. That was an intellectual aspiration that's still alive today as an aspiration, but I think this is akin to the development of chemical engineering from chemistry or electric engineering from from electromagnetism. So if you go back to the 30s or 40s, there wasn't yet chemical engineering. There was chemistry. There was fluid flow. There was mechanics and so on. But people pretty clearly viewed interesting goals, tried to build factories that make chemicals products and do it viably, safely, make good ones, do it at scale. So people started to try to do that, of course, and some factories were, some didn't, some were not viable, some exploded. But in parallel, developed a whole field called chemical engineering. Chemical engineering is a field. It's no bones about it. It has theoretical aspects to it. It has practical aspects. It's not just engineering, quote unquote. It's the real thing, real concepts were needed. Same thing with electrical engineering. There was Maxwell's equations, which in some sense were everything you know about electromagnetism. But you needed to figure out how to build circuits, how to build modules, how to put them together, how to bring electricity from one point to another, safely, and so on and so forth. So a whole field that developed called electrical engineering. I think that's what's happening right now. Is that what we have? We have a proto field, which is statistics computed, more of the theoretical side of the algorithm, the computer science. That was enough to start to build things. But what things, systems that bring value to human beings and use human data and mix in human decisions? The engineering side of that is all ad hoc. That's what's emerging. In fact, if you want to call machine learning a field, I think that's what it is. That's a proto form of engineering based on statistical and computational ideas and previous generations. Do you think there's something deeper about AI in its dreams and aspirations as compared to chemical engineering and electrical engineering? Well, the dreams and aspirations may be, but those are from those are 500 years from now. I think that that's like the Greeks sitting there and saying it would be neat to get to the moon someday. Right. I hate we have no clue how the brain does computation. We just clue it. We're like we're even worse than the Greeks on most anything interesting scientifically of our era. Can you linger on that just for a moment because you stand not completely unique, but a little bit unique in the clarity of that. Can you elaborate your intuition of why we're standing in our understanding of the human brain? A lot of people say, you're a scientist, say we're not very far in understanding human brain, but you're saying we're in the dark here. Well, I know I'm not unique. I don't even think in the clarity. But if you talk to real neuroscientists, they really study real synapses, real neurons, they agree. They agree. They agree with 100, hundreds of years task and they're building it up slowly and surely. What the signal is there is not clear. We have a lot of our metaphors. We think it's electrical. Maybe it's chemical. It's a whole soup. It's ions and proteins and it's a cell. That's even around like a single synapse. If you look at a electron micrograph of a single synapse, it's a city of its own. That's one little thing on a dendritic tree, which is extremely complicated, electrochemical thing. It's doing these spikes and voltages that are going to fly around and then proteins are taking it down into the DNA and who knows what. It is the problem of the next few centuries. It is fantastic. We have our metaphors about it. Is it an economic device? Is it like the immune system or is it like a layered set of arithmetic computations? We have all these metaphors and they're fun. That's not real science. There is neuroscience. That's not neuroscience. That's like the Greek speculating about how to get to the moon. Fun. I think that I like to say this fairly strongly because I think a lot of young people think they were on the verge because a lot of people who don't talk about it clearly and let it be understood. Yes, we kind of, this is brain inspired or kind of close breakthroughs are on the horizon. NN's groupulus people sometimes who need money for their labs. That's why I'm saying NN's groupulus, but people will sell. I need money from a lab. I'm studying computational neuroscience. I'm going to over sell it. There's been too much of that. Step into the gray area between metaphor and engineering with, I'm not sure if you're familiar with brain computer interfaces. A company like Elon Musk has neural link that's working on putting electrodes into the brain and trying to be able to read both read and send electrical signals. As you said, even the basic mechanism of communication in the brain is not something we understand. But do you hope without understanding the fundamental principles of how the brain works will be able to do something interesting at that gray area of metaphor? It's not my area. I hope in the sense that anybody else hopes for some interesting things to happen from research. I would expect more something like Alzheimer's will get figured out from modern neuroscience. A lot of humans are offering based on brain disease. We throw things like lithium at the brain. It kind of works. No one has a clue why. That's not quite true, but mostly we don't know. That's even just about the biochemistry of the brain and how it leads to mood swings and so on. How thought emerges from that. We were really, really completely dim so that you might want to hook up electrodes and try to do some signal process on that and try to find patterns. Fine. By all means, go for it. It's just not scientific at this point. It's like sitting in a satellite and watching the emissions from a city and trying to affirm things about the microeconomy, even though you don't have microeconomic concepts. It's really that kind of thing. Yes, can you find some signals that do something interesting or useful? Can you control a cursor or mouse with your brain? Absolutely. I can imagine business models based on that and even medical applications of that. But from there to understanding algorithms that allow us to really tie in deeply from the brain to computer, I just don't agree with Elon Musk. I don't think that's even, that's not for our generation, it's not even for the century. Just in hopes of getting you to dream, you've mentioned Kolmograv and Turing, my pop-up. Do you think that there might be breakthroughs that will get you to sit back in five, ten years and say, wow. I'm sure there will be, but I don't think that there'll be demos that impress me. I don't think that having a computer call a restaurant and pretend to be a human is breakthrough. And some people present it as such. It's imitating human intelligence. It's even putting cuffs in the thing to make a bit of a PR stunt. And so fine, the world runs on those things too. And I don't want to diminish all the hard work and engineering that goes behind things like that and the ultimate value to the human race. But that's not scientific understanding. And I know the people who work on these things, they are after scientific understanding. In the meantime, the trains got to run and they got mouse to feed and they got things to do. And there's nothing wrong with all that. I would call that though just engineering. And I want to distinguish that profiting in engineering field like a lecturer at Cambridge Ray that originally emerged, that had real principles and you really know what you're doing and you had a little scientific understanding, maybe not even complete. So it became more predictable and it was really gave value to human life because it was understood. And so we don't want to muddle too much of these waters of what we're able to do versus what we really can't do in a way that's going to impress the next. So I don't need to be wild, but I think that someone comes along in 20 years, a younger person who's absorbed all the technology and for them to be wild, I think they have to be more deeply impressed. A young Kolmogorov would not be wild by some of the stunts that you see right now coming from the big companies. The demos, but do you think the breakthroughs from Kolmogorov would be and give this question a chance? Do you think they'll be in the scientific fundamental principles arena or do you think it's possible to have fundamental breakthroughs in engineering, meaning I would say some of the things that Elon Musk is working with SpaceX and then others sort of trying to revolutionize the fundamentals of engineering, of manufacturing, of saying here's a problem, we know how to do a demo of and actually taking it to scale. Yeah, so there's going to be all kinds of breakthroughs. I just don't like that terminology. I'm a scientist and I work on things day in and day out and things move along and eventually say, wow, something happened, but I don't like that language very much. Also I don't like to prize theoretical breakthroughs over practical ones. I tend to be more with theoretician and I think there's lots to do in that arena right now. So I wouldn't point to the Kolmogorov as I might point to the Edison of the era and maybe Musk is a bit more like that. Musk, God bless him. Also we'll say things about AI that he knows very little about and then he does know what he is, he leads people straight when he talks about things he doesn't know anything about. Trying to program a computer to understand natural language, to be involved in a dialogue we're having right now and it happened in our lifetime. You could fake it, you can mimic sort of take old sentences that humans use and retread them with the deep understanding of language, no, it's not going to happen. So from that, I hope you can perceive that deeper, yet deeper kind of aspects and intelligence are not going to happen. Now will there be breakthroughs? I think that Google was a breakthrough. I think Amazon is a breakthrough. I think Uber is a breakthrough. Bring value to human beings at scale in new brand new ways based on data flows and so on. A lot of these things are slightly broken because there's not an kind of an engineering field that takes economic value in context of data and planetary scale and worries about all the externalities, the privacy. We don't have that field so we don't think these things through very well. But I see that as emerging and that will be constant that will looking back from 100 years that will be constantly breakthrough in this era. Just like electrical engineering was a breakthrough in the early part of the last century and chemical engineering was a breakthrough. So the scale, the markets that you talk about and we'll get to, we'll be seen as sort of breakthrough and we're in very early days of really doing interesting stuff there and we'll get to that. But it's just taking a quick step back. Can you give kind of throw off the historian hat? I mean, you briefly said that the history of AI kind of mimics the history of chemical engineering. But I keep saying machine learning. You keep wanting to say, AI just lets you know, I don't, you know, I resist that. I don't think this is about AI really was John McCarthy as almost a philosopher saying, wouldn't it be cool if we could put thought in a computer if we could mimic the human capability to think or put intelligence in in some sense into a computer? That's an interesting philosophical question and he wanted to make it more than philosophy. He wanted to actually write down logical formula and algorithms that would do that. And that is a perfectly valid reasonable thing to do. That's not what's happening in this era. Right. So the reason I keep saying AI actually and I'd love to hear what you think about it. Machine learning has a very particular set of methods and tools. Maybe your version of it is a mind doesn't mind. It doesn't. It's very, very open. It does sampling. It does. So systems that learn is what machine learning is. Systems that learn and make decisions. And make decisions. So the word pattern recognition and you know, finding patterns is all about making decisions in real worlds and having close feedback loops. So something like symbolic AI, expert systems, reaching systems, knowledge based representation, all of those kinds of things search. Does that neighbor fit into what you think of as machine learning? So I don't even like the word machine learning. I think that what the field you're talking about is all about making large collections of decisions under uncertainty by large collections of entities. Yes. And there are principles for that at that scale. You don't have to say the principles are for a single entity that's making decisions, single agent or single human. It really immediately goes to the network of decisions. Is it a good word for that or not? No, there's no good words for any of this. That's kind of part of the problem. So we can continue the conversation and use AI for all of that. I just want to kind of raise our flag here that this is not about. We don't know what intelligence is and real intelligence. We don't know much about abstraction and reasoning at the level of humans. We don't have a clue. We're not trying to build that because we don't have a clue. Eventually it may emerge. They'll make, I don't know if they'll be breakthroughs, but eventually we'll start to get glimmers of that. It's not what's happening right now. We're taking data. We're trying to make good decisions based on that. We're trying to scale. We're trying to economically, viably. We're trying to build markets. We're trying to keep value at that scale. And aspects of this will look intelligent. They will look computers were so dumb before they will see more intelligent. We will use that buzzword of intelligence. So we can use it in that sense. So machine learning, you can scope it narrowly is just learning from data and pattern recognition. But whatever, when I talk about these topics, I maybe data science is another word you could throw in the mix. It really is important that the decisions are as part of it. It's consequential decisions in the real world. I might have a medical operation. I might have to drive down this street, where there's scarcity, things that impact other human beings or other environments and so on. How do I do that based on data? How do I do that? How do I use computers to help those kind of things go forward? Whatever you want to call that, so let's call it AI. Let's agree to call it AI. But let's not say that what the goal of that is is intelligence. The goal of that is really good working systems at planetary scale that we've never seen before. I mean, the word AI from the Dartmouth conference from many decades ago of the dream of human I don't want to reclaim it. I want a new word. I think it was a bad choice. I mean, if you read one of my little things, the history was basically that McCarthy needed a new name because cybernetics already existed. And he didn't like, no one really liked Norbert Viener. The number of Viener was kind of an island to himself. And he felt that he had accomplished all this. And in some sense, he did. You look at the language of cybernetics. It was everything we're talking about. It was control theory and single processing and some notions of intelligence and close feedback loops and data. It was all there. It's just not a word that lived on partly because of the maybe the personalities. But McCarthy needed a new word to say, I'm different from you. I'm not part of your show. I got my own invented this word. And again, as kind of a thinking forward about the movies that would be made about it, it was a great choice. But thinking forward about creating a sober academic and world-world discipline, it was a terrible choice. It led to promises that are not true. We understand artificial perhaps, but we don't understand intelligence. It's a small tangent because you're one of the great personalities of machine learning, whatever the heck you call the field. Do you think science progresses by personalities or by the fundamental principles and theories and research that's outside of personality? Both. And I wouldn't say there should be one kind of personality. I have mine and I have my preferences and I have a kind of network around me that feeds me and some of them agree with me and some of disagree, but all kinds of personalities are needed. Right now, I think the personality that it's a little too exuberant, a little bit too ready to promise the moon is a little bit too much in ascendance. And I do think that there's some good to that. It certainly attracts lots of young people to our field. But a lot of people come in with strong misconceptions and they have to then unlearn those and then find something to do. And so I think there's just got to be some multiple voices. I didn't, I wasn't hearing enough of the more sober voice. So as a continuation of a fun tangent and speaking of vibrant personalities, what would you say is the most interesting disagreement you have with Jan LeCoon? So Jan's an old friend and I just say that I don't think we disagree about very much really. He and I both kind of have a, let's build that kind of mentality and does it work and kind of mentality and kind of concrete. We both speak French and we speak French word together and we have a lot in common. And so if one wanted to highlight a disagreement, it's not really a fundamental one. I think it's just kind of where we're emphasizing. Jan has emphasized pattern recognition and has emphasized prediction. So you know, and it's interesting to try to take that as far as you can. If you could do perfect prediction, what would that give you? Kind of as a thought experiment. I think that's way too limited. We cannot do perfect prediction. We will never have the data sets allow me to figure out what you're about ready to do. What question you're going to ask next, I have no clue. I will never know such things. Moreover, most of us find ourselves during the day in all kinds of situations we had no anticipation of that are kind of various, various novel in various ways. And in that moment, we want to think through what we want. And also there's going to be market forces acting on us. I'd like to go down that street, but now it's full because there's a crane in the street. I got to think about that. I got to think about what I might really want here. And I got to sort of think about how much it costs me to do this action versus this action. I got to think about the risks involved. You know, a lot of our current pattern recognition and prediction systems don't do any risk evaluation. They have no air bars. Right? I got to think about other people's decisions around me. I have to think about a collection of my decisions. Even just thinking about like a medical treatment. I'm not going to take the prediction of a neural net about my health, about something consequential. I'm not going to have a heart attack because some number is over .7. Even if you had all the data in the world, they've ever been collected about heart attacks. Better than any doctor ever had. I'm not going to trust the output of that neural net to predict my heart attack. I'm going to want to ask what if questions around that. I'm going to want to look at some other possible data. I didn't have causal things. I'm going to want to have a dialogue with a doctor about things we didn't think about and we gathered the data. I could go on and on. I hope you can see. I think that if you say predictions, everything that you're missing all of this stuff. Prediction plus decision making is everything. Both of them are equally important. The field has emphasized prediction. Yon rightly so has seen how powerful that is. At the cost of people not being aware of the decision making is where the rubber really hits the road where human lives are at stake, where risks are being taken, where you got to gather more data, you got to think about the air bars, you got to think about the consequences of your decision than others. You got to think about the economy around your decisions. Blah blah blah. I'm not the only one working on those, but we're a smaller tribe. Right now we're not the one that people talk about the most. If you go out of the real world in industry, at Amazon, I'd say half the people there are working on decision making and the other half are doing the pattern recognition. It's important. The words of pattern recognition and prediction, I think the distinction there, not the link on words, but the distinction there is more a constraint in the lab data set versus decision making is talking about consequential decisions in the real world under the messiness and the uncertainty of the real world and the whole of it, the whole mess of it that actually touches human beings and scale, you said market forces, that's the distinction. It helps add that perspective, that broader perspective. You're right. I totally agree. On the other hand, if you're a real prediction person, of course you want it to be in the real world. I'm just saying that's not possible with just datasets, that it has to be in the context of strategic things that someone's doing, data they might gather, things they could have gathered, the reasoning process around data. It's not just taking data and making predictions based on the data. One of the things that you're working on, I'm sure there's others working on it, but I don't hear often it talked about, especially in the clarity that you talk about it. I think it's both the most exciting and the most concerning area of AI in terms of decision-making. You've talked about AI systems that help make decisions that scale in a distributed way, millions, billions, decisions, as sort of markets of decisions. Can you, as a starting point, give an example of a system that you think about when you're thinking about these kinds of systems? Yeah. First of all, you're absolutely getting into some territory, which I will be beyond my expertise, and there are lots of things that are going to be very not obvious to think about. Just like, again, I like to think about history a little bit, but think about, put yourself back in the 60s, there was kind of a banking system that wasn't computerized, really. There was database theory emerging. Database people had to think about, how do I actually not just move data around, but actual money, and have it be valid and have transactions at ATMs happen that are actually all valid, and so on and so forth. That's the kind of issues you get into. You start to get serious about things like this. I like to think about, is kind of almost a thought experiment to help me think something simpler, which is a music market. To first order, there is no music market in the world right now, in our country, for sure. There are something called record companies, and they make money, and they prop up a few really good musicians and make them superstars, and they all make huge amounts of money. There's a long tail of huge numbers of people that make lots and lots of really good music that is actually listened to by more people than the famous people. They are not in a market. They cannot have a career. They do not make money. The creators. The creators. The creators, the so-called influencers or whatever, that diminishes who they are. There are people who make extremely good music, especially in the hip hop or Latin world these days. They do it on their laptop. That's what they do on the weekend, and they have another jug during the week. They put it up on SoundCloud or other sites. Eventually, it gets streamed. It now gets turned into bits. It's not economically valuable. The information is lost. It gets put up. There are people stream it. You walk around in a big city. You see people with headphones, all, you know, socially young kids listening to music all the time. If you look at the data, very little of the music there is in two is the famous people's music. It's old music. It's all the latest stuff. But the people who made that latest stuff are like some 16-year-old somewhere who will never make a career out of this, who will never make money. Of course, there will be a few counter examples. The record company incentivize to pick out a few and highlight them. Long story short, there's a missing market there. There is not a consumer producer relationship at the level of the actual creative acts. The pipelines and spotifies of the world that take this stuff and stream it along, they make money off of subscriptions or advertising in those things. They're making the money. And then they will offer bits and pieces of it to a few people again to highlight that, you know, they're the simulator market. Anyway, a real market would be if you're a creator of music that you actually are somebody who's good enough that people want to listen to you, you should have the data available to you. There should be a dashboard showing a map of the United States. So in the last week, here's all the places your songs were listened to. It should be transparent, vetable so that if someone in down in Providence sees that you're being listened to 10,000 times in Providence, they know that's real data, you know it's real data, they will have you come give a show down there. They will broadcast to the people who have been listening to you that you're coming. If you do this right, you could go down there and make $20,000. You do that three times during your start of a career. So in this sense, AI creates jobs. It's not about taking away human jobs. It's creating new jobs because it creates a new market. Once you've created a market, you've now connected up producers of consumers. The Mewkpersu making the music and say to someone who comes to their shows a lot, hey, I'll collect your daughter's wedding for $10,000. You'll say $8,000. They'll say $9,000. Then you can now get it in, come up to $100,000. You're not going to be a millionaire. Now even think about really the value of music is in these personal connections, even so much so that a young kid wants to wear a t-shirt with their favorite musicians signature on it. So if they listen to the music on the internet, the internet should be able to provide them with a button as they push and the merchandise arrives the next day. We can do that. Now, why should we do that? Well, because the kid who bought the shirt will be happy, but more the person who made the music will get the money. There's no advertising needed. So you can create markets that are in the producer and the consumers. Take 5% cut. Your company will be perfectly sound. It'll go forward in the future and it will create new markets and that raises human happiness. Now, this seems like it was easy. Just create this dashboard, create some connections and all that. But if you think about Uber or whatever, you think about the challenges in the real world of doing things like this. And there are actually new principles going to be needed. You're trying to create a new kind of two-way market at a different scale that's ever been done before. There's going to be unwanted aspects of the market. They'll be bad people. They'll be the data will get used in the wrong ways. It'll fail in some ways. It won't deliver about. You have to think that through. It's like anyone who ran a big auction or ran a big matching service in economics will think these things through. That maybe didn't get it all. The huge issues that can arise when you start to create markets. But it starts for at least for me solidify my thoughts and allow me to move forward in my own thinking. Yeah. I talked to how to research this Spotify. Actually, I think their long-term goal, they've said, is to have at least one million creators make a comfortable living putting a Spotify. I think you articulate a really nice vision of the world and the digitals in the cyber space of markets. What do you think companies like Spotify or YouTube or Netflix can do to create such markets? Is it an AI problem? Is it an interface problem? Is it an AI problem? Who should they hire to solve these problems? Part of it's not just top down. Silicon Valley has a attitude that they know how to do it. They will create the system just like Google did with a search box that will be so good that they'll just every one will adopt that. Everything you said, but missing the kind of culture. It's literally that 16-year-old who's able to create the songs. You don't create that as a Silicon Valley entity. You don't hire them per se. You have to create an ecosystem in which they are wanted and that they're belong. You have to have some cultural credibility to do things like this. Netflix, to their credit, wanted some of that sort of credibility. They created shows, content. They call it content. It's such a terrible word, but it's culture. With movies, you can kind of go give a large sum of money to somebody graduate from the USC Film School. It's a whole thing of its own, but it's kind of like rich white people's thing to do. American culture has not been so much about rich white people. It's been about all the immigrants, all the Africans who came and brought that culture and those rhythms to this world and created this whole new thing. American culture. Companies can't artificially create that. They can't just say, hey, we're here. We're going to buy it up. You got a partner. Anyway, not to denigrate, these companies are all trying and they should. I'm sure they're asking these questions in some other way, even get making an effort, but it is partly a respect the culture as you are a technology person. You got to blend your technology with cultural meaning. How much of a role do you think the algorithm, some machine learning has in connecting the consumer to the creator, the recommender system aspect of this? Yeah. I think pretty high. There's no magic in the algorithm, but a good recommender system is way better than a bad recommender system. Recommender systems was a billion dollar industry back even 10, 20 years ago. It continues to be extremely important going forward. What's your favorite recommender system just so we can put something on? Historically, I first went to Amazon. I first didn't like Amazon because they put the book people out of business or the library, the local booksellers went out of business. I've come to accept that there are probably more books being sold now and poor people reading them than ever before and then local booksellers are coming back. That's how economics sometimes work. You go up and you go down. But anyway, when I finally started going there and I bought a few books, I was really pleased to see another few books being recommended to me that I never would have thought of. I bought a bunch of them so they obviously had a good business model. I learned things and I still, to this day, browse using that service. I think lots of people get a lot. That is a good aspect of a recommender system. I'm learning from my peers in a indirect way. Their algorithms are not meant to have them impose what we learn. It really is trying to find out what's in the data. It doesn't work so well for other kind of entities, but that's just the complexity of human life. I'm not going to get recommendations on shirts, but that's interesting. If you try to recommend restaurants, it's hard to do it at scale. A blend of recommendation systems with other economic ideas, matchings and so on is really still very open, research wise, and there's new companies that can emerge to do that. What do you think is going to the messy, difficult land of say politics and things like that, the YouTube and Twitter have to deal with in terms of recommendation systems, being able to suggest, I think Facebook, just launch Facebook news, so they're having, recommend the kind of news that are most likely to be interesting. Doing this is AI solvable, again, whatever term one is used. Do you think it's a solvable problem for machines or is it a deeply human problem that's unsolvable? I don't even think about it at that level. I think that what's broken with some of these companies, it's all monetization by advertising. They're not at least Facebook. I want to critique them, but they didn't really try to connect a producer and a consumer in an economic way. No one wants to pay for anything. They all started with Google and then Facebook. They went back to the playbook of the television companies back in the day. No one wanted to pay for this signal. They will pay for the TV box, but not for the signal, at least back in the day. So advertising kind of filled that gap and advertising was new and interesting and it somehow didn't take over our lives quite. Fast forward, Google provides a service that people don't want to pay for. Somewhat surprisingly in the 90s, they made in that making huge amounts, they cornered the advertising market. It didn't seem like that was going to happen. At least to me, these little things on the right hand side of the screen just did not seem all that economically interesting, but that company's had maybe no other choice. The TV market was going away and billboards and so on. So they got it. And I think that sadly, that Google just has, it was doing so well with that. I make it so much more. They didn't think much more about how, wait a minute, is there a producer, consumer relationship to be set up here, not just between us and the advertisers market to be created? Is there an actual market between the producer and consumer? There, the producers, the person who created that video clip, the person who made that website, the person who could make more such things, the person who could adjust it as a function of demand. The person on the other side who's asking for different kinds of things, you know, so you see glimmers of that now, there's influencers and there's kind of a little glimmering of a market, but it should have been done 20 years ago. Should have been thought about, it should have been created in parallel with the advertising ecosystem. And then Facebook inherited that and I think they also didn't think very much about that. So fast forward and now they are making huge amounts of money off of advertising. And the news thing and all these clicks is just feeding the advertising. It's all connected up to the advertiser. So you want more people to click on certain things because that money flows to you, Facebook. You're very much incentivized to do that. And when you start to find it's breaking, so people were telling you, well, we're getting into some troubles, you try to adjust it with your smart AI algorithms, right? And figure out what are bad clicks though. Maybe shouldn't be clicked through the rate. It should be said, I find that pretty much hopeless. It does get into all the complies of human life. And you can try to fix it, you should, but you could also fix the whole business model. And the business model is that really, are there some human producers and consumers out there? Is there some economic value to be liberated by connecting them directly? Is it such that it's so valuable that people will be able to pay for it? All right. And my group name is like small thing. But even after you micro, so I like the example, suppose I'm going, next week I'm going to India, never been to India before, right? I have a couple of days in Mumbai. I have no idea what to do there, right? And I could go on the web right now and search. It's going to be kind of hopeless. I'm not going to find. I have lots of advertisers in my face, right? What I really want to do is broadcast to the world that I am going to Mumbai and have someone on the other side of a market look at me and there's a recommendation system there. So I'm not looking at all possible people coming to Mumbai. They're looking at the people who are relevant to them. So someone my age group, someone who kind of knows me in some level, I give up a little privacy by that, but I'm happy because what I'm going to get back is this person can make a little video for me. Or they're going to write a little two page paper on here's the cool things that you want to do and move by this week, especially, right? I'm going to look at that. I'm not going to pay a micro payment. I'm going to pay $100 or whatever for that. It's real value. It's like journalism. As an auto subscription, it's that I'm going to pay that person in that moment. Companies are going to take 5% of that and that person has now got it. It's a gig economy, if you will, but done for thinking about a little bit behind YouTube, there was actually people who could make more of those things. If they were connected into a market, they would make more of those things independently. You don't have to tell them what to do. You don't have to incentivize them any other way. These companies, I don't think have fought long and hard about that. I do distinguish on Facebook on the one side who just not thought about these things at all. I think thinking that AI will fix everything. Amazon thinks about them all the time because they were already out in the real world. They were delivering packages to people's doors. They were worried about a market. They were worried about sellers and they were worried and some things they do were great, some things maybe not so great. They're in that business model. I'd say Google sort of hovers somewhere in between. I don't think for a long, long time they got it. I think they probably see that YouTube is more pregnant with possibility than they might have thought and they're probably heading that direction. Silicon Valley has been dominated by the Google Facebook kind of mentality and the subscription and advertising. That's the core problem. The fake news actually rides on top of that because it means that you're monetizing with clip-through rate and that is the core problem. You got to remove that. Advertisement. If we're going to linger on that, that's an interesting thesis. I don't know if everyone really deeply thinks about that. You're right. The thought is the advertisement model is the only thing we have, the only thing we'll ever have. We have to fix. We have to build algorithms that despite that business model, find the better angels of our nature and do good by society and by the individual. You think we can slowly... You think, first of all, there's a difference you should and could. You're saying we should slowly move away from the advertisement model and have a direct connection between the consumer and the creator. The question I also have is, can we? Because the advertisement model is so successful now in terms of just making a huge amount of money and therefore being able to build a big company that provides... Has really smart people working that create a good service. Do you think it's possible and just to clarify, you think we should move away? Well, I think we should. But we is the... You know, me. Society. Yeah, well the companies. First of all, full disclosure, I'm doing a day-of-week at Amazon because I kind of want to learn more about how they do things. So, I'm not speaking for Amazon in any way, but I did go there because I actually believe they get a little bit of this or trying to create these markets. And they don't really use advertisement not a crucial part of Amazon. That's a good question. So, it has become not crucial, but it's become more and more present if you go to Amazon website and without revealing too many deep secrets about Amazon, I can tell you that a lot of people in the company question this and there's a huge question going on. You do not want to world where there's zero advertising. That actually is a bad world. Okay. So, here's the way to think about it. You're a company that, like Amazon, is trying to bring products to customers. And the customer, and any government, you want to buy a vacuum cleaner, say, you want to know what's available for me. And it's not going to be that obvious. You have to do a little bit of work at it. The recommendation system will sort of help. But now, suppose this other person over here has just made the world, they spent a huge amount of energy. They had a great idea. They made a great vacuum cleaner. They know. They really did it. They nailed it. It's an MIT, a whiz kid that made a great new vacuum cleaner. It's not going to be in the recommendation system. No one will know about it. The algorithms will not find it. And AI will not fix that at all. How do you allow that vacuum cleaner to start to get in front of people be sold? Well, advertising. And here, what advertising is, is a signal that you believe in your product enough that you're willing to pay some real money for it. And to me as a consumer, I look at that signal, I say, well, for so long, these are not just cheap alas, because we have now right now. I know that these are super cheap, pennies. If I see an ad where it's actually, I know the company is only doing a few of these, and they're making real money is kind of flowing. When I see an ad, I may pay more attention to it. And I actually might want that, because I see, hey, that guy spent money on his vacuum cleaner. Oh, maybe there's something good there, so I will look at it. And so that's part of the overall information flow in a good market. So advertising has a role. But the problem is, of course, that signal is now completely gone, because it just, you know, dominate by these tiny little things, but add up to big money for the company. You know, so I think it will just, I think it will change, because the society is just don't, you know, stick with things that annoy a lot of people. And advertising currently annoys people more than it provides information. And I think that at Google, probably is smart enough to figure out that this is a dead, this is a bad model, even though it's a hard-to-use amount of money, and they'll have to figure out how to pull it away from it slowly. And I'm sure the CEO there will figure it out, but they need to do it. And they needed it to, so if you reduce advertising, not to zero, but you reduce it, and the same time you bring up producer consumer actual real value being delivered, so real money is being paid, and they take a 5% cut, that 5% could start to get big enough to cancel out the lost revenue from the kind of the poor kind of advertising. And I think that a good company will do that, we'll realize that. And they're a company, you know, Facebook, you know, again, God bless them. They bring, you know, grandmother's, you know, they bring children's fixtures into grandmother's lives, it's fantastic. But they need to think of a new business model, and that's the core problem there, until they start to connect producer consumer, I think they will just continue to make money and then buy the next social network company and then buy the next one, and the innovation level will not be high, and the health issues will not go away. So I apologize that we kind of returned to words, I don't think the exact terms matter, but in sort of defensive advertisement, don't you think the kind of direct connection between consumer and creator producer is the best, like the, is what advertisement strives to do, right? So that is best advertisement is literally now a Facebook is listening to our conversation and heard that you're going to India, and we'll be able to actually start automatically for you making these connections and start giving this off or so like, I apologize if it's just a matter of terms, but just the draw of distinction, is it possible to make advertisement just better and better and better algorithmically to where it actually becomes a connection almost a different question. That's a good question. So let's put it on the first of all, what we just talked about, I was defending advertising. Okay, so I was defending it as a way to get signals into a market that don't come any other way, especially algorithmically, it's a sign that someone's put money on it, it's a sign they think it's valuable. And if I think that if other things someone else thinks it's valuable, and if I trust other people, I might be willing to listen. I don't trust that Facebook though is who's an intermediary between this. I don't think they care about me, okay, I don't think they do. And I find it creepy that they know I'm going to India next week because of our conversation. Why do you think that I can read? So what, just put your PR hat on. Why do you think you find Facebook creepy and not trust them as do majority of the population? So they're out of the Silicon Valley companies, I saw like not approval rate, but there's ranking how much people trust companies in Facebook is in the gutter. In the gutter, including people inside of Facebook. So what do you attribute that to? Because when I- You don't find it creepy that right now we're talking that I might walk out on the street right now that some unknown person who I don't know kind of comes up to me and says, I hear you're going to India. I mean, that's not even Facebook. That's just a- I want transparency in human society. I want to have if you know something about me, there's actually some reason you know something about me that's something that if I look at it later and audit it kind of, I approve. You know something about me because you care in some way. There's a caring relationship, even an economic one or something. Not just that you're someone who could exploit it in ways I don't know about or care about or I'm troubled by or whatever. And we're right now where that happened to way too much. And that Facebook knows things about a lot of people and could exploit it and does exploit it at times. I think most people do find that creepy. It's not for them. It's not that Facebook does not do it because they care about them, right, in a real sense. And they shouldn't. They should not be a big brother caring about us. That is not the role of a company like that. Why not? Not the big brother part but caring, the trust thing. I mean, don't those companies, just a link under because a lot of companies have a lot of information about us. I would argue that there's companies like Microsoft that has more information about us than Facebook does and yet we trust Microsoft more. Well, Microsoft is pivoting. Microsoft, you know, under such an A.L. has decided this is really important. We don't want to do creepy things. Really want people to trust us to actually only use information in ways that they really would approve of that we don't decide, right? And I'm just kind of adding that the health of a market is that when I connect to someone who produces a consumer, it's not just a random producer consumer. It's people who see each other, they don't like each other but they sense that if they transact, some happiness will go up on both sides. If a company helps me to do that and moments that I choose of my choosing, then fine. So and also think about the difference between browsing versus buying, right? There are moments in my life I just want to buy a gadget or something. I need something for that moment. I need some ammonia for my house or something because I got a problem in the spill. I want to just go in. I don't want to be advertised at that moment. I don't want to be led down very straight. That's annoying. I want to just go and have it be extremely easy to do what I want. Other moments I might say no, it's like today I'm going to the shopping mall. I want to walk around and see things and see people and be exposed to stuff. I want control over that though. I don't want the company's algorithms to decide for me. I think that's a thing. It's a total loss of control. If Facebook thinks they should take the control from us of deciding when we want to have certain kinds of information when we don't, what information that is, how much it relates to what they know about us that we didn't really want them to know about us, they're not, I don't want them to be helping me in that way. I don't want them to be helping them by they decide they have control over what I want and when. I totally agree. So, Facebook, by the way, I have this optimistic thing where I think Facebook has the kind of personal information about us that could create a beautiful thing. So I'm really optimistic of what Facebook could do. It's not what it's doing but what it could do. So I don't see that. I think that optimism is misplaced because there's not a bit, you have to have a business model behind these things. Yes, really. Create a beautiful thing is really, let's be clear. It's about something and people would value. I don't think they have that business model and I don't think they will suddenly discover it by what you know, long, hot shower. I disagree. I disagree in terms of, you can discover a lot of amazing things in a shower. So I think that I said they won't come. They won't. They won't do it. But in the shower, I think a lot of other people will discover it. I think that this guy, so I should also full disclosure, there's a company called United Masters which I'm on their board and they've created this music market. They have a hundred thousand artists now signed on and they've done things like onto the NBA and the music you find behind in the NBA clips right now is their music. That's a company that had the right business model in mind from the get go. Executed on that. From day one, there was value brought to, so here you can have a kid who made some songs who suddenly their songs run the NBA website. That's really economic value to people. Doing that differ on the optimism of being able to sort of change the direction of the Titanic. Right? So I'm older than you. So I think Titanic's crash. Got it. But just to elaborate, because I totally agree with you and I just want to know how difficult you think this problem is. So for example, I want to read some news and I would, there's a lot of times in the day where something makes me either smile or think in a way where I like consciously think this really gave me value. Like I sometimes listen to the daily podcasts in the New York Times way better than the New York Times themselves, by the way, for people listening. That's like real journalism is happening for some reason in the podcast space. It doesn't make sense to me. But often I listen to it 20 minutes and I would be willing to pay for that like $5, $10 for that experience. That's kind of what you're getting at. Is that a little transaction? How difficult is this to create a frictional system like Uber has, for example, for other things? What's your intuition there? So first of all, I pay a little bit of money to, you know, to send you something called Courts that does financial things. I like medium as a site out there, but I would. You had a great post on medium. I would have loved to pay you a dollar. But I wouldn't have wanted it. I wouldn't have wanted it per se because there should be also sites where that's not actually the goal. The goal is to actually have a broadcast channel that I monetize in some other way if I chose to. I mean, I could now people know about it. I could. I'm not doing it, but that's fine with me. Also, the musicians who are making all this music, I don't think the right model is that you pay a little subscription fee to them, right? Because people can copy the bits too easily. And it's just not that somewhere the value is. The value is that a connection was made with real between real human beings. And you can follow up on that and create yet more value. So no, I think. There's a lot of open questions here. Hot open questions, but also, yeah, I do want good recommendation systems that recommend cool stuff to me. But it's pretty hard, right? I don't like them to recommend stuff just based on my browsing history. I don't like that based on stuff they know about me. What's unknown about me is the most interesting. So this is the really interesting question. We made this agree. I think that I love recommender systems and I want to give them everything about me in a way that I trust. Yeah, but you don't. Because so for example, this morning I clicked on, I was pretty sleepy this morning. I clicked on a story about the Queen of England, right? I do not give a damn about the Queen of England. I really do not. But it was clickbait. It kind of looked funny and I had to say what the heck are they talking about? I don't want to have my life, you know, heading that direction. Now that's in my browsing history. The system and any reasonable system will think that I care about history. Right, but you're saying all the trace, all the digital exhaust or whatever, that's been kind of the models. If you collect all this stuff, you're going to figure all of us out. Well, if you're trying to figure out like kind of one person like Trump or something, maybe you could figure him out. But if you're trying to figure out, you know, 500 million people, you know, no way, no way. Do you think so? No, I do. I think so. I think we are humans are just amazing, rich and complicated. Maybe one of us has our little quirks. Everyone else has our little things that could intrigue us that we don't even know and will intrigue us. And there's no sign of it in our past, but by God, there it comes. And you know, you fall in love with it. And I don't want a company trying to figure that out for me and anticipate that. Okay. Well, I want them to provide a forum, a market, a place that I kind of go and by hooker, by crook, this happens. You know, I am walking down the street and I hear some Chilean music being played. And I never knew I like Chilean music. Wow. So there is that side. And I want them to provide a limited, but you know, interesting place to go, right? And so don't try to use your AI to kind of, you know, figure me out and then put me in a world where you figured me out. You know, no, create spaces for human beings where our creativity and our style will be enriched and come forward. And it will be a lot of more transparency. I won't have people randomly anonymously putting comments up and I'll special based on something no about me, facts that you know, we are so broken right now. If you're, you know, especially if you're celebrity, but you know, it's about anybody that anonymous people are hurting lots and lots of people right now. And that's part of this thing that Silicon Valley is thinking that, you know, just collect all this information and use it in a great way. So no, I'm not, I'm not a pessimist. I'm very much an optimist, my nature, but I think that's just been the wrong path for the whole technology to take. Be more limited, create, let humans rise up. Don't try to replace them. That's the AI mantra. Don't try to anticipate them. Don't try to predict them because you're not going to, you're not going to be able to do those things. You're going to make things worse. Okay. So right now, just give this a chance. Right now, the recommender systems are the creepy people in the shadow watching your every move. So they're looking at traces of you. They're not directly interacting with you. Sort of the, your close friends and family, the way they know you is by having conversation by actually having interactions back and forth. Do you think there's a place for recommender systems sort of to step because you just emphasize the value of human and human connection, but yeah, give a chance. AI human connection. Is there a role for an AI system to have conversations with you in terms of to try to figure out what kind of music you like? Not by just watching what you listen to, but actually having a conversation, natural language or otherwise. Yeah. No, I'm, so I'm not against it. I just wanted to push back against the, maybe you're saying you have options for Facebook. So I there, I think it's misplaced, but, but I think that the script eating, funding Facebook. Yeah. No. So good for you. Go for it. That's a hard spot to be. Yeah. No. Good. Human interaction like on our daily, the context around me in my own home is something that I don't want some big company to know about it. But I would be more than happy. Have technology helped me with it. Which kind of technology? Well, you know, just Alexa. Alexa. Well, a good, you know, Alexa's done right. I think Alexa's a research platform right now more than anything else, but Alexa done right, you know, could do things like I, I leave the water running in my garden and I say, Hey, Alexa, the water's running in my garden. And even have Alexa figure out that that means when my wife comes home that she should be told about that. That's a little bit of a reasoning. I would call that AI and by any kind of stretch. It's a little bit of reasoning and it actually kind of make my life a little easier and better. And, you know, I wouldn't call this a wow moment, but I kind of think that overall rises human happiness up to have that kind of thing. But not when you're lonely, Alexa knowing loneliness. No, no, no. I don't want Alexa to be feeling trucey and I don't want just the designer of the system to kind of work all this out. I really want to have a lot of control and I want transparency and control. And if the company can stand up and give me that in the context of new technology, I think they're going to first of all be way more successful than our current generation. Like I said, I was a machine Microsoft and I really think they're pivoting to kind of be the trusted old uncle. But, you know, I think that they get that this is a way to go that if you let people find technology and powers them to have more control and have and have control not just over privacy but over this rich set of interactions, that that people go like that a lot more. And that's the right business model going forward. What does control over privacy look like? Do you think you should be able to just view all the data that? No, it's much more than that. I mean, first of all, it should be an individual decision. Some people don't want privacy. They want their whole life out there. Other people want it. Privacy is not a zero one. It's not a legal thing. It's not just about which data is available, which is not. I like to recall to people that, you know, a couple of years ago, everyone, there was not really big cities. Everyone lived in the countryside and villages. And, and villages, everybody knew everything about you. Very, you had never any privacy. Is that bad? Are we better off now? Well, you know, arguably no, because what did you get for that loss of at least certain kinds of privacy? Well, people helped each other. If they, because they know everything about you, they know something's bad happening. They will help you with that. Right? And now you live in a big city, no one knows the amount that you get, no help. So it kind of depends the answer. I want certain people who I trust and there should be relationships. I should kind of manage all those. But who knows what about me? I should have some agency there. It shouldn't, I shouldn't just be a drift in a sea of technology where I know, you know, I don't want to go reading things and checking boxes. So I don't know how to do that. And I'm not a privacy researcher, per se. I just, I recognize the vast complexity of this. It's not just technology. It's not just legal scholars meeting technologists. There's got to be kind of a whole layers around it. And so I, when I alluded this, emerging engineering field, this is a big part of it. Like when electrical engineering came, I'm not, wasn't around at the time, but you just didn't plug electricity into walls and all kind of worked. You know, I have like underwriters laboratory that reassured you that that plug's not going to burn up your house. And that that machine will do this and that and everything. They'll be whole people who can install things. They'll be people who can watch the installers. There'll be a whole layers, you know, an onion of these kind of things. And for things as deep and interesting as privacy, which is as least as interesting as electricity, that's going to take decades to kind of work out, but it's going to require a lot of new structures that we don't have right now. So it's kind of hard to talk about it. And you're saying there's a lot of money to be made if you get it right. Absolutely. Absolutely. Well, a lot of money to be made in all these things that provide human services and people recognize them as useful parts of their lives. So yeah. So yeah, the dialogue sometimes goes from the exuberant technologists to the no technology is good kind of. And that's, you know, in our public discourse, you know, and newsrooms, you see too much of this kind of thing. And the sober discussions in the middle, which are the challenges you want to have or where we need to be having our conversations. And, you know, there's not actually there's not many forum for for those. You know, that's that's kind of what I would look for. Maybe I could go and I could read a comment section of something and it would actually be this kind of dialogue going back and forth. You don't see much of this, right? Which is why actually there's a resurgence of podcasts out of all because good are really hungry for conversation. But there's technology is not helping much. So comment sections of anything, including YouTube, is not hurting. And not hurting. And you think technically speaking is possible to help. I don't know the answers, but it's a less anonymity, a little more locality, you know, worlds that you kind of enter in and you trust the people there in those worlds so that when you start having a discussion, you know, not only is that people are not going to hurt you, but it's not going to be a total waste of your time because there's a lot of wasting of time that, you know, a lot of us, I pulled out of Facebook already on because it was clearly going to waste a lot of my time, even though there was some value. And so, yeah, worlds that are somehow you enter in and you know what you're getting and it kind of appeals to you. You might, new things might happen, but you kind of have some trust in that world. And there's some deep, interesting, complex, psychological aspects around anonymity, how that changes human behavior. Indeed. Quite dark and... Quite dark, yeah. I think a lot of us are, especially those of us who really loved the advent of technology. I love social networks when they came out. I didn't say any negatives there at all. But then I started seeing comment sections. I think it was maybe, you know, whether it's CNN or something. And I started to go, wow, this is just darkness. I just did not know about and our technology is now amplifying it. So sorry for the big philosophical question, but on that topic, do you think human beings, because you've also, out of all things, I put it in psychology too, do you think human beings are fundamentally good? Like all of us have good intent that could be mined or is it, depending on context and environment, everybody could be evil? So my answer is fundamentally good, but fundamentally limited. All of us have very, you know, blinkers on. We don't see the other person's pain that easily. We don't see the other person's point of view that easily. We're very much in our own head in our own world. My good days, I think the technology could open us up to more perspectives and more, let's blinker and more understanding. You know, a lot of wars in human history happened because of just ignorance. They didn't, they thought the other person was doing this, well, the other person wasn't doing this and we have a huge amount of that. But in my lifetime, I've not seen technology really helping that way yet. And I do believe in that. But, you know, no, I think fundamentally human reprimands are good. The people suffer, people have grievances, people have grudges and those things cause them to do things they probably would want. They regret it often. So, no, I think it's a, you know, part of the progress of technology is to indeed allow it to be a little easier to be the real good person you actually are. Well, but do you think individual human life or society could be modeled as an optimization problem? Not the way I think, typically. I mean, that's your time out. One of the most complex phenomena in the whole, you know, in all of the universe. Individual human life or society is a home. Both. Both. I mean, individual human life is amazingly complex. And so, you know, optimizations kind of just one branch of mathematics that talks about certain kind of things and it just feels way too limited for the complexity of such things. What properties of optimization problems? Do you think so? Do you think most interesting problems that could be solved through optimization? What kind of properties does that surface have? Non-convexity, convexity, linearity? All those kinds of things, saddle points. Well, so optimization is just one piece of mathematics. You know, there's like, you just even in our era, we're aware that say sampling is coming up examples of something. What's optimization? What's sampling? Well, you think you can, if you're kind of a certain kind of mathematician, you can try to blend them and make them seem to be sort of the same thing. But optimizations, roughly speaking, trying to find a point that a single point, that is the optimum of a criterion function of some kind. And sampling is trying to, from that same surface, treat that as a distribution or density and find points that have high density. So I want the entire distribution and an sampling paradigm and I want the single point, that's the best point in the optimization paradigm. Now if you were optimizing in the space of probability measures, the output of that could be a whole probability distribution. So you can start to make these things the same. But in mathematics, if you go too high up that kind of abstraction, you start to lose the ability to do the interesting theorems, so you kind of don't try to overly over abstract. So as a small tangent, what kind of world do you find more appealing? One that is deterministic or stochastic. Well, that's easy. I mean, I'm a statistician. The world is highly stochastic. I don't know what's going to happen in the next five minutes. But you're going to ask what we're going to do. Do to the uncertainty. Do to the massive uncertainty. You know, massive uncertainty. And so the best I can do is have come rough sense or probability distribution on things and somehow use that in my reasoning about what to do now. So how does the distributed at scale, when you have multi-agent systems look like, so optimization can optimize, sort of, it makes a lot more sense, sort of, at least from my, from robotics perspective, for a single robot, for a single agent trying to optimize some objective function. When you start to enter the real world, this game theory ready concepts starts popping up. And that how do you see optimization in this, because you've talked about markets in a scale, what does that look like? Do you see it as optimization? Do you see it as sampling? Do you see? Like how, how she, you might see, all blend together and a system designer thinking about how to build an incentivized system will have a blend of all these things. So, you know, a particle in a potential well is optimizing a functional called a Lagrangian. Right? The particle doesn't know that. There's no algorithm running that does that. It just happens. So it's a description mathematically of something that helps us understand as analysts what's happening. Right. And so the same will happen when we talk about, you know, mixtures of humans and computers and markets and so on and so forth. There'll be certain principles that allow us to understand what's happening, whether or not the actual algorithms are being used by any sense is not clear. Now, at some point, I may have set up a multi-agent or market kind of system. And I'm now thinking about an individual agent in that system. And they're asked to do some task and they're incentivized in some way. They get certain signals and they have some utility. Maybe what they will do at that point is they just won't know the answer. They may have to optimize to find an answer. Okay. So an artist could be embedded inside of an overall market. You know, and Game Theory is very, very broad. It is often studied very narrowly for certain kinds of problems. But it's roughly speaking. It's just the, I don't know what you're going to do. So I kind of anticipate that a little bit. And you anticipate what I'm going to anticipate. And we kind of go back and forth in our own minds. We run kind of thought experiments. You've talked about this interesting point in terms of Game Theory. So you know, most optimization problems really hate saddle points. Maybe you can discover saddle points are. But I have heard you kind of mentioned that there's a branch of optimization that you could try to explicitly look for saddle points as a good thing. Oh, not optimization. That's just Game Theory. That's so there's all kinds of different equilibrium game theory. And some of them are highly explanatory behavior. They're not attempting to be algorithmic. They're just trying to say, if you happen to be at this equilibrium, you would see certain kind of behavior. And we see that in real life. That's what an economist wants to do, especially a behavioral economist. In continuous differential game theory, you're in continuous spaces. Some of the simplest equilibrium are saddle points. A Nash equilibrium is a saddle point. It's a special kind of saddle point. So classically in game theory, you were trying to find Nash equilibrium. And in algorithmic game theory, you're trying to find algorithms that would find them. And so you're trying to find saddle points. I mean, so that's literally what you're trying to do. But any economist knows that Nash equilibrium have their limitations. They are definitely not that explanatory in many situations. They're not what you really want. There's other kind of equilibrium. And there's names associated with these because they came from history with certain people working on them. But there will be new ones emerging. So one example is a stacklberg equilibrium. So Nash, you and I are both playing this game against each other or for each other, maybe it's cooperative. And we're both going to think it through, then we're going to decide and we're going to do our thing simultaneously. In a stacklberg, no, I'm going to be the first mover. I'm going to make a move. You're going to look at my move, and then you're going to make yours. Now, since I know you're going to look at my move, I anticipate what you're going to do. And so I don't do something stupid. But then I know that you are also anticipating me. So we're kind of going back and forth online. But there is then a first mover thing. And so that was a different equilibrium. So just mathematically, yeah, these things have certain topologies, certain shapes that are like salafoets, and then algorithmically or dynamically, how do you move towards them? How do you move away from things? So some of these questions have answers. They've been studied. Others do not. And especially if it becomes stochastic, especially if there's large numbers of decentralized things. There's just young people getting in this field who kind of think it's all done because we have TensorFlow. Well, no, these are all open problems. And they're really important and interesting. It's about strategic settings. How do I collect data? Suppose I don't know what you're going to do, because I don't know you very well. Well, I got to collect data about you. So maybe I want to push you in a part of the space where I don't know much about you, so I can get data. And then later I'll realize that you'll never go there because of the way the game is set up. But that's part of the overall data analysis context. Even the game of poker is fascinating space. Well, whenever there's any answer into your lack of information, it's a super exciting space. Yeah. Just a link on optimization for a second. So when we look at deep learning, it's essentially minimization of a complicated loss function. So is there something insightful or hopeful that you see in the kinds of function surface that loss functions, that deep learning in the real world is trying to optimize over? Is there something interesting? Is it just the usual kind of problems of optimization? I think from an optimization point of view, that surface veraflow, it's pretty smooth. And secondly, if it's over parameterizer, there's lots of paths down to reasonable optimal. And so kind of the getting downhill to an optimum is viewed as not as hard as you might have expected in high dimensions. The fact that some optimum tend to be really good ones, and others not so good, and you tend to sometimes you find the good ones is still needs explanation. But the particular surfaces coming for the particular generation of neural nets, I kind of suspect those will change. In 10 years, it will not be exactly. Those surfaces, there'll be some others that are, and optimization theory will help contribute to why other surfaces or why other algorithms. Layers of arithmetic operations with a little bit of non-linearity, that didn't come from neuroscience per se. I mean, maybe in the minds of some of the people working on it, they were thinking even about brains, but they were arithmetic circuits in all kinds of fields, computer science, control theory, and so on. And that layers of these could transform things in certain ways, and that if it's smooth, maybe you could find parameter values. It's a big discovery that it's working, it's able to work at the scale. But in terms of, I don't think that'll work stuck with that, and we're certainly not stuck with that, because we're understanding the brain. So in terms of on the algorithm size of gradient descent, do you think we're stuck with gradient descent? Is variance of it, what variance do you find interesting, or do you think there'll be something else invented that is able to walk all over these optimization spaces in more interesting ways? So there's a co-design of the surface and the architecture and the algorithm. So if you just ask if we stay with the kind of architectures that we have now, not just neural nets, but phase retrieval architectures or make it's completion architectures, and so on. I think we've come to a place where a stochastic gradient algorithms are dominant, and there are versions that are a little better than others. They have more guarantees, they're more robust, and so on, and there's gone going research to figure out which is the best time for which situation. But I think that that'll start to co-evolve, that that'll put pressure on the actual architecture, and so we shouldn't do it in this particular way, we should do it in a different way, because this other algorithm is now available if you do it in a different way. So that I can't really anticipate that co-evolution process. But gradients are amazing mathematical objects. They have a lot of people who start to study them more deeply mathematically or are kind of shocked about what they are and what they can do. I mean, to think about this way, if I suppose that I tell you if you move along the x-axis, you get a uphill in some objective by three units. Whereas if you move along the y-axis, you go uphill by seven units. Now I'm going to only allow you to move a certain unit distance. What are you going to do? Most people will say, I'm going to go along the y-axis. I'm getting the biggest bang for my buck. My buck is only one unit, so I'm going to put all of it in the y-axis. And why should I even take any of my strength, my step size, and put any of it in the x-axis, because I'm getting less bang for my buck? That seems like a completely clear argument. And it's wrong, because the gradient direction is not to go along the y-axis. It's to take a little bit of the x-axis. And to understand that, you have to know some math. And so even a trivial, so-called operator like gradient is not trivial, and so exploiting its properties is still very, very important. Now we know that just creating descent has got all kinds of problems. It gets stuck in many ways, and it could dimension dependence and so on. So my own line of work recently has been about what kinds of stochasticity, how can we get dimension dependence, how can we do the theory of that? And we've come up pretty favorable results with certain kinds of stochasticity. We have sufficient conditions, generally. If you do this, we will give you a good guarantee. We don't have necessary conditions that it must be done a certain way in general. So stochasticity, how much randomness is being injected into the walking along the gradient? And what kind of randomness? Why is randomness good in this process? Why is stochasticity good? Yeah, so I can give you simple answers, but in some sense, again, it's kind of amazing. Stochasticity just, you know, particular features of a surface that could have hurt you if you were doing one thing deterministically, it won't hurt you because, you know, by chance, there's very little chance that you would get hurt. And, you know, so here, stochasticity, you know, it just kind of saves you from some of the particular features of surfaces that, you know, and in fact, if you think about, you know, surfaces that are discontinuous in a first derivative, like, you know, absolute value function, you will go down and hit that point where there's non-differentiability, right? And if you're running a deterministic algorithm, at that point, you can really do something bad, right? Where stochasticity just means it's pretty unlikely that it's gonna happen, you're gonna hit that point. So, you know, it's, it's, again, not trivial analyzed, but especially in higher dimensions, also stochasticity, our intuition isn't very good about it, but it has properties that kind of are very appealing in high dimensions for kind of law of large number of reasons. So it's all part of the mathematics, it's once fun to work in the field, is that you get to understand this mathematics. And, but long story short, you know, partly empirically it was discovered that stochastic gradient is very effective and theory kind of followed, I'd say, that, but I don't see that we're getting clearly out of that. What's the most beautiful, mysterious, profound idea to you in optimization? I don't know the most, but let me just say that, you know, Nesterov's work on Nesterov acceleration to me is pretty, pretty surprising and pretty deep. Can you elaborate? Well, Nesterov acceleration is just that, suppose that we are, you're gonna use gradients to move around into space for the reasons I've alluded to, they're nice directions to move. And suppose that I tell you that you're only allowed to use gradients, you're not gonna be allowed to, you know, it's a local person, it can only sense kind of the change in the surface. But I'm gonna give you kind of a computer that's able to store all your previous gradients, and so you start to learn something about the surface. And I'm gonna restrict you to maybe move in the direction of like a linear span of all the gradients. So you can't kind of just move in some arbitrary direction. Right? So now we have a well-defined mathematical complexity model. There's a certain classes of algorithms that can do that, and there's a can't. And we can ask for certain kinds of surfaces, how fast can you get down to the optimum? So there's an answer to these. So for a, you know, a smooth convex function, there's an answer, which is one over the number of steps squared, you will be within a ball of that size after K steps. Gradient descent in particular has a slower rate. It's one over K, okay? So you could ask is gradient descent actually, even though we know it's a good algorithm, is it the best algorithm in the sense of the answer? No, well, not clear yet, because one over K score is a lower bound. That's probably the best you can do. Gradient is one over K, but this is something better. And so I think it's a surprise to most, the Nesterov discovered a new algorithm that has got two pieces to it. It uses two gradients and puts those together in a certain kind of obscure way. And the thing doesn't even move downhill all the time. It sometimes goes back uphill. And if you're a physicist, that kind of makes some sense, you're building up some momentum. And that is kind of the right intuition, but that intuition is not enough to understand kind of how to do it and why it works. But it does. It achieves one over a K squared. And it has a mathematical structure. And it's still kind of to this day, a lot of us are running papers and trying to explore that and understand it. So there are lots of cool ideas and optimization, but just kind of using gradients, I think, is number one that goes back 150 years. And the Nesterov, I think, has made a major contribution with this idea. So like you said, gradients themselves are in some sense mysterious. Yeah. They're not as trivial as... Not as trivial. The coordinate descent is more of a trivial when you just pick one of the coordinates and go on the one. That's how human minds think. And gradients are not that easy for a human mind to grapple with. An absurd question, but what is statistics? So here it's a little bit, it's somewhere between math and science and technology. It's somewhere in that convex hole. So it's set of principles that allow you to make inferences that have got some reason to be believed. And also, principle that allow you to make decisions where you can have some reason to believe you're not gonna make errors. So all that requires some assumptions about what do you mean by an error? What do you mean by the probabilities? And... But after you start making some assumptions, you're led to conclusions that yes, I can guarantee that if you do this in this way, your probability of making error will be small. Your probability of continuing to not make errors over time will be small. And probability found something that's real will be small, will be high. So decision making is a big part? So that's not a big part. Yeah, so the original, so statistics, short history was that it's kind of goes back as a formal discipline, you know, 250 years or so. It was called inverse probability because around that era, probability was developed sort of, especially to explain gambling situations. Of course. And interesting. So you would say, well, given the state of nature is this, there's a certain roulette board that has a certain mechanism in it. What kind of outcomes do I expect to see? And especially if I do things longer amounts of time, what outcomes do I see? And the physicists start to pay attention to this. And then people say, well, given, let's turn the problem around, what if I saw certain outcomes could I infer what the underlying mechanism was? That's an inverse problem. And in fact, for quite a while, statistics was called inverse probability. That was the name of the field. And I believe that it was Laplace who was working in Napoleon's government who was trying, who needed to do a census of France, learn about the people there. So he went and got and gathered data. And he analyzed that data to determine policy. And said, let's call this field that does this kind of thing statistics because the word state is in there. In French, that's eight ta. But, you know, it's the study of data for the state. And so anyway, that caught on and it's been called statistics ever since. But by the time it got formalized, it was sort of in the 30s. And around that time, there was game theory and decision theory developed nearby. People in that era didn't think of themselves as either computer science or statistics or control or econ. They were all above. And so, you know, Vaughn Neumann is developing game theory, but also thinking of that as decision theory. Walled as an econometrician developing decision theory and then, you know, turn that into statistics. And so it's all about, here's not just data and you analyze it. Here's a loss function. Here's what you care about. Here's the question you're trying to ask. Here is a probability model. And here's the risk you will face if you make certain decisions. And to this day, in most advanced statistical curricula, you teach decision theory is the starting point. And then it branches out and the two branches are basing in a frequentist. But that's all about decisions. In statistics, what is the most beautiful, mysterious, maybe surprising idea that you've come across? Yeah, good question. I mean, there's a bunch of surprising ones. There's something that's way too technical for this thing, but something called James Stein estimation, which is kind of surprising and really takes time to wrap your head around. Can you try to maybe... I think I don't want even wanna try. Let me just say a colleague at Steven Stickler, University of Chicago, wrote a really beautiful paper on James Stein estimation, which helps to... It's views of paradox. It kind of defeats the minds of temps, thunder.
