 The following is a conversation with Sylvia McColley, a computer scientist at MIT, winner of the Toring Award, and one of the leading minds in the fields of cryptography, information security, game theory, and most recently, cryptocurrency and the theoretical foundations of a fully decentralized, secure, and scalable blockchain and Algorand, a company of cryptographers, engineers, and mathematicians that he founded in 2017. Quick mention of our sponsors, Athletic Greens Nutrition Drink, the Information In-Depth Tech Journalism website, Forcigmatic Motion Coffee, and Better Help Online Therapy. Click the sponsor links to get a discount at the support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that I will be having many conversations this year on the topic of cryptocurrency. I'm reading and thinking a lot on this topic. I just recently finished reading the Bitcoin standard, a book I highly recommend. As always, with this podcast, I'm approaching it with an open mind, with compassion, with as little ego as possible, and yes, with love. I hope you go along with me on this journey, and don't judge me too harshly on any likely missteps. As usual, I will play devil's advocate. I will, on purpose, sometimes, ask simple even dumb questions, all to try and explore the space of ideas here, with as much grace as I can muster. I have no financial interests here. I only have a simple curiosity and a love for knowledge, especially about a set of technologies that may very well transform the fabric of human civilization. If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube, review it on Apple Podcast, follow on Spotify, support it on Patreon, or connect with me on Twitter, and Lex Friedman. As usual, I'll do a few minutes of ads now. There's time stamps, so you can skip, but if you skip, please do still check out the sponsors, click the links by the stuff, whatever you have to do. It really is the best way to support this podcast. This show is sponsored by Athletic Greens, the only one daily drink to support better health and peak performance. It replaced the multivitamin for me and went far beyond that with 75 vitamins and minerals. It's the first thing I drink every day. It's funny I had a conversation with Jonathan from MIT, a friend of mine, who I just discovered was an ultramarathon runner. He talked about one of the mistakes he made, as he really didn't ramp up slowly enough, so he had to pay for the cost there. I made this comment that life involves taking risks like that, when you're not fully prepared, but taking on the task anyway, and sometimes it's worth it. But given that it does seem nutritionally and physically in terms of muscle, it's worthwhile to have a balance based on what you can do with some epic crazy stuff. I think it's good to see life as always trying to maintain a healthy base that enables you to in a somewhat healthy way to take on crazy activities. Athletic Greens is on the nutrition side, that's how I see them, is it giving me the basic nutrition I need, even if I mess up with the diet, even if I mess up with whatever sleep and whatever crazy stuff I do. Anyway, they also have fish oil and they're giving you one month supply free. When you sign up at Athletic Greens.com slash Lex, that's Athletic Greens.com slash Lex for the drink and the fish oil. Trust me, it's awesome. They're one of my favorite sponsors. Some of these reads, by the way, might go long, but you have timestamps you can skip. You don't have to listen to this, but I'm trying to do my best. I'm trying to do some interesting stuff that's actually worthwhile listening to. So hopefully it's fun and I'm trying to improvise more and more and just have fun with this thing. Life is short. I'm going to have fun with everything, even sponsor reads. This show is sponsored by the information. It's a website and media company, I guess you can call it. They do in-depth data-driven investigative journalism in the world of technology. I first came across their work a few years ago and remember being surprised that it was kind of expensive to sign up to, but I kept reading the stories and it pulled me in. The care, the depth of the reporting, made me realize, okay, this is what money can buy. I think there were some stuff that I didn't always agree with, but I always felt like it was the kind of journalism that was missing from the clickbait world of tech reporting. So I signed up, even though I couldn't really afford it at the time and it's been truly worth it. In fact, the information is one of the places that made me think that there's hope for journalism. In some sense, it feels like the engagement mechanisms that are driven by social media is driving our journalistic integrity into the ground. So the financial model that the information operates under, it feels like it's the savior. There's also perhaps a side comment or perhaps it's actually one of the main qualities of the information is because of the quality of the reporting and the writing, the kind of people that read it. Some of the most successful CEOs I'm aware of read it. So it brings a lot of influential people together. So then indirectly the information becomes one of the places you go to to understand what the sort of influential minds in the world of tech are thinking about. Anyway, you can get 75% off your first month if you sign up at theinformation.com slash Lex. That's the information.com slash Lex. Besides anything else, I see it just as a good way of supporting in-depth journalism. I hope you do as well. This show is also sponsored by Forcigmatic, the maker of delicious mushroom coffee and plant-based protein. I know what you're asking. Does a coffee taste like mushrooms? No. In fact, it does not. There's a bunch of healthy benefits that keep telling me about. You can research your yourself on the website. But all I know is it tastes good and makes you feel good. And I'm a huge fan of coffee. Also, even though I'm mentioning mushrooms, unfortunately, or fortunately, there is no psychedelic properties to this coffee. That said, I will be having a lot of conversations with psychedelics researchers on this podcast. I think it's in terms of the next couple of decades, one of the most exciting areas of research in the space of neuroscience, neurobiology, in the space of psychology, cognitive science, and even just philosophy. So, and even just medicine for overcoming addiction and all those kinds of things. But back to the coffee, get up to 40% off and free shipping and mushroom coffee bundles if you go to Forcigmatic.com slash Lex. That's forcigmatic.com slash Lex. This episode is also sponsored by Better Help. They want me to spell help. I refuse to spell help. It starts with an H, ends with a P, and the rest, please try to figure out. They help you figure out what you need to match with the licensed professional therapist in under 48 hours. I'm not triggered by the number 48, because it happens to be related to the challenge that I recently completed the 4x4x48 challenge from David Goggins. Speaking of which, that man is not a licensed professional therapist, but he in fact is one of the kind of philosophical mentors, philosophical guides from me and explore my own mind, the limits of my own mind, the madness of my mind, the temper, ups and downs, and the anger and how to use it successfully and how to avoid it and all those kinds of things. He truly is one of the most fascinating people I know, and dare I say almost like a kindred spirit to me in terms of madness. So, I very much look forward to doing a podcast with him. We've postponed the one that we're supposed to do for the 4x4x48 because I hurt my foot and couldn't really push myself to the limit as I wanted to. So, we decided to wait until everything is healed and I can really do some crazy stuff together with him and combine a podcast on top of that. Anyway, BetterHelp is easy, private, affordable, available, worldwide. Check them out at BetterHelp.com slash Lex. That's BetterHelp.com slash Lex. And now, here's my conversation with Silvio McColley. Let's start with a big and the basic question. What is a blockchain and why is it interesting, why is it fascinating, why is it powerful? All right. So, a blockchain, think of it, is really a common database distributed. Think about it as a ledger, which everybody can write an entry in a page. You can write, I can write, and everybody can read, and you have a guarantee that everybody has the same copy of the ledger that is in front of you. So, whatever you see on page 7, anyone else sees on page 7. So, what is extraordinary about this is this common knowledge thing that I think is really a first for humanity. I mean, if you look at communication, like right now, you can communicate very quickly images, photos, photos. But do you ever have a certainty that whatever you have received has been received by everybody else? Not really. And so, this is common knowledge and knowledge and certainty that everybody can write. Nobody has been prevented for having whatever they want. Nobody can erase, nobody can tear a page of a ledger, nobody can swap page, nobody can change anything. And that is immutable, common record is extremely powerful. And there's something fundamental that is decentralized about it. So, at least in spirit, some degree, or against maybe a resistance to centralization. Absolutely. If it is not decentralized, how can it be common knowledge? If only one person or a few people in a ledger, you don't have a ledger, you have to ask, what is on page 7? And how do you know that whatever they tell you is on page 7? They tell the same thing to everybody else. And so, this common knowledge is extremely powerful. Just to give you an example, assume a beta, you do an auction. You have a work very hard, you build a building, and now you want to auction off. Makes sense because you want to auction worldwide, the better yet you want to tokenize the building and sell it in all the parcels. Now, everybody sees the bids. And you know that everybody sees the bids. You and I see the same bids and so does everybody else. So, you know that a fair price has reached and you know, who wants what and who has paid how much. And if you do it instead of a device in a centralized system, I put a bid, say, oh, congratulations Alex, you won. And your price is 12,500, $70. I don't know. So, if instead of it's that common knowledge is a very powerful tool for your money. So, we return to it from a bunch of different perspectives, including like a technical perspective, but you often talk about blockchain and some of these concepts of decentralization, scalability, security, all those kinds of things. But one of the most maybe impactful, exciting things that leverage the blockchain, this kind of led your idea of common knowledge is cryptocurrency. So, in the financial space. So, is there, can you say in the same kind of basic way, what is cryptocurrency in the context of this common knowledge and the context of the blockchain? Great. Cryptocurrency is a currency that is on such a ledger. So, imagine that on the ledger, right, initially, you know that somehow you and I are the only owner each one, let's give it our ourselves, a billion each or whatever, let's use it. Then I start writing on the ledger. I give 100 of his units to my sister. You give my I give a much to my aunt and then and then now because it's written on the ledger and everybody can see my sister can give 57 of his units. It should receive from me to somebody else. And so and and that is money and that is money because you can see that somebody who tenders your payment as really the money there, right? You don't have any more of a doubt when you want to sell an item. If I write your check, is the check covered? If I write or do I have the money at the moment of a transaction? You really see because the ledger is always updated, what you see is what I see, with the merchant sees, you know that the money. So, it's the most powerful money system there is because it is totally transparent and so you know that you've been paid and and you know that the money is there, you have not to second-grade anything else. So, the common knowledge applied there is you're basically mimicking the same kind of thing you will get in the physical space, which is if you give a hundred bucks or a hundred of that thing, whatever, of that cryptocurrency to your sister, the actual transfer is as real as you giving like a basket of apples to your sister because that so in the case in the physical space, the the common knowledge is in the physics right to all the atoms and then its digital space, the common knowledge is in this ledger. And so that transfer holds the same kind of power but now it's operating in that digital space. Go ahead. Again, I apologize for a set of ridiculous questions but you mentioned cryptocurrencies and money. What is money? Why do we have money? Do you think about this kind of from this high philosophical level at times of this tool, this idea that we humans have all kind of came up with and seem to be using effectively to do stuff? Money is a social construct, okay, in my opinion. And this has been somehow, people always felt that somehow money is a way to allow us to transact even though we want to different things. So I have two sheep and then you have one cow and I wanted a cow but you are looking for blankets instead. So to have money is really simplifies this but at the end of it's why a bit was invented and you start with gold, you start when the cognizant, when you start with the check, but at the end of the day money is essentially a social construct because you know what you receive, you can actually spend with somebody else. And so there is a kind of a social pact and social belief that you have. At the end of the day, even a barter is of requires and this beliefs that other people are going to accept the quote and quote currency you offer them because if I'm amazing and you ask me to build a wall in your field and I did and you in exchange you give me a fuzz and sheep, what am I going to do? Eat them all? No, I had to feed them and if I don't feed them the diet and I my value is zero. So in receiving this livestock, I must believe that somebody else will accept them in return for something else. So money is based on social belief, social shared belief system that makes people transact. That's fascinating. I didn't even think about that. You're actually, you have a deep like network of beliefs about how society operates. So the value is assigned even to sheep based on that everyone will continue operating because they were previously operating. Somebody will feed the sheep. So I didn't even think about that. That's fascinating. So that directly transfers to to the space of money and then to the space of digital money cryptocurrency. Okay. Does it bother you sort of intellectually when this money that is a social construct is not directly tied to physical goods like gold, for example? Not at all because after all gold has some industrial value, nobody delies it. It's a it's a metal. It doesn't oxidate. It has some good things about it. But does this industrial value really represent the value which is now is traded? No. So gold is another way to express our belief. I give you an answer. Gold, you treat it like or somebody else will want to invest for doing something else. So it is really this notion of money is a mental construct is really and is shared is a social construct I really believe. And so some people feel that it's physical so very for gold exists. But then as you know now, we countries most of us together, country now they print their own money and you believe that they are not going to exaggerate it with inflation. Not everybody believes it. But I'm saying it varies at least not they are not going to exaggerate it bloodently. And therefore you receive it because you know that somebody else will accept it, will have faith in the currency and so on so forth. But the weather is gold, the weather is livestock, whatever it is, money is really a shared belief. So there is something and I've been reading more and more about different cryptocurrencies. There is a kind of belief that the scarcity of a particular resource like Bitcoin has a limited amount in its tied to physical to proof of work. So it's tied to physical reality in terms of how much you can mine effectively and so on. That that's an important feature of money. Do you think that's an important feature to be a part of what are the money is? Vett is certainly a very useful part. So at some point in time you know assume of it and all money, something of it all of a sudden we say days is money, our currency. Then you know I offer you 10 days is in payment of whatever goods and services you want to provide. But at the end of the day if you know that you can cultivate it and generate them at will then perhaps you should not accept my payment. Here is a bouquet of days. So you need some kind of a scarcity of inability to create a suddenly out of nothing is an important and it's not that in transricant necessity but it's much easier to accept once you know that there is a fixed number of units or whatever currency varies and very for you can mentally understand I'm getting you know this much of this piece of overpie and very for I consider myself paid I understand what I'm receiving. You described the goals of a blockchain you have a nice presentation on this as scalability security and decentralization and you challenge the blockchain trilema that claims you can only have two of the three. So let's talk about each. What is scalability in the context of blockchain and cryptocurrency? What does scalability mean? So remember if we said that the blockchain is a ledger and each page receives a gets tons of transaction and everybody can write in this in these pages of the ledger nobody can be stopped for writing and everybody can read them. Okay scalability means how fast can you write? Just imagine that you can write an entry in this spatial shared ledger once every hour. Well you know what you're going to do if you have an or one transaction per hour the world that doesn't go around. So you need to have scalability means here that you can somehow write a lot of transaction and then you can read them and everybody can validate them and that is the speed and the number of transactions per second and the fact that they are shared so you want to have this speed not only in writing but in sharing and in inspection for validity. This is scalability. The world is big, the world wants to interact with people want to interact with each other and you better be prepared to have a ledger in which you can write lots and lots and lots of transactions in this spatial way very very very quickly. So maybe from a more mathematical perspective or can we say something about how much scalability is needed for a world that is big? Well really depends on many transactions. So you want to but remember that I think you know right now you have to go into at least a thousand transactions per second even if you look at an old credit cards right and all we are going to go from another edge of 1600 to peaks of 20,000 of 40,000 something like this but remember it's not only a question of the transaction per say but the value is that the transaction is actually being shared and visible to everybody and the certainty that that is the case. I can print them on my own printer way more transactions but nobody has the time to see or to inspect that that doesn't count right. So you want scalability at this common knowledge level that is the challenge. I also meant from a perspective of like like a complexity analysis so does it you know when you get more and more people involved doesn't need to scale in some kind of way that like do you do you like to see certain kind of properties in order to say something is scalable? Oh absolutely. I took a little bit implicitly that the people transacting are actually very different. So if there is a two people who can do fast and fast access for a second of each other which is not so interesting. What do we really need is to say there are billions of people at an any point in time you know fast and some fast and some of them want to transact with each other and you want to support that. So Agrand and it solves so that's the company, the team of cryptographers and mathematicians, the engineers, so on that challenged the blockchain tralema. So let's break it down in terms of a chilling scalability. How do we achieve scalability in the space of blockchain and the space of cryptocurrency? Okay so scalability is security remember and decentralization. So that's what what you want. What's the best way to approach can we break it down the start with scalability and think about how do we achieve it? Well to achieve it at one at a time is perhaps a little easy even in security if nobody transacts nobody loses money. So it's secure but it's not scalable. So let me tell you I'm a cryptographer so I try to fight the bad guys and what you want is that a vesselager that we discussed before cannot be tampered with. So you must think of it a beta is a spatially ink that nobody can erase. Then as to be everybody should be able to read and not to alter the pages or the content of the pages. That's okay but you know what that is actually easy cryptographically easy cryptography means you can use tools invented 50 years ago which in cryptographic time is praistory okay we are cavemen working around and solve their problem in cryptography lane but you know but there is a really a fundamental problem which is really almost a social seems a political problem is to say who the hell chooses or publishes the next page of a ledger I mean that is really the challenge this ledger you can always add a page because more and more transaction to be written on there and somebody has to assemble with this transaction put them on a page and add the next page who is the somebody who chooses the page and adds it on who can be trusted to do exactly assume it is me for what I'm being right not that I won't volunteer for the job but then I would have a more power than any absolute monarchy in history because I would have tremendous power to say these are the transactions that the entire world should see and whatever I don't write this transaction will never see the light of day I mean no one had any such a power in history so it's very important to do that and that is the quintessential problem in a blockchain and people have thought about it to say it's not me it's not you but for instance in proof of work what people say is I say okay it's not me it's not you you know what it is we make a very difficult inventor know a cryptographic puzzle very hard to solve the first one to solve that as a right to add one page to the ledger on behalf of everybody else that's now it seems okay because you know sometimes I solve the puzzle before you do sometimes you solve before I do or before somebody else solves it it's okay and presumably the effort you put in is somehow correlated with how much trust you should be given to add to the ledger yeah so somehow you want to make sure of the tunnel you need to work because you want to prevent you want to make sure of the you get a one solution every 10 minutes say like in particular example a bit coin so that is very rare the two pages are added at the same time because if I solve a puzzle at the same time you do you could happen that if it happens once or twice we can survive this but if it happens and all every other page you know it's a double page when which the two is a very old page it becomes a problem so that's why in Bitcoin it is important that to have substantial amount of work so that no many how many people try on earth to solve a puzzle you have one solution out of how many people are trying every 10 minutes so that you have you distance see it with pages and you have the time to propagate for the network resolution and the page attached to it and very for the one page at a time that is added and that is a well why don't we do that we have a solution well first of all a page every 10 minutes is not fast enough it's a question of scalability and second of all to ensure that no matter how many people try you get a one page every 10 minutes one solution to the riddle every 10 minutes this means that the riddle becomes very very hard and that to have a chance to solve it within 10 minutes you must have such an expensive apparatus in terms of specialized computers not to one not to but faster than faster than them and we produce a tons of heat okay we did dissipate heat like a maniac and then you have to refrigerate them too and so then now you have a conditioning galore to add to the thing it becomes so expensive that fewer and fewer and fewer people can actually compete in order to add to the page and the problem becomes so so so cultural that and in in in Bitcoin depending on which day of a week look at it you are going to have two or three mining pools are really the ones capable controlling the chain so you're saying that's that's almost like least centralization right it started being decentralized and but the expenses became higher and higher and higher when the cost becomes higher and higher fewer and fewer people can afford them and then you know it becomes you know de facto centralized right yeah and in the different type of approach is instead for instance a delegated proof of stake which is also very easy to explain essentially boils down to to say well look at these 21 people say okay don't they look honest yes they do in fact I believe that they're going to remain honest from the foreseeable future so when do we do ourselves a favor let's entrust them to add the page on behalf of all of us to the ledger okay okay but now we are going to say is this centralized or decentralized well 21 is better than one what to say is very little so if you look at when people have been to centralized power I don't know the French revolutions okay there was a monarch and the nobles yes where they're 21 nobles no there were thousands of them what were millions and millions of these empowered citizens so one is centralized 21 is also centralized right so that's delegated proof of stake delegate the kind of like representative democracy I guess yes which is good working great right it's working well it's better than a monarch right and but there's there's problems there are problems and and so we were looking for a different when I think about algan for a different approach and so we have a my approach in vetten all is really really decentralized because essentially and in it works as follows you have a bunch of tokens right these are the tokens and that the equal power and you have say 10 billions of tokens distributed from not to the entire world and the owners each token as a chance to add the ledger equal probability deliver everybody else in fact actually if you want here is how it works so think about and all by some magic the program process which is not magic is mathematics but think of it the magic assume that you select a thousand tokens and so sometime a random okay and you have a guaranteed that the random selected and then these the owners of this one thousand tokens somehow agree on the next page they all sign it and that's the next page okay so it is clear vetten all nobody has the power but then all once in a while one of your tokens is selected and you are in charge of this committee to select the next page but this goes around very quickly so and if you look at this the equation really is that is not really centralized and because what for for agreeing on the same page it is important that the one thousand tokens that you randomly selected are in honest ends the majority of them so which if the majority of the tokens are in honest ends that is essentially true because if the majority of the tokens are in honest ends if you select I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm 90% of the tokens are in honest ends so can you randomly select a thousand in this thousand you you find the 501 tokens in bad ends very very improbable so so basically when a large fraction of people are honest then you can use randomness as a powerful tool to get decentralization so what is honesty mean and now we're into the social side of things which is how do we know that like the fraction the large fraction of people or participating parties are honest vetten is an excellent equation so by way first of all we should realize that the same thing is for every other system when you look at pull for work you rely that the majority of the mining power is in honest ends yes when you look at a delegated proof of stake you rely that the majority of this 21 people are honest what is the difference the difference is that in these other systems you sue to say the all economy is secure if the majority of this small piece of economy are honest and that is a big question but instead what to win in in in our grand and our approach we say the all economy is secure if the majority of economy is honest in other words who can subvert our grand is not a majority of a small group but is a majority of the token holders I took on spy with each other in order to sink the very economy for which they own the majority of yes but I think it is a bit harder to like a self destructive majority essentially and you're also making me realize that basically every system that we have in the world today assumes that the majority of participants is honest yes the only difference is the majority of whom and in some cases the majority of a club and in our cases majority of the whole system the whole system okay so that's that's fat so through that kind of random sampling you can achieve decentralization you can achieve so the scalability I understand and then the security that you're referring to basically the security comes from the fact that the sample selected would likely include honest people so it's very difficult to so by the way the security as you as you mentioned you're referring to is basically security against dishonesty by or manipulation or whatever yes yes and so essentially when the what you're going to do is to by following and say you say well let's see if you understood what you're saying but somebody has to randomly selected with tokens when I believe you so then who does this random selection and in in our ground we do something a little bit an orthodox essentially is the token choose themselves or random and you say if you think about it that seems to be a terrible idea because if you want to say choose yourself at random and whoever chooses himself is a fasten people committee you choose the page for the rest of us and because if I'm a bad person I'm going to select myself over and over again because I want to be part of the committee every single time but not so fast so what do we do in our ground what does it mean that I select myself with each one of us in the privacy of our own computer actually laptop what do you do is execute your own individual lottery and think about that you pull a lever of a slot machine you can only pull the lever once not until you win not until you win and when you pull the lever case one either you win in such a case you have a winning ticket or you lose you don't get any winning ticket so if you don't have a winning ticket you can say anything you want about the next page in the legion nobody pays attention but if you ever win in ticket people say oh wow this is one of the 1000 winning tickets we better pay attention to what he or she says and that's how he works and the lottery is a cryptographic lottery which means that even if I am an entire nation extremely powerful with incredible computing powers I don't have the ability to improve even minimally my probability of one my talking winning the lottery and that's how it happens so everybody pulls the lever they 1000 random winners say oh here is my winning ticket and here is my opinion up or down about the block these are the ones that count and if you think about it while this is distributed because there is the case of Algonn there is 10 billion tokens and you select a faster than them more distributed than this you cannot get and then why is this you know scalable because what do you have to do okay you have to do the lottery Algonn the lottery takes it takes actually one microsecond wherever you have one token or two tokens or a billion tokens is always one microsecond or computation which is very fast we don't hit the planet with a microsecond or computation and finally why is this secure because even if I wear a very evil and very very powerful individual I'm so powerful that I can corrupt anybody I want is tantanous in the world whom I want to corrupt the people in the committee so that I can choose the page of the legend but I do have a problem I do not know whom I should corrupt should I corrupt this lady in Shanghai the same guy in Paris because I don't know I should the winners are random so I don't know whom I should corrupt but once the winner come forward and say here is my winning ticket and you propagate your winning ticket across the network together with your opinion about the block now I know who they are for sure I can corrupt all the fuss on them given to my incredible powers but so what whatever they said they already said and their winning tickets and their opinions are very propagated across the network and I do not have the power no more than the US government or any government as the power to put back in the bottle a message very propagated by WikiLeaks so everything you just described is kind of is fascinating a set of ideas and you know online I've been reading quite a bit and people are really excited about a set of ideas nevertheless it is not the dominating technology today so Bitcoin in terms of cryptocurrency is the most popular cryptocurrency in the Ethereum and so on so it's useful to kind of comment we're already talking about proof of work a little bit but what in your sense does Bitcoin get right and where is it lacking okay so the first thing that Bitcoin got right is to understand that there was the need over crypto currency and that might be enough for Trump so with the serve always like since because they say the time is ripe from this idea because very often it's not enough to be right here to be right at the right time and somebody got it right there so heart also to Bitcoin for that and and so what do they got to write is the make it is make it is hard to subvert and change the the logic to cancel a transaction it's not impossible that is very hard what they did not get right is somehow that is a great store of value currency wise but money is not only a question that you store it and you put under the mattress money wants to be transacted and the transaction and Bitcoin's are very little so if you want to store value everybody needs a store value matters well use a Bitcoin I mean it's the plant but if you don't look at it for a moment at least is a great store of value and everybody needs a store of value but most of the time we want to transact we want to interact we don't put the money on the mattress right so we wanted to turn and that they didn't get it right that is too slow to transact to too few transactions scalability is it possible to build stuff on top of Bitcoin that's sort of fixes the scalability I mean this is the thing you look at there's a bunch of technologies that kind of hit the right need at the right time and they have flaws but we kind of build infrastructures on top of them over time to fix it as opposed to getting it right from the beginning or is it difficult to do well that is difficult to do so you are talking to somebody that when I decided to throw my heart in the arena and I decided first of all like as I said before I much admire my predecessor I mean they got it right a lot of things and I really admire for that but you know I had a choice to make either I patch something that as a whole is all over the place or start from scratch I just started from scratch because sometimes it's a bit of a way so what about a Ethereum which looks at proof of stake and a lot of different innovative ideas that kind of improve or seek to improve on some of the flaws a Bitcoin et you might another great idea so they figured it out that it was that money and payments are important as they are they are only the first level the first stepping stone the next level are smart contracts and they were at the vision to say the people will need smart contracts which allow me and new to somehow to to transact securely we thought to being shop around by a trusted third party by a mediator by the way because mediators are hard to find and in fact maybe even impossible to find if you live in Thailand and I live in New Zealand maybe we don't have a common person that we know and trust and even if we find them guess what they want to be paid so much so right that 6% of the of the world GDP is goes into financial friction which is essentially third party so the headed right to the world needed that but again the scalability is not there and the system is of smart contracts in Ethereum is slow and expensive and I believe is not enough to satisfy the appetite and the need we have for smart contracts well what do you make of just as a small sort of aside in human history perhaps it's a big one is the NFT the non-fungible tokens do you find those interesting technically or is it more interesting on the social side of things well both I think you know I think it's NFTs are actually great right so you have a your an artist to create a song or you could be a piece of art and he has many unique representation right over a unique piece where there is an artifact of something dreamnapa by you and as unique representation but now you can trade and allow and the important part is that now you have a this not only the NFTs themselves but the ability to trade them quickly fast securely knowing that who who also which writes and I bet that gives a totally new opportunity for content creators to be remunerated for what they do so but ultimately you still have to have that scalability security and decentralization to to make it you know to make it work for bigger and bigger applications correct yeah I still wonder what kind of applications are yet to be like enabled by it because so much the interesting thing about NFTs you know if you look outside of art is just like money you can start playing with different social constructs is you can start playing with ideas you can start playing with with even like investing somebody was talking about almost creating an economy out of like creative people or influencers like if you start a YouTube channel or something like that you can invest in that person and you can start trading their creations and then almost I create a market out of people's ideas out of people's creations out of the people themselves that generate those creations and there's a lot of interesting possibilities of what you can do with that I mean it seems ridiculous but you're basically creating hierarchy of value maybe artificial in the digital world and are trading that but in so doing are inspiring people to create so maybe as a sort of our economy gets better and better and better where actual work in the physical space becomes less and less in terms of its importance maybe we'll completely be operating in the digital space where where these kinds of economies have more and more power and then you have to have this kind of blockchains to the scalability security and decentralization and decentralization is of course the tricky one because people and powers start to get nervous absolutely once in power you always never be supplanted by somebody else but this is your job so you can do relations your job the top job and now everybody wants it well what is your sense about our our time and the future hope about the decentralization of power do you think that's something that we can actually achieve given that power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely and it's so wonderful to be absolutely powerful well good the question so first of all I believe that by the way there is a complex equations like all the rest of your equations I'm so very sorry it's okay I'm enjoying it so but so there are two things first of all power has been centralized for a variety of reasons when you want to get it is easier for somebody even a single person to grab power but there is also some kind of a technology like very often that justified having power because in a way in a society in which even communication never mind block chain which is common knowledge but even simple unilateral communication is hard it is much easier to say you do as I say because right the alternative is that but as so there is a little bit of a technology barrier but I think that and now to get to this common knowledge it is a totally different story now we have finally with the technology for doing this so that is one part but I really believe that you know not by having a distributed system not only you don't have a way you have actually much more stable and doable system because not only for corruption but even for things that go astray and he give it a long enough time by strange version of Murphy's law whatever goes wrong goes wrong and so any the power is diffused you actually have much more stable if you look at any any living complex living being is distributed I mean I'm I don't have somebody is a okay tell Silvian always time to eat you have millions of cells in your body you have billions of bacteria exactly help me in the guts I think you know we are in a superman somehow it keeps us alive so and it's strange enough however when we design systems we design them centralized we ourselves are distributed beings and when we plan to say okay I want to look at an architecture how about I make a pyramid I put the best of the top and the power flows down and so I again is a little bit perhaps of a technology problem but now the technology is there so that is a big challenge to rethink how we want to organize power in very large system and and and and distribute the system in my opinion a much more resilient let's put this way there was a mine of my Italian compatriots right and or Machiavelli who looked at the time there was a big there was a bunch of small state democratic republic of Florence of the organism and the other thing and there was the Ottoman Empire but at the time was an empire and a southern was very centralized and he made a political observation that goes roughly to say whenever you have such a centralised thing it's very hard to overtake but but for more governments is centralized but if you get it it's so easy to keep population one instead the vis-a-vis other things are much more resilient when the power is distributed is much more it's going to be lasting for much a longer time and ultimately maybe the human spirit wants that kind of resilience wants that kind of the truth it's just that we didn't have technology throughout history Machiavelli didn't have the computer the internet and that's just certainly part of a reason yes you've written an interesting blog post if we take a step out of the realm of bits and into this the realm of governance you wrote a blog post about making algorithm governance decentralized can you explain what that means the philosophy behind that you know how you decentralized basically all aspects of this kind of system well the philosophy and the how let's start with the philosophy so I really believe they tap nothing fixed last very long and and so I really believe that life is about a intelligent adaptation things change and we have to be nimble and adjust to change and and when I when I see a lot of of a crypto project actually very proud to say it's fixed in stone and writing or code is low or low is code I very far of a code will never change it will go wow when I'm saying this is a recipe to me of disaster not immediately as soon just imagine you take a notion liner and you want to go I don't know from Lisbon to New York and you set a course iceberg no iceberg time past or not time past and all it doesn't matter but it's not the way you need a till you need to correct you need to adjust and and so by the way we would design algorithm with the idea that the code was evolving as the needs and of course a waiver is a system in which every time there is an adjustment you must have essentially a vote that right now is a orchestrated 90 percent of the stake they say okay we are ready we agree on the next version and we pick up this version so we are able to evolve without losing too many components left and right but I think we thought evolving any system essentially become asphetic and is going to shrivel and dies sooner or later and and so that is is needed and what you want to do on the blockchain you have a perfect platform in which you can log your wishes your votes your things so that you have a guarantee that whatever vote you express is actually seen by everybody else so everybody sees really the outcome call it a referendum or a change and that is in my opinion a system that wants to live long as to adapt there is an interesting question about leaders I've talked to the talcbeater and I probably talked to him again soon he's one of the leaders maybe one of the faces of the thearian project and it's interesting you have a Satoshi Nakamoto who's the face of Bitcoin I guess but he's faceless he she they it does seem like in our whatever it is maybe it's 20th century maybe it's mechaelian thinking but we seek leaders leaders have value minus torvold the leader of uh of linux the open source development a lot I mean there's no it's not it's not that the leadership is sort of dogmatic but it's inspiring and it's also powerful in that through leaders we propagate the vision like the division of the project is more stable maybe not the details but the vision and so do you think there's value to because there's a tension between decentralization and leadership like in visionaries yes what do you make of that tension okay so I really believe that if it's a I never get question I think of it then all I really believe in the power of emotions I think the emotion are of a creative impulse of everybody else and very very for is very easy for a leader to be a physical person a real being and uh that interprets our emotions by the way this emotion has to resonate and what is good is that very very the more intimate our emotions are the more universal we are paradoxically more personal the more everybody else somehow magically agrees and feels a bit of the same and so and it's very important to have a leader in the initial face that generates out on nothing something that is important leadership but then the true tested leadership is to disappear after your lead of the community so in my opinion the quintessential leader in my uh in my uh in my uh according to my vision is a george Washington it's for one term it's another term and then all of a sudden if you retire and became a power citizen and 200 and change years later we still are we sound effects but we had done a lot of things right and we have been able to vote that to me is success in leadership well instead you contrast our experiment with a lot of our experiment I've done so much so well that I won't another four years and why shouldn't be only a four and I have another eight why should be another eight give me sixteen and we fix all your form and now then is the type in my opinion of failed leadership leadership ought to be really lead ignite and disappear and if you don't disappear the system is going to die with you and there's no good idea for everybody else is there so we've been talking a little bit about cryptocurrency but is there spaces where this kind of blockchain ideas that you're describing which I find fascinating do you think they can revolutionize some other aspects of our world that's not just money a lot of things are going to be revolutionized is uh is uh independent of finance by the way I really believe uh that uh uh finances uh an incredible form of freedom I mean if I'm free to do everything I want but I don't even mean to do anything that's a bad idea so I feel really think the financial freedom is very very important but you know but you just I can say that you know against you know censorship you write something on the chain and now nobody can take it out get take it out that is a very important way to express you know um um um um um um um um our view and um and then the transparency that uh that that that you give because uh everybody can see what's happening on the blockchain so transparency is not money but I believe that transparency actually is a very important ingredient also of finance let's put this way as much as I'm enthusiastic about blockchain and uh uh decentralized finance uh um and uh we have actually our expression we're trying we're creating with the future five because as much as we want we must agree that the first guarantee of financial growth and prosperity are really the legal system the courts because we may not think about them and say oh the courts are kind of bunch of boring lawyers but without them I'm saying there is no certainty there is no um notion of uh of equality there is no notion that you can resolve your disputes think that's what thrives the commerce and things and so what I really believe that the blockchain actually makes a lot of the stress essentially automatic by making it impossible to cheat in very way you don't even need to go to court if nobody can change the ledger right so essentially is a way of you that cannot solve a legal system that uses to a blockchain but what I'm saying a big chunk of can actually be guaranteed and there is no reason why technology should be antagonistic to legal scholarship it could be actually existing and one should start to do the interest things that the technology alone cannot do and then you go from there uh but but I think that is essentially is uh blockchain can affect all kinds of our of our behavior yeah so in some sense transparency the required transparency ensures honesty prevents corruption so there's a lot of system that could use that and the legal system is one of them there's a little bit of attention that I wonder if you can speak to where this kind of transparency there's attention with privacy is it possible to achieve privacy if wanted on uh on blockchain do you have do you have ideas about different technologies that can do that people have been playing with different ideas so absolutely the answer is yes and um but but but but but I'm a cryptographer uh right so I really believe in privacy and I believe in and I have a devoted in all um a big chunk of my life to guarantee privacy even when it seems almost impossible to have it and um and it is possible to have it in also in the blockchain too and however I believe in timing as well and I believe that the people ever the right to understand their system believe in and right now um uh people can understand the blockchain to be something that is not can uh cannot be altered and is transparent and that's good enough right now anyway to add and there is a pseudo privacy for the fact that who knows if the keys belong public key belongs to me or to you right and I can when I want to change my money from one public key I split it to other public keys going to figure out which one is silver all of them are silver only one of silver who knows so you get some vanilla privacy not not not the one I can talk and I think it's good enough because and it's important for now that we absorb a best stage because of the next stage we must understand the privacy tool have even taken on faith when the public starts saying I believe in the scientist and whatever they say I swear by them and very far the term is private is private and nobody understands it very well we need a much more educated about the tools we are using and so I look forward to deploying more and more privacy blockchain but we are not I will not rush to it until the people understand and are behind whatever we have right now so you build privacy on top of the power of the blockchain you have to first understand the power of the blockchain yes yes so algorant is like one of the most exciting technically at least from my perspective technologies ideas in this whole space what's the future of algorant look like is it possible for it to dominate the world let's put it this way I certainly working very hard with a great team to give the best blockchain that one can demand and enjoy and they said I really believe that very is going to be it's not a winner text from all so it's going to be a few blockchains and each one is going to have its own brand and it's going to be great at something and sometimes is a scalability sometimes is is your views sometimes is a thing and it's important to have a dialogue between these things and I'm sure and I'm working very hard to make sure that I got this one of them but I don't believe that you know is even a desirable to have you know a winner and takes all because we need to express different things but the important thing is going to have enough interoperability of our systems so that you can transfer your assets where you have the best tool to service them whatever your needs are at the time so there's idea I don't know they call themselves Bitcoin maximalists which is essentially the bet that the philosophy that Bitcoin will eat the world so you're talking about it is good to have variety their claim is it's good to have the best technology dominate the the medium of exchange the the medium of store value the money the digital you know the digital currency space what's your sense of the positives and the negatives of that so I feel people are smart and it's going to be very hard for anybody and to win and because people want more and more things there is an Italian saying that goes as translates well I think it goes up and tight grows while eating okay I think you understand what what do you mean yes so I say I'm not hungry oh okay food oh let me try this so we want more and more and more and when you find something like Bitcoin which I already had very good things to say but it does something very well but is a static I mean store of value yes I think it's a great like the rest you know it would be a sad world if the world in which we are so anchoring down so many defenses that we want to store value and hide it on the mattress I long for a world in which it is open people want to transact interact with which way and very for when you want to store value when perhaps a one chain where you want to have to transact maybe is another I'm not saying that you know one chain cannot be store of value or everything but I really believe I believe in the ingenuity of people and in the innovation that is in transect to human nature we want always different things so how can it be something invented whatever it is decades ago is going to fulfill the needs of our future generations I know going to fulfill my needs I don't know my kids or their kids I used to we are going to have different world than fingers that we love all so you believe yes so you believe that life intelligent life is ultimately about adaptability and evolving so static is static loses in the end yes let me ask the well first the ridiculous question do you have any clue whose the to shinnaka moto is is that even a interesting question well your question by the way are very interesting so and I think the I so I would say first of all it's not me okay and I can prove it because you know if I were to do shinnaka moto I would have not found an algorithm which takes totally different principle to approach to to a system but the other thing who is the to shinnaka moto you know what the right answer is is not him or she hair or them satoshi Nakamura is Bitcoin because to me is such a coherent proof of work but at the end they creator and the creation identify themselves so he says okay understand Michelangelo okay he did the system chopper fine he did the way some Peter's dome fine he did the the most of the Pietro statue fine but besides this who was Michelangelo yeah the question is his own work that is Michelangelo so I think that when you look at the Bitcoin is a piece of work that as it affects yes like anything human but it was captivated the imaginations or millions of people as subverted vestado school and I'm saying you know whoever this person of people are he's leaving in this piece of work they need it is Bitcoin that's my idea the work is yes is bigger we forget that sometimes it's something about our biology wants likes to see a face and attach a face to the idea when really the ideas the thing we love the ideas the thing that impact ideas the thing that ultimately we you know Steve Jobs or something like that we associate with the mac with the iPhone with just everything he did at Apple Apple actually the company is Steve Jobs Steve Jobs the man is is appales in comparison to the creation correct and the sense of aesthetics of it as brought to the daily lives and very often the aesthetic wins in the long in the long in the long game and these are very elegant design product and when you say oh elegance a very few people care about it apparently millions and millions and millions and millions of people do because we are attacked by beauty and these are beautifully designed products and and and you know and they've in addition to ever the technological aspect of the other thing and I think yes it is yes as the Staevsky said beauty will save the world so I'm with you on that one right it currently seems like cryptocurrency all these different technologies are gathering a lot of excitement not just in our discourse but in their like scale financial impact a lot of companies are starting to invest in Bitcoin do you think that the main method of store value and exchange of value basically money will soon or at some point in the century will become cryptocurrency yes so mind you as I said that the notion of cryptocurrency like any other fundamental human notion has to evolve but yes so I think that he has a lot of momentum behind it and is not only static as a this programmable money as I think smart contracts it allows appear to appear interaction among people who don't even know each other right and they don't even very for it cannot even trust each other just because they never saw each other so I think it's so powerful that is going to do they said again a particular cryptocurrency should develop and cryptocurrency they will all develop but the answer is yes we are going towards a much more unless we have a society a sudden crisis there's no body hopes there's always an asteroid there's always something a nuclear war and all the existential crisis that we kind of think about including artificial intelligence okay it's funny you mentioned that um Michelangelo and Steve Jobs you know set of ideas represents the person's work so we talked about Algrang which is a super interesting set of technologies but you know you did also win the touring award you have a bunch of you have a bunch of ideas that are you know seminal ideas so can we talk about cryptography for a little bit what is the most beautiful idea in cryptography or computer science or mathematics in general asking somebody who has explored the depths of all well very a few contenders and either your work or or other work let's leave my work aside and and so but one powerful idea and it's a both a null idea in some sense and a very very modern one and it might be known as this idea of a one-way function so a function that easy to evaluate so give an X you can compute f of X easily but given f of X is very hard to go back to X okay think like breaking a glass easy reconstruct the glass hard frying an egg easy from the side egg to go back to your original egg hard if you want to be extreme killings are living being unfortunately easy they are the way around very hard and so the fact that the notion of a function which you have a recipe that is in front of your eyes to transform an X into f of X and then from f of X even though you see the recipe to transform it you cannot go back to X that in my opinion is one of the most elegant and momentous notions that there are and there is a computational notion because the difficulties in a computational sense and is a mathematical notion because we are talking about function and that is so fruitful because that is actually the foundation of all a cryptography and let me tell you is an old notion because very often in any mythology that we think of the most powerful gods or goddesses are the ones of X and the opposite of X the gods of love and death and when you take opposite they don't just erase one another you create something way more powerful and this one where function is extremely powerful because essentially it becomes something that is easy for the good guys and bad for the bad hard for the bad guys so for instance in pseudo random number generation the easy part of the function corresponds you want to generate bits very quickly and hard is predicting what the next bit is it doesn't look the same one is X alpha X going from X to X R what does the predicting bits by a magic of reductions in mathematical apparatus this simple function morphs itself into pseudo random generation this is simple function morphs in cells in digital signature scheme in which digital designing should be easy and forging should be hard again a digital signature is not going from X to X but the magic and the richness of this notion is met that it is so powerful with morphs in all kinds of incredible constructs and in both these two opposites coexist the easy and the hard and in my opinion is very very elegant notion so that simple notion ties together cryptography and like you say pseudo random number generation you have work on pseudo random functions what are those what what's the difference in those and the generators pseudo random number generators okay let's start they work let's go back to pseudo random number generation yes first of all people think of the pseudo random generation generates random number not true because I don't believe from nothing you can get you can you can get something so nothing from nothing but the randomness you cannot create out on nothing but what you could do is that you could it can be expanded so in other words if you give me somehow 300 random bits truly random bits then I can give you 300,000 300 million 300 trillion 300 quadrillions as many as you want random bits so that even though I tell you the recipe by which I produce these bits but I don't tell you the initial 300 random numbers I keep them secret and you see all the bits I produce so far if I if you were to bet given all the bits produce so far what is the next bit in my sequence better than 50 50 of course 50 50 anybody can guess right but to be inferring something you have to be a bit better then the effort to to do this extra bit is so enormous that is the factor random so that is a pseudo random generator are these expanders of secret randomness which goes extremely fast okay let's say what is that? The vendors of secret randomness beautifully put okay yes so every time every time somebody who if your programmer is using a function that's not called pseudo random it's called random usually you know these programming languages and it's generating different that's essentially expanding the secret randomness but they should in the past actually most of library they used something pre modern cryptography unfortunately will be better served take 300 real seed random number and then expand them appropriately as we know now but it has been a very old idea in fact one of the best philosophers have debated whether the world was the deterministic or probabilistic very big questions right? does God play dice? Exactly Einstein says it does it doesn't but in fact now we have a language even at the Albert time was not around but it was this complexity theory modern complexity base cryptography and now we know that either universe as 300 random bits where the where is random or probabilistic or deterministic it doesn't matter because you can expand this initial seed or randomness forever in which all the experiments you can do all the inferences you can do all the things you can do they are you are not able to distinguish them from truly random so if you are not able to distinguish truly random from this super duper pseudo randomness are very different things that's what I'm gonna say some way to become a real philosophical so for things to be different but I don't have in my lifetime in my lifetime of a universe animated to set them aside well it should be intellectually honest say well pseudo random in specific function is as good as random do you think true randomness is possible and what does that mean? so I practically speaking the exact as you said if you're being honest that the pseudo randomness approaches true randomness pretty quickly but is it maybe is it a philosophical question is there such a thing as true randomness? Well the answer is actually maybe but if very exist most probably is expensive to get and in any case if I give you one online random you would never tell them apart but I know any other shape no matter how much you work on it so in some sense if it exists or not it really a quote philosophical sense in the colloquial way to save it we cannot somehow pin it down. Do you ever again just to stay on philosophical for a bit for a brief moment? Do you ever think about free will and whether that exists because ultimately free will sort of is this experience that we have like we're making choices even though it appears that you know the world is deterministic at the I mean that's against the debate but if it is in fact deterministic at the lowest possible level at the at the physics level how do you make if it is deterministic how do you make how do you make sense of the difference between the experience of us feeling like we're making a choice and the whole thing being deterministic. So first of all I'm going to give you a gut reaction to the equation and the gut reaction is that it is important that we believe that there exists free will and second of all almost by weird logic if we believe it exists then it does exist okay. So it's very important for our social apparatus for our sense of the ourselves that it exists the moment in which you know we we so want to be almost to be conjured up in existence but again I really feel that if you look at some point and the space of free will seems to shrink we realize how more and more how much of our genetic apparatus dictates who we are why we prefer certain things than others right and why we react to noises of music we prefer poetry or anything against we may explain even always but but at the end of the day whether it exists in a philosophical sense of not just like randomness if you can if pseudo random is as good as random vis--vis lifetime of a universe of our experience when does it really matter yeah so you know we're talking about randomness I wonder if I can weave in quantum mechanics for a brief moment there's a you know a lot of advancements on the quantum computing side so leveraging your quantum mechanics to perform a new kind of computation and there's concern of that being a threat to a lot of the basic assumptions that underlie cryptography what do you think do you think quantum computing will challenge a lot of cryptography will cryptography be able to defend all those kinds of things okay great so first of all for the record because I think in matters but it's important that very good there are people who continue to contend that quantum mechanics exist but there's nothing to do with computing is not going to accelerate it at least in a very basic kind of art computation that is a belief you cannot take it out my I'm a little bit more agnostic about it but I really believe going back to whatever I said about the one-way function so one-way function what is it that's a cryptography so does quantum computing challenge the one-way function essentially you can boil it down to does quantum computing found where we function what is one-way function easy in one direction are them the other okay but if quantum computing exist when you define what it is easy it's not by a easy by a classical computer and are the by a classical computer but easy for for a quantum computer that's a bad idea but once easy means it should be easy for a quantum and hard for also quantum then you can see that you are yes is a challenge but you have hope because you can absorb if one computing really realizes and becomes available and according to the promises then you can use them also for the easy part and once you use it from the easy part they choices that you have a one-way function they multiply so okay so they particular candidates of one-way function they not be one-way anymore but quantum one-way function may continue to exist and so I really believe that for life to be meaningful with one-way function had to exist because just imagine that anything that is it becomes easy to do I mean what kind of life is it I mean so you need that and if something is hard but it's so hard to generate you'll never find something which is hard for you you want that there is abundance there is easy to produce hard problem that's my opinion is why life is interesting because hard problem pop up I'm not really relatively speed so in some sense I almost think that I do hope of a existing vedon exist somehow life is a way less interesting than it actually is yeah it does that's funny it does seem like the one-way function is fundamental to all of life which is the emergence of the complexity that we see around does seem to require the one-way function I don't know if you play with cellular automata that's just another formulation of I know but yeah it's very simple it's almost a very simple illustration of starting out with simple rules and one way being able to generate the incredible amounts of complexity but then you ask the question can I reverse that and it's just it's just a surprising how difficult it is to reverse that it's surprising even in constrained situations it's very difficult to prove anything that it almost I mean the sad thing about it well I don't know if it's sad but it seems like we don't even have the mathematical tools to reverse engineer stuff I don't know if they exist or not but in the space of cellular automata where you start with something simple and you create something incredibly complex can you take something a small picture of that complex and reverse engineer that's kind of what we're doing as scientists here you're seeing the result of the complexity and you're trying to come up with some universal law that generate all this what is the you know the theory of everything what are the basic physics laws that generate this whole thing and there's a hope that you should be able to do that but it gets it's difficult yeah but there is also some poetry of the fact that it's difficult right because he gives us some mystery life we thought the weatress how many nights not so fun life will be less fun can we talk about interactive proofs a little bit and zero knowledge proofs what are those okay how do they work so interactive proof actually is is a modern realization and conceptualization of something that we knew was true that you know that is easy to go to lecture in fact that's my motivation we invented schools to go to lecture I wouldn't say oh I have the Minister of Education I published this book you read it yeah and this is book for this year this book for this year we spend a lot of our treasury in educating our kids and in person educating go to class interact with each other on the blackboard and chalk on my time now we can have a whiteboard and presumably you're going to have actually this magic pens and a display instead but the the idea is that interactively you can convey truth much more efficiently and we knew this psychologically it's better to hear a respination but just to belabor some paper right same thing so interactive proofs is a way to to do a falling rather than doing in some complicated very long papers and possibly infinite long proofs exponentially long proofs you save a falling if the sphere is true there is a game that is associated to the theorem and if the theorem is true this game I have a winning strategy that I can win half of it over time no matter what you do okay so then you say well is the theorem true you believe me or should I believe you so okay let's play so and if I prove that I have a strategy that and I win the first time and I win the second time then I lose a third time but I win if I say more than half of the time or I win say all the time if the theorem is true and at least at most half of the time if the theorem is false you statistically get convinced you can verify this quickly and and therefore is much when the game in the game typically is extremely fast so you generate a miniature game in which the theorem is true I win all the time in the theorem is false I can win at most half of the time and if I win win win win win win win win win win you can deduce either the theorem is true which most probably is not speak or I've been very very unlucky because it's like if I had a hundred contourses and I got a hundred heads very improbable so that is a way and so this transformation from the formal statement of a proof into a game that can be quickly played and you can draw statistics on many times you win and you is one of a big conquest of modern complexity theory and in fact actually as highlighted the notion of a proof as I really give us a new insight of what to be true means and what trophies and what the proofs are so these are generally proofs so what kind of mysteries can allow us to unlock and prove you said truth so what does it allow us what kind of truth is that allow us to arrive at so it enlarges the real mobile is provable because in some sense of the classical way of proving things was extremely inefficient from the verifier point of view yes right so and and so very for very so much proof that you can take but in this way you can actually very quickly in minutes verify something with the is the correctness of assertion but otherwise to the taking all lifetime to belabor and check all the the passages of a very very very long proof and you better check all of them because if you don't check one line the an error can be in that line and so you have to go linearly through all the stuff rather than bypass this so you unlock tremendous amount what the proof is and in addition once you have the idea that essentially a proof system is something that allows me to convince you of a true statement but does not allow me to convince you of a false statement and better advises evades of proof proof can be beautiful should be should be elegant but advises is true or false if you want to be able to differentiate it is possible to prove the truth and it should be impossible or statistically extremely hard to prove something false and if you do this you can prove way way more once you understand this and on top of it we got some insight like in visit zero knowledge of proofs that is in something which it took for granted were the same knowledge and verification actually separate concepts so you can verify that an assertion is correct without having any idea why this is so and so people felt to say if you want to verify something yet to have the proof once you have the proof you know why is true you have the proof itself so somehow you can totally differentiate knowledge and and and verification validity so totally you can decide if something is true and still have no idea if you're good example your mind oh actually you know at the beginning we labor to find the first knowledge zero knowledge proof then we find a second when we found a third and then a few years later actually we proved a theorem which essentially says every theorem no matter what about can be explained in a zero knowledge way okay so it's not a class of theorem but all theorems and it's a very powerful thing so if we were really for thousands of years but the identity between knowledge and verification had to be handing in together and for no reason at all I mean we had to develop a wave of technology as you know I'm very big technology because it makes us more human and and make us understand more things than before and and I think that is a that is a that's a good thing so this interactive proof process there's power in games yes and you've recently gotten into recently I'm not sure you can correct me mechanism designed yeah it's so it's I mean first of all maybe you can explain what mechanism design and the the fascinating space of playing with games and designing games mechanism design is that you want to you want to set in behavior to arise right if you want to organize you know a societal structure or something you want to have some orderly behavior to arise right because it is important for your goals but but you know that people they don't care what my goals are make cares about the maximizing their utility so put it crossly making money the more money the better so to speak right I'm exaggerating self interest in what self interest in whatever way they so what do you want to do is ideally what do you want to do is to to design a game so that while people played sought to maximize their self interest they achieve the social goal and behavior that I want that is really the best type of thing and it is a very hard science and art to design these games and it challenges us to actually come up with solution concept for way to analyzing the games that need to be broader and I think the number game theory has developed in a bunch of very compelling way to analyze the game that if the game has a best property well you can have a pretty good guarantee that is going to be played in a given way but as it turns out and not surprisingly these tools have a range of action like anything else all these so-called the technically solution concept the way to analyze the game like dominant strategy will leave them with something comes to mind to be very meaningful but as a limited power in some sense the games that can be a admit such a way to be analyzed is a very specific kind of games and the rules are set the constraints are set the utilities are all set so if you want to reason if there is a way say that you can analyze a restricted class of games but most games don't fall into the restricted class then what do I do when you need to enlarge away what a rational player can do so for instance in my opinion at least in some of my I played with this for a few years and I was doing some exotery things I'm sure in the space that were not exactly mainstream and then I changed my interest and I blocked it but when I think for a while I was doing so for instance to me is a way in which I design the game and you don't have the best move for you the best move is the move it is best for you no matter what the other players are doing sometimes a game doesn't have that okay too much to ask but I can design the game such a way given the option in front of you say oh these are really stupid for me take them aside but these these are not stupid so if you design them the game so that in any combination unknown stupid things that the player could do I achieve what I want I'm done I don't care to find the very unique equilibrium I don't give a damn I want to say well as long as you don't do stupid things and nobody else does stupid things good social things outcome arise I should be equally happy and so I really believe that this type of analysis and all is possible and as a bigger radius so it reaches more games and more classes or games and after that we have to enlarge it again and it's going to be we're going to have fun because you won't behave you can be conceptualized in many ways and it's a long game it's a long game do you have favorite games that you're looking at now I mean I suppose your work with blockchain and algorithm is a kind of game that you're you basically this mechanism design design the game such that it scalable secure and decentralized right yes yes and very often you have to say and very and you must also design so that the main centers are are and things tend to be tough whatever little I learned from my venture in mechanism design is that incentives are very hard to design because people are very complex creatures and so and somehow the way with design algorithm is a totally different way essentially we've no incentives essentially and but technically speaking there is a notion that is actually believable right so that to say and people want to maximize the variability yes up to a point let me let me tell you assume with if you are honest you make a hundred bucks but if you are dishonest no matter how dishonest you are you can only make a hundred bucks and one cent what are you going to be I'm saying you know what technical speaking even that one nobody bothers and say how much am I going to make by honest hundred if I'm devious and even accrimal 100 bucks and one cent you know I'm others will be honest okay so that essentially scolding or epsilon utility equilibrium but I think it's good and and and and that's what we design essentially means that you know there is an a having no incentives is actually a good thing because the prevent people from reasoning are well saying going to game the system but why can we achieve in algorithm 12 known incentives and in Bitcoin instead yet to pay the miners because if they do tremendous amount of work because if you have to do a lot of work then you demand to be paid accordingly because you right but if I're going to say yet to add the two and two equal to four how much you want to be paid for vessel if you don't give me vice I don't add the two and two I say you can add the two and two in your sleep you don't need to be paid to add the two and two so the idea is that if we make the system so efficient so that generating the next block is so simple it doesn't hit the universe let alone my computer let alone take some microsecondo computation I'm at as well not being received in centers for doing that and try to incentivize some other part of the system but not the main consensus which is a mechanism for generating block to betray since you're Italian Sicilian I also heard rumors that you are a connoisseur of food what you know if I said today is the last day you get to be alive I'm Russian you shouldn't have trusted me you never know the Russian whether you're going to make it out or not well if you had one last meal you can travel somewhere in the world yes either you make it or somebody else makes it what second it looked like all right this is one last meal I must say you know in this era of COVID I've not been able to see my mom and and my mom was a fantastic chef okay and had the best very traditional food as you know the very traditional food are great for a reason because they survived hundreds of years of culinary innovation yeah so in there is one very laborious thing which is and you heard the name which is this Parmigiana but to do it is a piece of art why so many hours but only my mom could do it if we have the one last meal I want to Parmigiana okay what is what's what's the laborious process is that the ingredients is it the the actual process is it the atmosphere and the humans involved and the latter a the ingredient I like in any other in the Italian cuisine believes in very few ingredients if you say quintessential Italian recipe very boninose spaghetti paste okay paste is olive oil very good extra virgin olive oil and basil pine nuts pepper a clove of garlic not too much otherwise used you do the power everything and then yet to and to do even two schools of thought Parmigiana pecorino or or mix of a two yeah I mentioned six ingredients yes that is typical Italian that is I understand that there are other cuisines for instance a French cuisine which is extremely sophisticated and extremely combinatorial or some a Chinese cuisine which has a lot of many more ingredients in this and yet to the artist to put them together a lot of things in Italy is really the striving for simplicity yet to find few ingredients but the right ingredients to create something so in Parmigiana the ingredients are eggplants we are tomatoes we are basil but but how to put them together and the process is a is an act of all love okay labor and love is that you can spend a winter day when I'm exaggerating but the entire morning for sure to do it properly yeah as the Japanese cuisine too there's a mastery to the simplicity with the sushi I don't know if you've seen georgeans of sushi but there's a mastery to that that's propagated through the generations it's fascinating you know people love it when I ask about books I don't know if books whether fiction nonfiction technical or completely non-technical had an impact in your life throughout if there's anything you would recommend or even just mention as something they gave you an insight or moved you in some way so okay so I don't know if I can recommend because in some sense you almost had to be Italian or to be such a scholar but being Italian one thing with a really impressed me tremendously is the divine comedy it is a medieval poem a very long poem divided in three parts hell purgatory and paradise okay and the vet is the non-trivial story of a middleman man gets into a crisis personal crisis and when the auto-visc crisis he purifies makes a catastrophe purifies himself more and more and more until is become capable of actually meeting God okay and the vet is actually a complex story so yet to get some very sophisticated language maybe Latin alphabet point that we were talking about 12 hundreds of Italy right and in Florence and this guy instead he chose his own dialect not spoken outside his own immediate circle right and I'm a flooring time dollar and actually he done to really made Italian Italian you well and so I just how can you express such a sophisticated things and so this and then the point is that these words that nobody actually knew because I were essentially dialect and plus a bunch of very intricate rhymes in which a vet to rhyme for things and turns out a bit by getting meaning from the things with the rhyme you essentially guess what the word means and you invent Italian and you communicate by almost as most as what you want is a miracle communication in a dialect a very poor language very unsophisticated to express very sophisticated situation I love it people who love it and Italians and not Italian but but what I what I got of it is that you know very often limitations are our strength because if you limit yourself at a very poor language somehow you get out of it and you achieve even better form of communication if you're using a hypersophisticated literary language with lots of resonance from the prior books so that you can actually instantaneously quote he couldn't quote anything because nothing was written in Italian before him so I really felt that limitations are our strength and I think that rather than complaining about the limitations we should embrace them because if you embrace our limitation limited as we are we find very creative solutions that people with less limitation we have we would not even think about it no the limitations are kind of super power if you choose to see it that way is there since you speak both languages is there something that's lost in translation to you is there something you can express in Italian that you can't in English and vice versa maybe is there something you could say to the musicality of the language I mean I from I've been to Italy a few times and I'm not sure if it's the actual words but it's the people are certainly very there's body language too there's just the whole being is wrong so I don't know if you miss some of that when you're speaking English in this country yes in fact actually I certainly I am I miss it and somehow it was a sacrifice that I made consciously by the time and I knew that this I was not going to express myself at a better level and it was actually a sacrifice because given to you have also your mother tongue is Russian so you know that you can be very expressive in your mother tongue and not very expressive in the new language and then what people think of you in the new language because when the precise of expression the things it generates you know it shows you know elegance or he shows you know knowledge or he shows as a census or he shows as a caste or education whatever it is so all of a sudden I found myself on the bottom yeah so I had to fight all my way up back up and but what I'm thinking I got passing right there limitations actually I was trying to in fact he's a trick to limit yourself to exceed right and you know there are examples in history if you think about and or Hernn Corts right he goes to in Ved Mexico he has what a few hundred people with him and he has a hundred thousand people in arms on the other side first thing he does he limits himself he sinks his own ship there is no return okay and I'm not born the actual manager that's really profound I actually first of all this inspiring to me I feel like I have quite a few limitations but more practically on the Russian side I'm going to try to do a couple of really big and really tough interviews in Russian once COVID lifts a little bit I'm traveling to Russia and I'll keep your advice in mind that the limitations is a kind of superpower we should use it to our advantage because you do feel less like you're not able to convey your wisdom in the Russian language because I move here on us 13 so you don't you know the parts of life you live under certain language are the parts of life you're able to communicate you know I became I became a thoughtful deeply thoughtful human in English it's but the the pain from World War II this the the music of the people that wasn't still with me in Russian so I can carry both of those and there's limitations in both I can't say philosophically profound stuff in Russian but I can't in English express like that melancholy feeling of like the people and so combining those two I'll somehow beautifully said thanks for sharing this is great yes I totally understand you yes you've accomplished some incredible things in this space of science in a space of technology space of theory and engineering do you have advice for somebody young and undergraduate student somebody in high school or anyone who just feels young about life or about career about making their way in this world so I was telling before that I believe in emotion and in my thing is to be true to your on emotion and that I think that if you do that you're doing well because there's a life well spent and you are going never tired because you want to solve all these emotional knots that I was intrigued you from the beginning and I really believe that I know to to leave leave meaningfully creatively and yet to leave your emotional life so I really believe that whether you're a scientist or an artist even more but a scientist I think of a man as well if you are a human being so you are really to leave fully your emotions and to extend the possible sometimes emotions can be overbearing and my devices try to express them with more and more confident sometimes is hard but you are going to be much more fulfilled than by suppressing them what about love one of the big ones well role is that play yeah it's it's a bigger part of emotions of it is a it's a scary thing right it's a it's a lot of vulnerability it comes with a love but there is also so much energy and power and and loving all senses and in the traditional sense but also in the sense of border sense for for humanity with feeling less and all compassion that you know makes us one with another people and the suffering of people I mean all of this is is a very scary stuff but is really the the the the the the the the the sad thing is it really hurts to lose it yes that's why the vulnerability comes with it yes that's the thing about emotion is stop and down and the down seems to come always with the ups but the opponent only comes with the down so yeah let me ask you about the the ultimate down which is unfortunately we humans are mortal or appear to be for the most part do you think about your immortality do you do you fear death I hope so and because I mean we've had death for his life so at least there is no meaningful life a death is actually in some sense our ultimate motivator to live a beautiful and meaningful life I myself failed as a young man and Veta unless I I got something that I wanted to do and I know why I got the idea of a said something to say if I'm not able to say I would suicide so maybe was a way to motivate myself but you don't need to motivate because in some sense fortunately death is there so you better get up and do your thing and because Veta is the best motivation to to live fully what do you think what do you hope your legacy is you know you imagine you have two kids yes and so I really feel that you know there is one side is my biological legacy and that is my two kids right and and their kids hopefully and that is one fine and the other thing is this common enterprise which is society and I really feel that my legacy would be better by providing security and privacy actually for me are metaphorical to say I want to give you the ability to interact more and take more risks and reach out more for more people as difficult and dangerous as amazing but my all scientific work is about to to guarantee privacy and and give you the security of interaction and not only not transactional like it would be a blockchain transaction but that is really one of the hard core of my emotional problems and I think that all these other problems I want to tackle yeah and ultimately privacy and security is freedom yes freedom is at the core of this it's dangerous just it's like the emotion but ultimately that's how we create all the beautiful things around us do you think there's meaning to it all this life except the urgency that death provides and us anxious beings create cool stuff along the way is there a deeper meaning and if it is what is it well meaning of life actually we have three meanings of life great that's great one to seek two to seek and three to seek to seek what you know I really or is there no answer to that I was no answer to that I really think that the journey is more and more important than the destination whatever it would be and I think that is a journey and is in my opinion at the end of a day I must admit to meaningful in itself and we must admit to it maybe whatever your destination might be I'd be hanging you know we may never didn't get there but where hell was a great ride well I don't think there's a better way to end this so we all thank you for joint thank you for wasting your extremely valuable time with me today joining on this journey of seeking something together we found nothing but it was it was very fun I really enjoyed it thank you so much thank you and I really am special for me to be interviewed by you thank you for listening to this conversation with Sylvia McColley and thank you to our sponsors athletic greens nutrition drink the information in depth tech journalism website for cinematic martial coffee and better help online therapy click the sponsor links to get a discount and to support the spot guest and now let me leave you with some words from Henry David Theroux wealth is the ability to fully experience life thank you for listening and hope to see you next time okay