 The following is a conversation with Deliep George, a researcher at the intersection of neuroscience and artificial intelligence, co-founder of Ecarius, Scott Phoenix, and formerly co-founder of Numenta, with Jeff Hawkins, who has been on this podcast and Dana Dupinski. From his early work on hierarchical temporal memory to recursive cortical networks to today, Deliep's always sought to engineer intelligence that is closely inspired by the human brain. As a side note, I think we understand very little about the fundamental principles underlying the function of the human brain, but the little we do know gives hints that may be more useful for engineering intelligence than any idea in mathematics, computer science, physics, and scientific fields outside of biology. And so the brain is a kind of existence proof that says it's possible. Keep at it. I should also say that brain-inspired AI is often overhyped and use this fodder, just this quantum computing for marketing speak. But I'm not afraid of exploring these sometimes overhyped areas since where there's smoke, there's sometimes fire. Quick summary of the ads. Three sponsors, Babel, Raycon earbuds, and Masterclass. Please consider supporting this podcast by clicking the special links in the description to get the discount. It really is the best way to support this podcast. If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube, review the five stars and upper podcasts, support on Patreon, connect with me on Twitter, and Lex Friedman. As usual, I'll do a few minutes of ads now and never any ads in the middle that can break the flow of the conversation. This show is sponsored by Babel, an app and website that gets you speaking in a new language within weeks. Go to Babel.com and use code Lex to get three months free. They offer 14 languages, including Spanish, French, Italian, German, and yes, Russian. Daily lessons are 10 to 15 minutes, super easy, effective, designed by over 100 language experts. Let me read a few lines from the Russian poem Nutch Ulytsa Fanai Abteca by Alexander Blok, that you'll start to understand if you sign up to Babel. Nutch Ulytsa Fanai Abteca, Bismislinyy, Tuscly Svet, Živyi ešio hočetert věka, se bude tak, išchoda, nět. Now, I say that you'll only start to understand this poem because Russian starts with a language and ends with a vodka. Now, the latter part is definitely not endorsed or provided by Babel and will probably lose me this sponsorship, but once you graduate from Babel, you can enroll in my advanced course of late-night Russian conversation over vodka. I have not yet developed enough for that. It's in progress. So get started by visiting Babel.com and use code Lex to get three months free. This show is sponsored by Raycon Air Buds. Get them by Raycon.com slash Lex. They become my main method of listening to podcasts, audiobooks, and music when I run, do pushups and pull-ups, or just living life. In fact, I often listen to brown noise with them when I'm thinking deeply about something, it helps me focus. They're super comfortable, pair easily, great sound, great bass, six hours of playtime. I've been putting in a lot of miles to get ready for a potential ultra marathon and listening to audiobooks on World War Two. The sound is rich and really comes in clear. So again, get them at byraycon.com slash Lex. This show is sponsored by Masterclass. Sign up at masterclass.com slash Lex to get a discount and to support this podcast. When I first heard about Masterclass, I thought it was too good to be true. I still think it's too good to be true. For 180 bucks a year, you get an all-access pass to watch courses from the list of my favorites. Chris Hatfield on Space Exploration. Neil deGrasse Tyson on Scientific Thinking and Communication will write, creator of some city and sims on game design. Every time I do this read, I really want to play a city-builder game. Carl Santana on guitar, Gareth Kasparov on chess, Daniel Nagorno on poker, many more. Chris Hatfield explaining how rockets work and the experience of being launching this space alone is worth the money. By the way, you can watch it on basically any device. Once again, sign up at masterclass.com to get a discount and to support this podcast. And now here's my conversation with Deliep George. Do you think we need to understand a brain in order to build it? Yes, if you want to build a brain, we definitely need to understand how it works. So, blue brain or Henry Markham's project is trying to build a brain without understanding it, like, you know, just trying to put details of the brain from neuroscience experiments into a giant simulation by putting more and more neurons, more and more details. But that is not going to work because when it doesn't perform as what you expect to do, then what do you do? You just keep adding more details. How do you debug it? So, so unless you understand, unless you have a theory about how the system is supposed to work, how the pieces are supposed to fit together, what they're going to contribute, you can't you can't build it at the functional level understand. So, can you actually link around and describe the blue brain project? It's kind of fascinating principle and idea to try to simulate the brain. We're talking about the human brain, right? Right. Human brains and rat brains or cat brains have lots in common that the cortex, the neocortex structure is very similar. So, initially they were trying to just simulate a cat brain and to understand the nature of evil. Understand the nature of evil. Or as it happens in most of these simulations, you easily get one thing out which is oscillations. Yeah, if you simulate a large number of neurons, they oscillate and you can adjust the parameters and say that oscillations match the rhythm that we see in the brain, etc. But I see. So, like, so the idea is, is the simulation at the level of individual neurons? Yeah. So, the blue brain project, the original idea as proposed was, you put very detailed biophysical neurons, biophysical models of neurons. And you interconnect them according to the statistics of connections that we have found from real neuroscience experiments. And then turn it on and see what happens. And these neural models are, you know, incredibly complicated in themselves, right? Because these neurons are modeled using this idea called Hodgkin Huxley models, which are about how signals propagate in a cable. And there are active dendrites, all those phenomena, which those phenomena themselves we don't understand that well. And then we put in connectivity, which is podcast work, but, you know, absurd. And of course, if we do not have any theory about how it is supposed to work, we, you know, we just have to take whatever comes out of it as, okay, this is something interesting. But in your sense, like these models of the way signal travels along, like with the axons and all the basic models, that's there to crude. Oh, well, actually, they are pretty detailed and pretty sophisticated. And they do replicate the neural dynamics. If you take a single neuron and you, you try to turn on the different channels, the calcium channels and the different receptors and see what the effect of turning on or off those channels are in the neurons spike output. People have built pretty sophisticated models of that. And they are, I would say, you know, in the regime of correct. Well, see the correctness, that's interesting, because you mentioned at several levels, the correctness is measured by looking at some kind of aggregate statistics. It would be more the spiking dynamics of the dynamics of signal. Yeah. And yeah, these models, because they are going to the level of mechanism. So they are basically looking at, okay, what is the effect of turning on and on channel? And you can model that using electric circuits. And then, so they are model, so it is not just a function fitting. People are looking at the mechanism underlying it and putting that in terms of electric circuit theory, signal propagation theory and modeling that. And so those models are sophisticated, but getting a single neurons model 99% right does not still tell you how to, you know, it would be the analog of getting a transistor model right and now trying to build a microprocessor. And if you just observe, you know, if you did not understand how a microprocessor works, but you say, oh, I know, can model one transistor well. And now I will just try to interconnect the transistors according to whatever I could, you know, guess from the experiments and try to simulate it. Then it is very unlikely that you will produce a functioning microprocessor. You want to, you know, when you want to produce a functioning microprocessor, you want to understand Boolean logic, how does, how do the gates work, all those things. And then, you know, understand how do those gates get implemented using transistors? Yeah, there's actually, I remember, this reminds me, there's a paper, maybe you're familiar with it, that I remember going through in a reading group that approaches microprocessor from a perspective of a neuroscientist. I think it basically, it uses all the tools that we have of neuroscience to try to understand, like I said, if we just aliens showed up to study computers, and to see if those tools can be used to get any kind of sense of how the microprocessor works. I think the final takeaway from at least this initial exploration is that we're screwed. There's no way that the tools in neuroscience would be able to get us to anything, like not even Boolean logic. I mean, it's just any aspect of the architecture of the function of the processes involved, the clocks, the timing, all that, you can't figure that out from the tools of neuroscience. Yeah, so I'm very familiar with this, this particular paper. I think it was called Can a neuroscientist understand a microprocessor? Yeah, something like that. Following the methodology in that paper, even electrical engineer would not understand microprocessor. So I couldn't. So I don't think it is that bad in the sense of saying, neuroscience is do find valuable things by observing the brain. They do find good insights. But those insights cannot be put together just a simulation. You have to, you have to investigate what are the computational underpinnings of those findings. How do all of them fit together from an information processing perspective? You have to, you have to, somebody has to painstakingly put those things together and build hypothesis. So I don't want to, this all of neuroscience are saying, oh, they are not finding anything. No, that paper almost went to that level of neuroscientists will never understand. No, that's not true. I think they do find lots of useful things. But it has to be put together in a computational framework. Yeah, but just the AI systems are be listening to this podcast, a hundred years from now, and they will probably, there's some non-zero probability that they'll find your words laughable. There's like, I remember, human thought they understood something about the brain, they're totally cool. There's a sense about neuroscience that we may be in the very, very early days of understanding the brain. But, I mean, that's one perspective. In your perspective, how far are we into understanding any aspect of the brain? So the dynamics of the individual neuron communication, to the how in a collective sense, how they're able to store information, transfer information, how the intelligence that emerges, all that kind of stuff. Where are we on that timeline? Yeah. So, you know, timelines are very, very hard to predict. And you can, of course, be wrong. And it can be wrong on either side. We know that when we look back, the first flight was in 1903, in 1900, there was a New York Times article on flying machines that do not fly. And, and, you know, humans might not fly for another hundred years. That was what that article stated. And so, but, no, they flew three years after that. So it is, you know, it's very hard to, so. Well, and on that point, one of the Wright brothers, I think two years before, said that, like he said, like some number, like 50 years, he has become convinced that it's, it's impossible. Even during that experimentation. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's distributed to, when it's like the entrepreneurial battle of like depression of going through just like, thinking, there's this is impossible. But there, yeah, there's something even the person that's in it is not able to see, as to make correctly. Exactly. But I can, I can tell from the point of, you know, objectively, what are the things that we know about the brain and how that can be used to build AI models, which can then go back and inform how the brain works. So my way of understanding the brain would be to basically say, look at the insights, neuroscientists have found. Understand that from a computational angle, information processing angle, build models using that. And then building that model, which functions, which is a functional model, which is, which is doing the task that we want the model to do. It is not just trying to model a phenomena in the brain. It is trying to do what the brain is trying to do on the whole functional level. And building that model will help you fill in the missing pieces that, you know, biology just gives you the hints. And building the model, you know, fills in the rest of the pieces of the puzzle. And then you can go and connect that back to biology and say, okay, now, it makes sense that this part of the brain is doing this or this layer in the cortical circuit is doing this. And then continue this iteratively because now that will inform new experiments in neuroscience. And of course, you know, building the model and verifying that in the real world, will you will also tell you more about does the model actually work? And you can refine the model, find better ways of putting these neuroscience insights together. So I would say it is, you know, so neuroscience is alone just from experimentation. We'll not be able to build a model of the of the brain or a functional model of the brain. So we, you know, there's lots of efforts which are very impressive efforts in collecting more and more connectivity data from the brain. You know, how are the micro circuits of the brain connected with each other? That's beautiful, by the way. Those are beautiful. And at the same time, those, those do not itself, by themselves, convey the story of how does it work? And somebody has to understand, okay, why are they connected like that? And what, what are those things doing? And we do that by building models in AI, using hints from neuroscience and repeat the cycle. So what aspect of the brain are useful in this whole endeavor? Which, by the way, I should say, you're, you're both the neurosciences and AI person. I guess the dream is to both understand the brain and to build AGI systems. So you're, it's like an engineer's perspective of trying to understand the brain. So what aspects of the brain function is speaking, like you said, you find interesting. Yeah, quite a lot of things. All right, so one is, you know, if you look at the visual cortex and, you know, the visual cortex is a large part of the brain. I forgot the exact fraction, but it is, it's a huge part of our brain area is occupied by just vision. So vision, visual cortex is not just a feed forward cascade of neurons. There are a lot more feedback connections in the brain compared to the feed forward connections. And, and it is surprising to the level of detail neurosciences have actually studied this. If you go into neurosciences literature and poke around and ask, you know, how they study, what will be the effect of poking a neuron in level IT in level V1? And how they studied that? And you will say, yes, they have studied that. Every possible combination. It's not a random exploration at all. It's a very hypothesis driven, right? They are very experimental neurosciences are very, very systematic in how they probe the brain because experiments are very costly to contact. They take a lot of preparation. They need a lot of control. So they are very hypothesis driven in how they probe the brain. And often what I find is that when we have a question in AI about, has anybody probed how lateral connections in the brain works? And when you go and read the literature, yes, people have probed it and people have probed it very systematically. And they have hypothesis about how those lateral connections are supposedly contributing to visual processing. But of course, they have been built very, very functional detailed models of it. By the way, how do the, you know, studies I turned it off today, do they stimulate like a neuron in one particular area of the visual cortex and then see how the travel of the signal travels kind of thing? Fascinating, very, very fascinating experiments. So I can give you one example I was impressed with. This is, so before going to that, let me, let me give you, you know, or we have how the, the layers in the cortex are organized, right? Visual cortex is organized into roughly four hierarchical levels. Okay, so V1, V2, V4, IT. And in V1- What happened to V3? Well, yeah, there's another pathway. Okay, so there is this, I'm talking about just object recognition pathway. Okay, and then in V1 itself, so it's, there is a very detailed micro circuit in V1 itself. That is, that is organization within a level itself. The cortical sheet is organized into, you know, multiple layers and there are columnar structure. And this, this layer wise and columnar structure is repeated in V1, V2, V4, IT, all of them, right? And, and the connections between these layers within a level, you know, in V1 itself, there are six layers, roughly, and the connections between them, there is a particular structure to them. And now, so one example of an experiment of people did is when I, when you present a stimulus, which is, let's say, requires separating the foreground from the background of an object. So it is a textured triangle on a textured background. And you can check, does the surface settle first, or does the contour settle first? Settle in the sense that the, so when you finally form the percept of the, of the triangle, you understand where the contours of the triangle are, and you also know where the inside of the triangle is, right? That's when you form the final percept. Now, you can ask what is the dynamics of forming that final percept? Do the, do the neurons first find the edges and converge on where the edges are, and then they find the inner surfaces, or does it go the other way around? So, so is the answer. In this case, it turns out that it finds first settles on the edges. It converges on the edge hypothesis first. And then the surfaces are filled in from the edges to the inside. That's fascinating. And, and the detail to which you can study this, it's, it's amazing that you can actually not only find the temporal dynamics of when this happens. And then you can also find which layer in the, you know, in V1, which layer is encoding the edges, which layer is encoding the surfaces, and which layer is encoding the feedback, which layer is encoding the feed forward, and what, what's the combination of them that produces the final person? And these kinds of experiments stand out when you try to explain illusions. One, one example of a favorite illusion of mine is the Kanitsa triangle. I don't know that you are familiar with this one. So, this is, this is an example where it's a triangle, but, you know, the corners of the, only the corners of the triangle are shown in the stimulus. So, they look like kind of Pac-Man. Oh, the Black Pac-Man. Exactly. And then you start to see. Your visual system hallucinates the edges. Yeah. And you can, you know, you, when you look at it, you will see a faint edge, right? And you can go inside the brain and look, you know, do actually neurons signal the presence of this edge. And, and if they signal, how do they do it? Because they are not receiving anything from the input. And the input is black for those neurons, right? So, how do they signal it? When does the signaling happen? You know, does it, you know, so, so if a real contour is present in the input, then the, the neurons immediately signal, okay, there is a, there is an edge here. When, when it is an illusory edge, it is clearly not in the input. It is coming from the context. So, those neurons fire later. And, and you can say that, okay, these are, it's the feedback connections that is causing them to fire. And, and they happen later. And you can, I'll find the dynamics of them. So, so this study is a very impressive and, and very detailed. So, by the way, just, uh, just to stay, step back, you said, uh, that there may be more feedback connections, the feed forward connections. Yeah. First of all, it's just for like a machine learning folks. Yeah. I mean, that, that's crazy that there's all these feedback connections we often think about, I have a thing, thanks to deep learning, you start to think about, um, the, the human brain is a kind of feed forward mechanism. Right. So, what the heck are these feedback connections? Yeah. What's their, what's the dynamics? What are we supposed to think about them? Yeah. So, this is, this feeds in their very beautiful picture about how the brain works, right? Um, so the, the beautiful picture of how the brain works is that our brain is building a model of the world. Uh, I know. So, our visual system is building a model of how objects behave in the world. And, and we are constantly projecting that model back onto the world. So, what we are seeing is not just a feed forward thing that just gets interpreted in, in a field forward party. We are constantly projecting our expectations onto the world. And, and what the final person is a combination of what we project onto the world, uh, combined with what the actual sensory input is. Um, almost like trying to calculate the difference and then trying to interpret the difference. Yeah. It's, it's, um, I wouldn't put just calculating the difference. It's more like, what is the best explanation for the, the input stimulus based on the model of the world I have? Got it. Got it. And that's where all the illusions come in. And that's, but that's, that's an incredibly efficient, so, uh, efficient process. So the feedback mechanism, it just helps you constantly, uh, yeah. So hallucinate how the world should be based on your world model and then just looking at, uh, if there's novelty, uh, like trying to explain it. Yeah. Hence, that's why movement would take movement really well. There's all these kinds of things. And this is like at all different levels of the cortex here, say, it happens at the lowest level or the highest level. Yes. Yeah. Feed, in fact, feedback connections are more prevent in everywhere in the cortex. And, and, um, so one way to think about it and there's a lot of evidence for this is inference, um, so, you know, so basically if you have a model of the world and when, when some evidence comes in, what you are doing is inference, right? You are trying to now explain this evidence using your model of the world. Yeah. And this inference includes projecting your model onto the evidence and taking the evidence, uh, back into the model and, and, and doing an iterative procedure. Um, and, this iterative procedure is what happens using the feed-forward feedback propagation, uh, and feedback affects what you see in the world and, you know, it also affects feed-forward propagation. And examples are everywhere. We see these kinds of things everywhere. The idea that there can be multiple competing hypothesis, uh, in our model, trying to explain the same evidence and then you have to kind of make them compete. And one hypothesis will explain every other hypothesis through this competition process. Wait, wait, so you have competing models of the world that try to explain what do you mean by explain away? So this is a classic example in a, uh, graphical models, probabilistic models. Um, so if you know what are those, um, okay, um, I think it's useful to mention because we'll talk about the more, yeah, yeah. So neural networks are one class of machine learning models. Um, you know, you have distributed set of, uh, nodes, which are called the neurons, you know, each one is doing a dot product and you can, you can approximate any function using this, uh, multi-level, uh, network of neurons. So that's, uh, a, a class of models, which are useful for, useful for function approximation. There is another class of models in machine learning, uh, called probabilistic graphical models. And you can think of them as each node in that model is variable, which is, which is talking about something, you know, it can be a variable representing is, is an edge present in the input or not. And at the top of the, uh, uh, uh, network, uh, node can be, uh, representing, is there an object present in the, uh, world or not? And, and then so it can, it is, it is another way of encoding knowledge. And, uh, um, and then you, once you encode the knowledge, you can, uh, do inference in the right way. You know, what is the best way to, uh, explain some set of evidence using this model that you encoded, you know, so when you encode the model, you are encoding the relationship between these different variables. How is the edge connected to my, uh, the model of the object? How is the surface connected to the model of the object? Um, and then, um, of course, this is a very distributed complicated model. And inference is how do you explain a piece of evidence? When, when a set of stimulus comes in, if somebody tells me there is a 50% probability that there is an edge here in this part of the model. How does that affect my belief on whether I should think that there should be a, is the square percent in the image. So, so this is the process of inference. So one example of inference is having this, experiencing a way effect between multiple causes. So, uh, graphical models can be used to represent causality in the world. Um, so let's say, um, you know, uh, your, uh, alarm, uh, uh, at home can be, uh, triggered by a, uh, burglar getting into your house, or it can be triggered by an earthquake. Both, both can be causes of the alarm going off. So now, you're, you're, you know, you're in your office, you heard burglar alarm going off, you are heading, uh, home, uh, thinking that there's a burglar, but while driving home, if you hear on the radio that there was an earthquake in the vicinity, now you're hype, you know, uh, strength of evidence for, uh, a burglar getting into their house is diminished. Because now that, that piece of evidence is explained by the earthquake being present. So if you, if you think about these two causes explaining at lower level, uh, variable, which is alarm, now what we're seeing is that increasing the evidence for some cause. Ex, you know, there is evidence coming even from below for alarm being present. And initially it was flowing to a burglar being present. But now, since somebody had some, this, there is a, there is a evidence for this other cause. It explains every this evidence and it evidence will now flow to the other cause. This is, you know, two competing causal, uh, things trying to explain the same evidence. And the brain has a similar kind of mechanism for, uh, for doing so. That's kind of interesting. I mean, and that, how's that all encoded in the brain? Like, where's the storage of information? Are we talking just maybe to get it, uh, a little bit more specific? Is it in the hardware of the actual connections? Is it in, uh, chemical communication? Is it electrical communication? Do we, do we know? So, so this is, you know, a paper that we are bringing out soon, which was this, um, this is the cortical micro circuits paper that I sent you a draft of. Of course, this is, uh, a lot of it is still hypothesis. One hypothesis is that a, you can think of a cortical column as encoding a, a concept, a concept, you know, think of it as a, uh, a, um, cons, an example of a concept is, is an edge present or not or is, is an object present or not. Okay. So you can, you can think of it as a binary variable, a binary random variable, the presence of an edge or not or the presence of an object or not. So each cortical column can be thought of as representing that one concept, one variable. And then the connections between these cortical columns are basically encoding the relationship between these random variables. And then there are connections within the cortical column, there are each cortical column is implemented using multiple layers of neurons with very, very, very rich, um, structure there, you know, there are thousands of neurons in a cortical column, but as structures similar across the different cortical columns. Correct. Yeah. Correct. And also these cortical columns connect to a substructure called Thalamus in the, uh, you know, so all, all cortical columns pass through this substructure. So our hypothesis is that, yeah, the connections between the cortical columns implement this, uh, you know, that's where the knowledge is stored about, you know, how these different concepts connect to each other. And then the neurons inside this cortical column and in Thalamus in combination implement this, uh, actual computations, in order for inference, which includes explaining a way and competing between the different, uh, hypothesis. Um, and it is already, so what is amazing is that, um, neuroscientists have actually done experiments to the tune of showing these things. They might not be putting it in the overall inference framework, but they will show things like if I poke this higher level neuron, uh, it will inhibit through this complicated loop through Thalamus, it will inhibit this other column. Uh, so they will do such experiments. But do they use terminology of concepts, for example? So, so you're, I mean, is it, uh, is it something where it's easy to anthropomorphize and think about concepts, like you start moving into logic based kind of reasoning systems. So, um, I would just think of concepts in that kind of way, or is it, uh, is it a lot messier, a lot more gray area? You know, even, even more gray, even more messy than, uh, the artificial neuron that war kinds of abstractions. It's the easiest way to think of it as a variable, right? It's a binary variable, which is showing the presence or absence of something. But I guess what I'm asking is, is that something, uh, we suppose I think of something as human interpretable of that something. It doesn't need to be. It doesn't need to be human interpretable. There's no need for it to be human interpretable. But it's, it's almost like, um, you, you will be able to find some interpretation of it, uh, because it is connected to the other things that you know. And the, the point is that it's useful somehow. Yeah. It's useful as an entity in the graphic, in connecting to the other entities that are, let's call them concepts. Right. Okay. So, uh, by the way, what's, are these the cortical micro circuits? Correct. These are the cortical micro circuits. You know, that's what neuroscience is used to talk about the circuits in, in, uh, within a level of the cortex. So you can think of, you know, let's think of a neural network, you know, artificial neural network terms, you know, people talk about the architecture of the, you know, so how many, how many layers they build, uh, you know, what is the fan in fan out, etc. That is the macro architecture. Uh, so and then within a layer of the neural network, you can, you know, the cortical neural network is much more structured within, you know, within a level. There's a lot more intricate structure there. But even, even within an artificial neural network, you can think of in feature detection plus pooling as one level. And so that is kind of a micro circuit. It's much more complex in the real brain. Uh, and, uh, and so within a level, what about is that circuitry within a column of the cortex and between the layers of the cortex? That's the micro circuitry. I love that terminology. Uh, machine learning people don't use the circuit terminology. Right. But they should. It's a, it's a nice. Okay. Uh, okay. So that's, uh, that's the, the cortical micro circuits. So what's interesting about, uh, what, what can we say? What is the paper that, uh, you're working on, uh, propose about the ideas around these cortical micro circuits? So this is a fully functional model for the micro circuits of the visual cortex. So the paper focuses on your idea and our discussions now is focusing on vision. Yeah. The, uh, visual cortex. Okay. Yeah. This is a model. This is a full model. This is how vision works. But this is, this is a, yeah, yeah. Okay. So let me, let me step back, uh, a bit. Um, so we looked at neuroscience for insights on how to build a vision model. And, and, and we synthesized all those insights into a computational model. This is called the recursive cortical network model that we, we used for breaking captures and, uh, and we are using the same model for robotic picking and, uh, tracking of objects and that again as a vision system. That's a vision. Computer vision system. That's a computer vision. It takes in images and outputs. What? On one side, it outputs the class of the image, uh, and also segments the image, uh, and you can also ask it further queries. Where is the edge of the object? Where is the interior of the object? So it's a, it's a model that you build to answer multiple questions. So you're not trying to build a model for just classification or just segmentation, except it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a joint model that can do multiple things. Um, and, um, so, so that's the model that we built using insights from neuroscience. And some of those insights are what is the role of feedback connections? What is the role of lateral connections? Uh, so all those things went into the model. The model actually uses feedback connections. All these ideas from your, from your sense. Yeah. Uh, so what, what, what the heck is a, uh, requires a cortical network? Like what, what are the architecture approaches? Interesting aspects here. Which is essentially a brain-inspired approach to a computer vision. Yeah. So there are multiple layers to this question. I can go from the very, very top and then zoom in. Okay. So one important thing constrained that went into the model is that you should not think vision, think of vision as something in isolation. We should not think perception as something as a pre-processor for cognition. Perception and cognition are interconnected. And so you should not think of one problem in separation from the other problem. Um, and so that means if you finally want to have a system that understand concepts, uh, about the world and can learn a, in a very conceptual model of the world and can reason and connect to language, all of those things, you need to, you need to have, think all the way through and make sure that your perception system is compatible with your cognition system and language system and all of them. And one aspect of that is top-down controllability. Um, what does that mean? So that means, you know, so, so think of, you know, you can close your eyes and think about the details of one object. Right. I can, I can zoom in further and further again, you know, so, so think of the model in front of me. Right. And now you can think about, okay, what the cap of that model looks. Uh, you know, we can think about what's the texture on that model of the, of the cap, you know, you can think about, you know, what will happen if something hits that. Uh, so you can, you can, you can manipulate your visual knowledge in a cognition driven ways. Yes. Uh, and so this top-down controllability, uh, and being able to simulate scenarios in the world. So you're not just a passive player in this perception game, you can, you can control it. You can, you can, you have imagination. Correct. Correct. So, so, so basically, you know, basically having a generating network, yeah, which is a model. And, and it is not just some arbitrary generating network. It has to be, it has to be built in a way that it is controllable top-down. It is, it is not just trying to generate a whole picture at once. Uh, you know, it's not trying to generate photorealistic things of the world. You, you know, you don't have good photorealistic models of the world. Human brains do not have. If I, if I, for example, ask you the question, uh, what is the color of the letter E in the Google logo? You have no idea. Although, you have seen it millions of times. I've made it to that hundreds of times. So, so it's not, our model is not photorealistic, but, but it is, but it has other properties that we can manipulate it, uh, in the, uh, and you can think about filling in a different color in that logo. You can think about expanding the, the letter E. Yeah. You know, you can see what, in, so you can imagine the consequence of, you know, actions that you have never performed. So, so these are the kind of characteristics the generative model need to have. So, this is one constraint that went into our model. Like, you know, so this is when you read the, just the perceptions side of the paper, it is not obvious that this was a constraint into the, that went into the model, this top-down controllability of the generative model. Uh, so what, what does top-down controllability in a model look like? It's a really interesting concept, fascinating concept. What does that, is that the recursion, the recursionness gives you that or how do you, how do you do it? Um, quite a few things. It's like, what, what does the model factor, uh, factorize? You know, what are the, what is the model representing as different pieces in the puzzle? Like, you know, so, so in the RCN, uh, network, it, it, things of the world, you know, so far as a, the background of an image is modeled separately from the foreground of the image. So, so the, the objects are separate from the background. They are different entities. So there's a kind of segmentation that's built in fundamental each of the structures. And, and, and then even that object is composed of parts. And also, and, another one is the, the shape of the object is differently modeled from the texture of the object. Got it. So, there's like these, um, uh, I mean, you know, a French martiala is, uh, yeah, he's, so there's, uh, he developed this like IQ test type of thing for arc challenge for, and uh, it's kind of cool that there's, um, these concepts, priors, they defines that you bring to the table in order to be able to reason about basic shapes and things in IQ tests. So here you're making it quite explicit that here, here are the things that you should be. These are like distinct things that you should be able to, um, model in this. Keep in mind that you, you can derive these from much more general principles. It doesn't, you don't need to explicitly put it as, oh, objects versus foreground versus background, uh, the surface versus texture. No, these are, these are derived from a more fundamental principles of how, you know, what's the property of continuity of natural signals? Yeah. By the way, that sounds very poetic. But yeah, uh, so you're saying that's a, uh, there's some low, low properties from which emerges the idea that shapes should be different than, like, there should be a part of an object. There should be, I mean, exactly. Kind of like French wild talk. I mean, there's object nests. There's all these things that it's kind of crazy that we have. There's all these things that it's kind of crazy that we humans, uh, I guess evolved to have because it's useful for us to perceive the world. Correct. Correct. And it, it derives mostly from the properties of natural signals. And, yeah. And so, um, natural signals, so natural signals are the kind of things we'll perceive in the, in the natural world. Correct. I don't know. I don't know why that sounds so beautiful. Natural signals. Yeah. As opposed to a QR code, like, which is an artificial signal that we created, humans are not very good at classifying QR codes. We are very good at saying something is a cat or a dog, but not very good at, you know, the class, where the computers are very good at classifying QR codes. So our, our visual system is tuned for natural signals. Uh, and there are fundamental assumptions in the architecture that are derived from natural signals, uh, properties. I wonder when you take, uh, a host in genetic drugs. Does that go into natural or is that closer to QR code? It's still natural. Yeah. Because it's still operating using her brains. By the way, on that topic, I mean, I haven't been following. I think they're becoming legalized in certain. I can't wait until they become legalized to degree the, like, vision science research, research could study it. Yeah. Just like through, through medical, chemical ways, modify it. There could be ethical concerns, but modify that's another way to study the brain is to be able to chemically modify it. It's probably, um, probably very long a way to, to figure out how to do it ethically. Yeah, but I think that our studies on that already. Uh, ready? Yeah, I think so. Uh, because it's, it's not unethical to give, uh, it do rats. Oh, that's true. That's true. There's a lot of, it's struck the rats out there. Okay. Yeah. Sorry. Sorry. It's okay. So there's, uh, so there's these, uh, low level, uh, things from natural signals that, uh, that, that, that, that, from which these properties will emerge. Yes. Uh, but it is still a very hard problem on how to encode that again. So you don't, you know, there is no, uh, so, uh, you mentioned, um, the, the, the priors, uh, Francho wanted to encode in, uh, in the, abstract reasoning challenge, but it is not straightforward how to encode those priors. So, so some of those, uh, challenges, like, you know, the object, like, uh, or completion challenges are things that we purely use our visual system to do. It is, uh, it looks like abstract reasoning, but it is purely an output of, uh, the vision system. For example, completing the corners of that concert triangle, completing the lines of that concert triangle. It's a purely visual system property. It, you know, it's, there is no abstract reasoning involved. It uses all these priors, but it is stored in our visual system in a particular way that is amenable to inference. And, and, and that is one of the things that we tackled in the, you know, basically saying, okay, these are the prior knowledge, uh, which, which will be derived from the word, but then how is that prior knowledge represented in the model such that inference when, when some piece of evidence comes in can be done very efficiently and in a very distributed way. Um, because it is very, there are so many ways of representing knowledge, which is not amenable to very quick inference, you know, quick lookups. Um, and so that's one, um, core part of what we tackled in, uh, the RCN model. Um, uh, how do you encode? We shall knowledge to do a very quick inference. And yeah, can you maybe comment on, uh, so folks listening to this in general, maybe familiar with different kinds of architectures of neural networks? What, what are we talking about with the RCN? Uh, what, what, what does the architecture look like? What are different components? Is it close to neural networks? Is it far away from neural networks? What does it look like? Yeah. So, so you can, uh, think of the delta between the model and a convolutional neural network. If, if people are familiar with convolutional neural networks, so convolutional neural networks have this feed forward processing cascade, which is called, uh, feature detectors and pooling. And that is repeated in the, in the hierarchy in, in a, uh, multi level, uh, system. Um, and if you, if you want to, and intuitive idea of what, what is happening feature detectors are, uh, you know, detecting, interesting co-occurrences in the input. It can be a line, a corner, a, an eye or a piece of texture, etc. And the pooling neurons are doing some local transformation of that and making it invariant to local transformations. So this is what the structure of convolutional neural network is. Um, recursive critical network has a similar structure when you look at just the feed forward pathway. But in addition to that, it is also structured in a way that it is generative. So that again, you can run it backward and combine the forward with the backward. Another aspect that it has is, it has lateral connections. This lateral connections, um, which is, between, so if you have an edge here and an edge here, it has connections between these edges. It is not just feed forward connections. It is, um, something between these edges, which is, uh, the nodes are presenting these edges, which is to enforce compatibility between them. So otherwise, what will happen is the constraints. It's a constraint is basically, if you, if you do just feature detection followed by pooling, then your, your transformations in different parts of the visual field are not coordinated. Uh, and so you can, you will create, uh, jagged, when you, when you generate from the model, you will create jagged, um, uh, things and uncoordinated transformations. So these lateral connections are enforcing the, the transformations. Is the whole thing still differentiable? Uh, no. Okay. No. It's not, it's not trade using, uh, back prop. Okay. That's really important. So, uh, so there's these feed forward, there's feedback mechanisms. There's some interesting connectivity things that is still layered, like, uh, uh, uh, uh, multiple, multiple, uh, layers. Okay. Very, very interesting. Uh, and yeah. Okay. So the interconnection between, uh, adjacent, the connections across service constraints that, that keep the thing stable. Got it. Okay. So what else? Uh, and then there's this idea of doing inference, a neural network does not do inference on the fly. So an example of why this inference is important is, you know, so one of the first applications, uh, that we showed in the paper was to crack, uh, text-based captures. What are captures, by the way? Uh, yep. Yeah. By the way, one of the most awesome, like, the people don't use this term anymore, human computation, I think. Uh, I love this term. The guy who created captures, I think, came up with this term. Yeah. I love it. Anyway. Uh, yeah. Uh, uh, what, what are captures? So, captures are those strings that you fill in, uh, when you're, you know, when if you're opening a new account in Google, they show you a picture, you know, usually it used to be set of garbled letters, uh, that you have to kind of figure out what, what, what is that string of characters and type in. And the reason captures exist is because, you know, uh, Google or Twitter do not want automatic creation of accounts. You can use a computer to create millions of accounts, uh, and, uh, use that for in nephatist purposes. Uh, so you want to make sure that to the extent possible, the interaction that your, your system is having is with a human. So it's a, it's called a human interaction proof. A capture is a human interaction proof. Um, so, so this is a captures are by design, things that are easy for humans to solve, but hard for computer. Hard for robots. Yeah. Um, so, and text-based captures were was the one which is prevalent on the around 2014, because at that time, text-based risk captures were hard for computers to crack. Even now, they are actually in the sense of an arbitrary text-based capture will be unsolved, will even know. But with the techniques that we have developed, it can be, you know, you can quickly develop a mechanism that solves the capture. They probably got a lot harder to, the people that they've been getting clever and clever generating these text characters. Yeah. Right. Right. So, okay. So that was one of the things you've tested it on is these kinds of captures in 2014, 2015. Got that kind of stuff. Right. Right. So what, uh, what, uh, what, I mean, why, by the way, why captures? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Even now, I would say capture is a very, very good challenge problem. Uh, if you want to understand how human perception works and if you want to build, uh, systems that work like the human brain, uh, and I wouldn't say capture is a solved problem. We have cracked the fundamental defense of captures, but it is not solved in the way that human solve it. Um, so I can give you an example. I can, um, take a five year old child who has just learned characters, uh, and, uh, show them any new capture that we create. Mm-hmm. They will be able to solve it. Uh, I can show you pretty much any new capture, uh, from any new website. You'll be able to solve it without getting any training examples from that particular style of capture. You're assuming I'm human, yeah. Yes. Yeah. Uh, that's right. So if you are human, I, otherwise, I will be able to figure that out. Yeah. Well, using this one. But, uh, this whole podcast is just a touring test. That's a long, a long touring test. Anyway, I'm sorry. So, yeah. So she's human, humans can figure it out with very few examples or not training examples. No, no, no, no training examples from that particular style of capture. Um, and, and so you can, you know, so, uh, even now this is unreachable for, uh, the current deep learning system. So, basically, there is no, I don't think a system exists where you can basically say, train on whatever you want. And then now say, hey, I will show you a new capture, which I did not show you in, in the, in the training setup. Will the system be able to solve it? Um, still doesn't exist. So that is the magic of human perception. Yeah. And Doug Hough starter, uh, put this, uh, very beautifully in one of his, uh, talks. The, the central problem in AI is what is the letter A? If you can, if you can build a system that reliably can detect all the variations of the letter A, you don't even need to go to the, the, the V and the C. Yeah. You don't even know to go to the V and the C or the strings of characters. And, uh, so that, that is a spirit at which, you know, with, which we, uh, tackle that. What does it mean by that? I mean, is, is it, uh, like without training examples, try to figure out the fundamental elements that make up the letter A in all of its forms. In all of its forms, it can be, A can be made with two human standing leaning against each of their holding hands. Yeah. And, uh, it can be made of leaves. It can be, yeah, you might have to understand, uh, everything about this world, the Northern Tunisian letter A, yeah. So it's common sense for reasoning essentially. Yeah. Right. So, so to finally, to really solve, finally, to say that you have solved capture, uh, you have to solve the whole problem. Yeah. Okay. So what, how does, uh, this kind of the RCN architecture help us to get, uh, do a better job there. Yeah. So, uh, as I mentioned, one of the important things was being able to do inference, being able to dynamically do inference. Can you, can you, uh, can you clarify what you mean? Because you said, like, no networks don't do inference. Yeah. So what do you mean by inference in this context? So, okay. So in captures, what they do to confuse people is to make these characters crowd together. Yes. Okay. And when you make the characters crowd together, what happens is that you will now start seeing combinations of characters as some other new character or, or an existing character. So you would, you would put an R and N together. It will start looking like an M. And, and so locally, they are, you know, there is very strong evidence for it being, uh, some, uh, incorrect character. But globally, the only explanation that fits together is something that is different from what you can find locally. Yes. So, so, so this is inference. You are basically taking, uh, local evidence and putting it in the global context and often coming to a conclusion locally, which is conflicting with the local information. So actually, so you mean inference, like, in the way it's used, when you talk about reasoning, for example, uh, is supposed to like inference, which is this, with, you know, with artificial neural networks, which is a single path to the network. Correct. Okay. So like, you're basically doing some basic forms of reasoning, like integration of like, uh, how local things fit into the, the global configuration. And, and, and things like explaining a way coming into this one, because you are, you are, explaining that piece of evidence, uh, as something else, uh, because globally, that's the only thing that makes sense. Um, so now, uh, you can, amortize this inference by, you know, in a neural network, if you want to do this, what you, you can, you can brute force it, you can just show it all combinations of things. Uh, that you want to, you want to, uh, you're reasoning to work over. And you can, you know, like, just train the help out of that neural network. And it will look like it is doing, uh, you know, inference on the fly, but it is, it is really just doing amortized inference. It is because you, you have to show it a lot of these combinations during training time. Um, so what you want to do is be able to do dynamic inference, rather than just being able to show all those combinations in the training time. And that's something we emphasized in the model. What does it mean dynamic inference? Is that, that has to do with the feedback thing? Yes. Like what, what is dynamic? I, I'm trying to visualize what dynamic inference would be in this case. Like, what is it doing with the input? It's shown the input the first time. Yeah. And it is, like, what's changing over temporarily over what's the dynamics of this inference process? So, so you can think of it as you have, um, at the top of the model, the characters that you are trained on, they are the causes that you are trying to explain the pixels using the characters as the causes. The, you know, the characters are the things that cost the pixels. Yeah. So there's this causality thing. So the reason you mentioned causality, I guess, is because there's a temporal aspects of this whole thing. In this particular case, the temporal aspect is not important. It is more like when, if, if I turn the character on, the pixels will turn on. Yeah, it'll be after there's a little bit, but yeah. So that is causality in the sense of like a logic causality, like, hence inference. Okay. The dynamics is that, even the locally, it will look like, okay, this is an A. And, and locally, just when I look at just that patch of the image, it looks like an A. But when I look at it in the context of all the other causes, it might not, in a, M is not the something that makes sense. So that is something you have to kind of recursively figure out. Yeah. So, okay. So, and this thing perform pretty well on the captures. Correct. And, I mean, is there some kind of interesting intuition you can provide why did well? Like, what did it look like? Is there visualizations that could be human interpretable to us humans? Yes. Yeah. So the good thing about the model is that it is extremely, so it is not just doing a classification, right? It is, it is, it is providing a full explanation for the scene. So when it, when it operates on a scene, it is coming at back and saying, look, this is the part is the A. And these are the pixels that turned on. These are the pixels in the input that tells makes me think that it is an A. And also, these are the portions I hallucinated. It, you know, it, it, it provides a complete explanation of that form. And then, it's going to, these are the contours. These are, this is the interior. And this is in front of this other object. So that, that's the kind of explanation it, the inference network provides. So, so that, that is useful and interpretable. And then the kind of errors it makes are also, I don't want to read too much into it, but the kind of errors the network makes are very similar to the kinds of errors humans would make in a similar situation. So there's something about the structure that feels reminiscent of the way humans visual system works. Well, I mean, how hard coded is this to the capture problem? This idea. Not really hard coded because it's the, the assumptions, as I mentioned, are general, right? It is more. And those themselves can be applied in many situations, which are natural signals. So it's, it's the foreground versus background factorization. And the factorization of the surfaces versus the contours. So these are all generally applicable assumptions in all vision. So why, why capture, why attack the capture problem, which is quite unique in the computer vision context versus like the traditional benchmarks of image net and all those kinds of image classification or even segmentation tasks and all that kind of stuff. Do you feel like that's, I mean, what, what's your thinking about those kinds of benchmarks in this, in this context? I mean, those benchmarks are useful for deep learning kind of algorithms, you know, so the settings that deep learning works in are here is my huge training set. And here is my test set. So the training set is almost 100,000 x bigger than the test set in many cases. What we wanted to do was invert that. The training set is way smaller than the test set. Yes. And, you know, capture is a problem that is by definition hard for computers. And it has these good properties of strong generalization, strong out of training distribution generalization. If you are interested in studying that and putting having your model have that property, then it's a good data set to tackle. So is there, have you attempted to, which I think I believe there's quite a growing body of work on looking at M-ness and image net without training. So like taking the basic challenges, how what tiny fraction of the training set can we take in order to do a reasonable job of the classification task? Have you explored that angle in these classic benchmarks? Yes. So we did do M-nist. So, you know, so it's not just capture. So there was also versions of multiple versions of M-nist, including the standard version, which where we inverted the problem, which is basically saying rather than train on 60,000 training data, you know, how quickly can you get to high level accuracy with very little training data? Is there some performance you remember? Like how well, how well did it do? How many examples that it need? Yeah, I remember that it was, you know, on the order of 10 or 100 of examples, to get into 95% accuracy and it was definitely better than the systems, other systems out there at that time. At that time? Yeah, they're really pushing. I think that's a really interesting space, actually. I think there's an actual name for M-nist that like there's different names, the different sizes of training sets. I mean, people are like attacking this problem. I think it's super interesting. It's funny how like the M-nist will probably be with us all the way to AGI, as the data said, it just sits by. It is a clean, simple data set to study the fundamentals of learning with just like captures. It's interesting. Not enough people, I don't know, maybe you can correct me, but I feel like captures don't show up as often in papers as they probably should. That's correct. Yeah, because you know, usually these things have a momentum, you know, once something gets established as a standard benchmark, that is a dynamics of how graduate students operate and how a system works that pushes people to track that benchmark. Yeah, so nobody wants to think outside the box. Okay. Okay, so good performance on the captures. What else is there interesting on the RCN side before we talk about the cortical micro. Yeah, so the same model, so the the the important part of the model was that it trains very quickly with very little training data and it's you know, quite robust to out of distribution perturbations. And we are using that very fruitfully in advaric areas in many of the robotic stocks we are solving. So, you know, let me ask you this kind of touchy question. I have to I've spoken with your friend, colleague Jeff Hawkins, too. I mean, these I have to kind of ask, there is a bit one of you have brain inspired stuff. Yeah, and you make big claims. Yeah, big sexy claims. Yeah, there's a you know, there's critics, I mean, machine learning sub-breddit. Don't give me started on those people. There are hard I mean, criticism was good, but they're a bit they're a bit over the top. There is quite a bit of sort of skepticism and criticism. You know, is this work really as good as it promises to be? Yeah, what do you have thoughts on that kind of skepticism? Do you have comments and the kind of criticism I might have received about, you know, is this approach legit? Is this a promising approach? Yeah, or at least as promising as it seems to be, you know, advertised as? Yeah, I can comment on it. So, you know, our art scene paper is published in science, which I would argue is a very high quality journal, very hard to publish in. And usually it is indicative of the quality of the work. And I can I can I am very, very certain that the ideas that we brought together in that paper in terms of the importance of feedback connections, recursive inference, lateral connections, coming to best explanation of the scene as the problem to solve, trying to solve recognition, segmentation, all jointly in a way that is compatible with higher level cognition, top-down attention, all those ideas that we brought together into something, you know, coherent and workable in the in the world and solving a challenging, tackling a challenging problem. I think that will that will stay and that contribution I stand by, right? Now, I can I can tell you a story which is funny in the context of this, right? So, if you read the abstract of the paper and you know, the argument we are putting in, you know, we are putting in, look, current deep learning systems take a lot of training data, they don't use these insights. And here is our new model, which is not a deep neural network, it's a graphical model, it does inference, this is how the paper is, right? Now, once the paper was accepted and everything, it went to the press department in science, you know, to play as science office, we didn't do any press release when we have published it was, it went to the press department, what did the, what was the press release that they wrote up? A new deep learning model, solves captures. Solves captures. And so, so you can see where was, you know, what was being hyped in that thing, right? So, it's like, there is the, there is a dynamic in the, in the community of, you know, so that's especially happens when there are lots of new people coming into the field and they get attracted to one thing. And some people are trying to think different compared to that. So, there is some, I think skepticism is science is important and it is, you know, very much required. But it's also, it's not skepticism usually, it's mostly bandwagon effect that is happening, rather than, in, but that's not even that. I mean, I'll tell you what they react to, which is like, I'm sensitive to as well. If you look at just companies open AI, deep mind, yeah, Macarius, I mean, there's a, there's a little bit of a race to the top and hype, right? It's, it's like, it doesn't pay off to be humble. So, like, and, and the press is just irresponsible often. They just, I mean, don't give me start on the state of journalism today. Like, it seems like the people who write articles about these things, they literally have not even spent an hour on the Wikipedia article about what is new on that works. Like, they haven't invested just even the language to laziness. It's like, robots, beat humans, like, they write this kind of stuff that just, and then, and then, of course, the researchers are quite sensitive to that because it gets a lot of attention. They're like, why did this work get so much attention? You know, that's, that's over the top and people get really sensitive, you know, the same kind of criticism with, um, opening AI did work with Rubik's cube with robot that people criticized, uh, same with GPT-2 and three, they criticize, same thing with, uh, deep minds with Alpha Zero. I mean, yeah, I'm sensitive to it, but, and of course, with your work, you mentioned deep learning, but there's something super sexy to the public about brain inspired. I mean, that immediately grabs people's imagination, not even like, neural networks, but like, really brain inspired, like, brain like neural networks, that seems really compelling to people. And, um, to me as well, to the world as a narrative. And so, uh, people hook up, hook on to that. And, uh, sometimes you, uh, the skepticism engine turns on in the research community and they're skeptical. But I think putting aside the ideas of the actual performance on captures or performance on any data set, I mean, to me, all these data sets are useless anyway. It's nice to have them. Uh, but in the grand scheme of things, they're silly toy examples. The point is, is there intuition about the ideas, just like you mentioned, bringing the ideas together in the unique way? Is there something there? Is there some value there? And is it going to stand the test the time? Yes. And that's the hope. That's the hope. Uh, I'm, my confidence there is very high. I, you know, I don't treat brain inspired as a marketing term. Uh, you know, I am looking into the details of biology and, and puzzling over, uh, those things and I am, I am grappling with those things. And so it is, it is not a marketing term at all. It, you know, you can use it as a marketing term and, and people often use it. And you can get combined with them. And when, when people don't understand how we are approaching the problem, it is, it is easy to be, uh, misunderstood. And in a thing of it is, you know, purely, uh, marketing. But that's not the way uh, we are. So you really, I mean, as a scientist, you believe that if we kind of just stick to really understanding the brain, that's going to, that's the right, like you, you should constantly meditate on the, how does the brain do this? Because that's going to be really helpful for engineering intelligence systems. Yes. You need to, so I think it is, it's one input and it is, it is helpful. But you, you should know when to deviate from it too. Um, so an example is convolutional neural networks, right? Uh, convolution is not an operation brain in, uh, implements. Uh, the visual cortex is not convolutional. Visual cortex has local receptive fields, local connectivity. But they, you know, the, um, there is no translation in, in variants in the, um, uh, the network weights, um, in, in the visual cortex. That is a, computational trick, which is a very good engineering trick that we use for sharing the training between the different nodes. Um, so, uh, and, and that trick will be with us for some time. It will go away when we have, um, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, robots with eyes and heads that move. And so then the, that trick will go away. It will not be, uh, useful at that time. So, also the brain doesn't, so the brain doesn't have translational invariance. It has the focal point. I guess I think it focuses on, correct. It does, it has a phobia and, and because of the phobia, um, the, the receptive fields are not like, uh, the copying of the weights. Like the, the, the, the weights in the center are very different from the weights in the periphery. Yes, the periphery. I mean, I did this, uh, actually wrote a paper and just gotten a chance to really study peripheral, peripheral vision, which is a fascinating thing. Very under, understood thing of what the, you know, at the every level the brain does with the periphery. It does some funky stuff. Yeah. So it's, uh, it's another kind of trick than, uh, convolutional. Like it does, it, uh, it's, you know, convolutional, convolution in neural networks is a trick for efficiency, is efficiency trick. And the brain does a whole other kind of thing. Correct. Correct. So, so you need to understand the principles or processing for that. You can still apply engineering tricks. Yeah. When, where you want it to be, you don't want to be slavishly mimicking all the things of the brain. Um, and, and so yeah, so it should be one input and I think it is extremely helpful. Uh, but you, it should be the point of really understanding so that you know when to deviate from it. So okay, that's really cool. That, that's work from a few years ago. See, you, uh, you did work in New Menta, which have Hawkins, yeah, uh, with, um, hierarchical temporal memory. How is your, just if you could give a brief history, how is your view of the way, the models of the brain changed over the past few years leading up to, to now? Is there some interesting aspects where there was an adjustment to your understanding of the brain, or is it all just building atop of each other? In terms of the higher level ideas, uh, especially the one chef wrote about in the book, if you, if you blur out, right? You know, yeah, on intelligence. Right, on intelligence. If you, if you blur out the details and, and if you just zoom out and at the higher level idea, uh, things are, I would say consistent with what he wrote about, but, but many things will be consistent with that because it is, it's a blur, you know, when you, when you, you know, deep learning systems are also, you know, multi level hierarchical, all of those things, right? So, so at the, but, um, in terms of the detail, a lot of things are different, uh, and, and, and those details matter a lot. Um, so, so one point of difference I had with Jeff, uh, was, uh, how to approach, you know, how much of biological, possibility and realism do you want in the learning algorithms? Um, so, uh, when I was there, uh, this was, you know, almost 10 years ago now. So, yeah, I was really having fun. I don't know, I don't know what just things now, but 10 years ago, uh, the difference was that I did not want to be so constrained on saying, uh, my learning algorithms want to need to be biologically plausible, uh, based on some filter of biological possibility available at that time. To me, that is a dangerous cut to make because we are, you know, discovering more and more things about the brain all the time, new biophysical mechanisms, new channels, uh, are being discovered all the time. So, I don't want to upfront kill off and, uh, learning algorithm just because we don't really understand the fold, uh, the full, uh, the biophysics or whatever of how the brain learns. Exactly. Exactly. But let me ask an sergeant drop, like, what's our, what's your sense? What's our best understanding of how the brain learns? So things like back propagation, credit assignment. So, so many of these algorithms have learning algorithms have things in common, right? It is a back propagation is one way of credit assignment. There is another algorithm called expectation maximization, which is, you know, another weight adjustment algorithm, but is the your sense the brain does something like this has to. There is no way around it in the sense of saying that you do have to adjust the, the connections. So, yeah, and you're saying credit assignment, you have to reward the connections that were useful in making a correct prediction and not, yeah, I guess, what up, but yeah, it doesn't have to be differentiable. Yeah, it doesn't have to be differentiable. Yeah. But you have to have a, you know, you have a model that you start with, you have data comes in and you have to have a way of adjusting the model such that it better fits the data. Yeah. So that, that is all of learning, and some of them can be using back prop to do that. Some of it can be using, you know, very local graph changes to do that. That can be, you know, many of these learning algorithms have similar update properties locally in terms of what the neurons need to do locally. I wonder if small differences in learning algorithms have huge differences in the actual effect. So the dynamics of, I mean, sort of, the reverse, like, spiking, like, if credit assignment is like a lightning versus like a rainstorm or something, whether, whether there's a, like a looping, local type of situation with the credit assignment, whether there is, like regularization, like, how, how, how, how many injects robustness into the whole thing, like, whether it's chemical or electrical or mechanical, all those kinds of things like that. I feel like it, it that, yeah, I feel like those differences could be essential, right? It could be. It's just that you don't know enough to, on the learning side, you don't know enough to say that is definitely not the way the brain does it. Got it. So you don't want to be stuck to it. So that, yeah, so you've been open minded on that side of things. Correct. On the inference said, on the recognition said, I am much more, I'm unable to be constrained because it's much easier to do experiments because, you know, it's like, okay, he's as stimulus, you know, how many steps did it get to take the answer? I can trace it back. I can, I can understand the speed of that computation, etc. much more readily on the inference side. Got it. And then you can't do good experiments on the learning side. Correct. So that let's, let's go right into the cortical microcircuits right back. So what, what are these ideas beyond recursive cortical networks that you're looking at now? So we have made a, you know, pass through, you know, multiple of the steps that, you know, as I mentioned earlier, you know, we were looking at perception from the angle of cognition, right. It was not just perception for perception sake. How do you, how do you connect it to cognition? How do you learn concepts and how do you learn abstract reasoning? Similar to some of the things Fransua talked about, right. So, so we have taken one pass through it, basically saying, what is the basic cognitive architecture that you need to have, which has a perceptual system, which has a system that learns dynamics of the world and then has something like a routine program learning system on top of it to learn concepts. So we have built one, the, you know, the version point one of that system. This was another science robotics paper. It is, it's the title of that paper was, you know, something like cognitive programs. How do you build cognitive programs? And the application there was on manipulation or about information. It was, it was, so think of it like this. Suppose you wanted to tell a new person that you met, you don't know the language or that person uses, you want to communicate to that person to achieve some task, right. So I want to say, hey, you need to pick up all the red cups from the kitchen counter and put it here, right. How do you communicate that, right. You can show pictures. You can basically say, look, this is a starting state. The things are here. This is the ending state. And, and what does the person need to understand from that? The person need to understand what conceptually happened in those pictures from the input to the output, right. So, so we are looking at pre-verbal conceptual understanding without language. How do you, how do you have a set of concepts that you can manipulate in your head? I'm from a set of images of input and output. Can you infer what is happening in those images? Got it. With concepts that are pre-language, okay. So what does it mean for conceptually pre-language? Like, yeah. Why, why, so why, why is language so important here? So I want to make a distinction between concepts that are just learned from text, by just, just feeding brute force text. You can, you can start extracting things like, okay, cow is likely to be on grass. So those kinds of things, you can extract purely from text. But that's kind of a simple association thing rather than a concept as an abstraction of something that happens in the real world in a grounded way that I can, I can simulate it in my mind and connect it back to the real world. And you think kind of the visual, the visual world, concepts in the visual world are somehow lower level than just the language. The lower level kind of makes it feel like, okay, that's important. Like, it's more like, I would say the concepts in the visual and the motor system and the concept learning system, which if you cut off the language part, just what we learn by interacting with the world and abstractions from that, that is a prerequisite for any real language understanding. So you disagree with Shomsky? Because he says languages at the bottom, everything. No, I disagree with Shomsky completely on how many levels from universal grammar to, yeah. So that was a paper in science beyond the recursive cortical network. What other interesting problems are there? The open problems and brain inspired approaches that you're thinking about. I mean, everything is solved, right? Like, no, no, no problem is solved solved, right? I think of perception as kind of the first thing that you have to build, but the last thing that you will be actually solved. So because if you do not build perception system in the right way, you cannot build concept system in the right way. So you have to build a perception system. However wrong that might be, you have to still build that and learn concepts from there and then keep it trading. And finally, perception will get solved fully when perception, cognition, language, all those things work together, finally. So what, and so great, we talked a lot about perception, but maybe on the concept side and like common sense or just general reasoning side. Yeah. Is there some, some intuition you can draw from the brain about how we could do that? So I have, I have this classic example I give. So suppose I give you a few sentences and then ask you a question following that sentence. This is a natural language processing problem, right? So here goes. I'm telling you, a Sally pounded a nail on the ceiling. Okay. That's a sentence. Now I am asking you a question. What's the nail horizontal or vertical? Vertical. Okay. How did you answer that? Well, I imagined Sally. It was kind of hard to imagine what the hell she was doing, but I imagine I had a visual of the whole situation. Exactly. Exactly. So here, I post a question in natural language. The answer to that question was you got the answer from actually simulating the scene. Now I can go more and more detail about what Sally's standing on something while doing this. Could she have been standing on a light bulb to do this? I could ask more and more questions about this and I can ask, make you simulate the scene in more and more detail. Where is all that knowledge that you're accessing stored? It is not in your language system. It was not just by reading text, you got that knowledge. It is stored from the ability experiences that you have had from, and by the age of five, you have pretty much all of this. It is stored in your visual system, water system in a way such that it can be accessed through language. Got it. I mean, right. So here, the language is just almost the query into the whole visual cortex and that does the whole feedback thing. I mean, it is all reasoning kind of connected to the perception system in some way. You can do a lot of it by quick associations without having to go into the depth and most of the time you will be right. You can just do quick associations, but I can easily create tricky situations for you where that quick associations is wrong and you have to actually run the simulation. So the figuring out how these concepts connect, do you have a good idea of how to do that? That's exactly what one of the problems that we are working on and the way we are approaching that is basically saying, okay, you need to, so the the takeaway is that language is simulation control and your perceptual plus motor system is building a simulation of the world. So that's basically the way we are approaching it and the first thing that we built was a controllable perceptual system and we built a schema networks which was a controllable dynamic system. Then we built a concept learning system that puts all these things together into programs or abstractions that you can run and simulate. And now we are taking the step of connecting it to language and it will be very simple examples initially. It will not be the GPT-3 like examples, but it will be grounded simulation-based language. And for like the the querying would be like question answering kind of thing. Correct. And it will be in some simple world initially on you know, but it will be about, okay, can the system connect the language and ground it in the right way and run the right simulations to come up with the answer. And the goals to try to do things that for example GPT-3 couldn't do. Correct. Speaking of which, if we could talk about GPT-3 a little bit, I think it's an interesting thought-provoking set of ideas that open AI is pushing forward. I think it's good for us to talk about the limits and the possibilities in your network. So in general, what are your thoughts about this recently released very large 175 billion parameter language model? So I haven't directly evaluated it yet from what I have seen on Twitter and you know other people evaluating it. It looks very intriguing. I am very intrigued by some of the properties it is displaying and and of course the text generation part of that was already evident in GPT-2, you know that it can generate coherent text over long distances. That was but of course the weaknesses are also pretty visible in saying that okay, it is not really carrying a world state around. And you know, sometimes you get sentences like I went up the hill to reach the valley or to think about it. Like some completely incompatible statements or when you're traveling from one place to the other, it doesn't take into account the time of travel, things like that. So those things I think will happen less in GPT-3 because it is trained on even more data and so and it can do even more longer distance coherence. But it will still have the fundamental limitations that it doesn't have a world model and it can't run simulations in its head to find whether something is true in the world or not. Do you think within, so sticking a huge amount of text from the internet and forming a compressed representation, do you think in that could emerge something that's an approximation of a world model which essentially could be used for reasoning? And it's a it's a it's a I'm not talking about GPT-3, I'm talking about GPT-4, 5 and GPT-10. Yeah, I mean they will look more impressive than GPT-3. So you can if you take that to the extreme then a Markov chain of just first order and if you if you go to I'm taking the other extreme if you read Shannin's book right he has a model of English text which is based on first order Markov chains, second order Markov chains, third order Markov chains and saying that okay third order Markov chains look better than first order Markov chains. So does that mean a first order Markov chain has a model of the world? Yes, it does. So yes in that level when you go higher order models or more sophisticated structure in the model like the Transomer Networks tab, yes they have a model of the text world. But that is not a model of the world it's it's a model of the text world and it will have in interesting properties and it will be useful but just scaling it up is not going to give us a GI or natural language understanding or meaning. Well the the question is whether they're being forced to compress a very large amount of text. Yeah. Forces you to construct things that are very much like because the idea of concepts and meaning is a is a spectrum. Yeah. So in order to form that kind of compression maybe it will be forced to figure out the abstractions which look awfully a lot like the kind of things that we think about as as concepts as world models as common sense. Is that possible? No I don't think it is possible because the information is not there. So the information is is there behind the text right? No unless somebody has written on all the details about how everything works in the world to the absurd amounts like okay it is easier to walk forward than backward that you have to open the door to go out of the thing. Doctors where underwear you know unless all these things somebody has written down somewhere or you know somehow the program found it to be useful for compression from some other text the information is not there. So that's an argument that like text is a lot lower fidelity than the you know the experience of our physical world. Like. So you used word that thousand words like that was the kind of thing. Well in this case pictures aren't really so the the richest aspect of the physical world isn't even just pictures it's the it's the interactivity with the world. Yeah. It's being able to interact it's almost like it's almost like if you could interact. So I disagree what maybe I agree with you that pictures were thousand words but a thousand. You could say you could capture it with a DVD. So I wonder if there's some interactive element where a system could live in text world where it could be part of the chat be part of you know talking to people. It's interesting I mean fundamentally so you're you're making a statement about the limitation of text. I okay let's so let's say we have a text corpus that includes basically every experience we could possibly have. I mean just a very large corpus of text and also interactive components. I guess the question is whether the neural network architecture these very simple transformers but if they had like hundreds of trillions or whatever comes after a trillion parameters whether that could store the information needed. That's architecturally. Do you have like do you have thoughts about the limitation on that side of things of what neural networks. I mean so transformers you know still a feed-for-world neural network. It's a very interesting architecture which is good for text modeling and probably some aspects of video modeling but it is still a feed-for-world architecture and you believe in the feedback mechanism recursion. Oh and and also cost you know causality you know being able to do counterfactual reasoning being able to do you know intervention so which is actions in the world. So all those things require different kinds of models to be built. I don't think transformers captures that family. It is very good at statistical modeling of text and it will become better and better with more data bigger models but that is only going to get so far. Finally when you in so I had this joke on Twitter saying that hey this is a model that has read all of quantum mechanics and theory of relativity and we are asking you to do text completion or you know we are asking you to solve simple puzzles that you know when you have AGI if you if you you know that's not what you ask a system to do if it is you know we ask we'll ask the system to do experiments you know what you yeah and I'm come up with hypothesis and you know revise the hypothesis based on evidence from experiments all those things right those are the things that we want the system to do when we have AGI not solve simple puzzles. Like impressive demo some of you generating a red button in HTML right which are all useful like you know there's no not missing the usefulness. So I get by the way I'm I mean playing a little bit of a devil's advocate so calm down internet so I just I'm curious almost in which ways will a dumb but large you know on that work will surprise us. Yeah so like I'm it's kind of you're I completely agree with your intuition is just that I don't want to dogmatically like a hundred percent put all the chips there it's we've been surprised so much even the current GPT two and three are so surprising yeah the self-play mechanisms of alpha zero are really surprising and I reinforce the fact that reinforcements learning works at all to me is really surprising the fact that you own networks work at all is quite surprising given how nonlinear the spaces the fact that it's able to find local minima that are at all reasonable it's very surprising so it's uh I wonder sometimes whether us humans just want it to not the for AGI not to be such a dumb thing so I just because exactly what you're saying is like the ideas of concepts and be able to reason those concepts and and connect those concepts in like hierarchical ways and then to be able to have world models I mean just everything we're describing in human language in this poetic way seems to make sense that that is what intelligence the reasoning are like I wonder if at the core way they can be much dumber uh well finally it is still connections and messages passing over right right so in that way it's done so I guess the recursion the the feedback mechanism that does seem to be a fundamental kind of thing um yeah yeah the idea of concepts also memory correct yeah like having an episodic memory yeah yeah that seems to be an important thing so how do we get memory so yeah we have another piece of work that which came on recently on how do you form episodic memories and uh and form abstractions from them uh and we haven't figured out a you know all the connections of that to the overall cognitive architecture but um yeah what are your ideas about how you could have an episodic memory so at least it's very clear that there you need to have two kinds of memory right that that's very very clear right which is there are things that happen uh as statistical patterns in the world uh but then there is the the one timeline of things that happen only once in your life right uh and this day is not going to happen ever again and and so and that needs to be stored as a as a you know just a stream of uh string right this is this is my experience and then then the question is about how do you take that experience and connect it to the statistical part of it how do you now say that okay I experience this thing now I want to be careful about similar situations and so so you need to be able to index that similarity using your other giants that is in you know the the model of the world that you have learned although the situation came from the episode you need to be able to index the other one so uh the episodic memory being implemented as an indexing over the other uh model that you're building so the memory is remain and they uh they uh they they're an index into this like the statistical thing that you formed yeah statistical causal structural model that you've built over over time so so it's basically the idea is that uh the hippocampus is uh just storing or sequencing in a set of pointers that happens over time and then whenever you want to reconstitute that memory and evaluate the different uh uh aspects of it whether it was good bad do I need to encounter the situation again you need the cortex uh to reinstantiate to replay that memory so how do you find that memory like which direction is the important direction both directions like you know it's again by directional you know so I guess how do you retrieve the memory so this is again hypothesis right yeah we're making this so when you uh when you come to a new situation uh your your cortex is doing inference uh over in the new situation and then of course hippocampus is connected to different parts of the cortex um and and you have this deja vu situation right okay I have seen this thing before and uh and then in the hippocampus you can have an index of okay this is when it happened as I said as a timeline uh and and and then you then you use the hippocampus to drive the the similar timelines to say now I am I am rather than being driven by my current input stimuli I am going back in time and uh rewinding my experience for playing putting it but putting back into the cortex and then putting it back into the cortex of course affects what you're going to see next in your current situation. Yeah so that's that's the whole thing having a world model and then I just uh yeah uh connecting to the perception yeah it does seem to be that that's what's happening it'd be uh on the neural network side it's um it's interesting to think of how we actually do that yeah yeah so I have a knowledge base yes it is possible that you can put many of the structures into uh neural networks and we will find ways of combining properties of neural networks and graphical models so uh I mean it's already started happening yes uh graph neural networks are kind of a merge between them yeah uh and there will be more of that thing so what to me it is the direction is pretty clearly in looking at biology and the history of uh evolutionary history of intelligence it is pretty clear that okay what will need to is more structure in the models and modeling of the world and supporting dynamic inference well let me ask you uh there's a guy named Elon Musk there's a company called Neuralink and there's a general field called brain computing interfaces yeah um it's kind of uh interface between your two uh loves yes the brain and the intelligence uh so there's like very direct applications of brain computing interfaces for um people with different conditions more in the short term yeah but there's also these sci-fi futuristic kinds of ideas of AI systems being able to communicate in a high bandwidth way with the brain by directional what are your thoughts about uh neuralink and BCI in general as a as a possibility so I think BCI is a cool research area and in fact um when I got interested in brains initially when you know so I was enrolled at Stanford and when I got interested in brains it was it was through a brain uh computer interface talk that Krishna Shanoi gave that's when I even started thinking about the problem so uh so it is definitely a fascinating research idea and it is the applications are enormous right um so you know there is a science fiction scenario of you know brains directly communicating that's you know let's keep that aside for the time being uh even just the the intermediate milestones that pursuing which are very reasonable as far as I can see uh being able to control an external limb using uh uh in a direct connections from the brain and being able to write things into the brain uh so so those are all uh good steps to take and they have enormous applications you know people losing limbs being able to control prosthetics uh quadriplegic being able to control something uh so and therapeutics and you know I also know about another company working in the space uh called paradromics uh they're doing you know it's based on a different electrode array but trying to attack some of the same problems so I think it's a very also surgery correct surgically implanted electrons yeah um so uh yeah I think of it as a very very promising field especially when it is helping people overcome uh some limitations now at some point of course it will advance the level of being able to communicate uh how hard is that problem do you think like so so okay let's say we magically solve what I think is a really hard problem of doing all of this safely yeah so so like being able to connect electrodes and not just thousands but like millions to the brain yeah I think it's very very hard because you also do not know what the what will happen to the brain with that right in the sense of how does the brain adapt to something like that and it's you know as we were learning it's the brain is quite uh in terms of neuro plasticity is pretty malleable correct so it's gonna adjust correct so the machine learning side the computer side is gonna adjust and then the brain is gonna adjust exactly and then what what soup does this land us into is the kind of the kind of hallucinations you might get from this there might be pretty intense yeah yeah so uh just connecting to all of Wikipedia it's interesting whether we need to be able to figure out the basic protocol of the brain's communication schemes in order to get them to the machine and the brain to talk because another possibility is the brain actually just adjust to whatever the heck the computer is doing exactly that's the way I think that I find that to be a more promising way it's basically saying you know okay attach electrodes to some part of the cortex okay and make sure maybe if it is done from birth the brain will adapt it says that you know that part is not damaged it was not used for anything these electrodes are attached there right and now you you train that part of the brain to do this high bandwidth communication between something else right and and uh if you do it like that I then it is brain adapting to and of course your external system is designed so that it is adaptable you know just like we you know design computers or mouse keyboard all of them to be interacting with humans so of course that feedback system is designed to be human compatible but um now it is not trying to record from the all of the brain and uh you know now you know two system trying to adapt to each other it's a brain adapting it to one way so it's fascinating the brain is connected to like the internet it's connected yeah just imagine it's connecting it to twitter and just just just taking that stream yeah of information um yeah but again if we take a step back I don't know what your intuition is I feel like that is not as hard of a problem as the doing it safely there's there's a huge barrier to surgery right because because the biological system it's it's a it's a mush of like weird stuff correct so that the surgery part of it by algebra the long term repercussions part of it again I don't know what else will you know we we often find uh after a long time uh in biology that okay that idea was strong right you know so people used to cut off this uh the gland called the thymus or something and uh then they found that oh no that actually causes cancer yeah and then there's a subtle like millions of variables involved but this whole process the nice thing and just like again with Elon just like colonizing Mars seems like a ridiculously difficult idea but in the process of doing it we might learn a lot about the biology of the neurobiology of the brain the neuroscience side of things it's like if you want to learn something do the most difficult version of it yeah see what you learn the intermediate steps that they are taking sounded all very reasonable to me yeah yeah it's great well but like everything with Elon is the time-lizing insanely fast so that's the only awful question uh well one we've been talking about cognition a little bit so like reasoning we haven't mentioned the other c word which is consciousness uh do you ever think about that one do is that useful at all uh in this whole context of what it takes to create an intelligent reasoning being or is that completely outside of your uh like the engineer perspective of intelligence uh it is not outside the realm but it doesn't on a day-to-day basis inform what we do but it's more so in many ways the company name is connected to this idea of consciousness like what's the company name like he is you know so vikyrus is the company name and uh and so what does vikyrus mean right it's um uh at the first level it is about modeling the world and uh and it is internalizing the external actions so so you interact with the world and learn a lot about the world and now after having learned a lot about the world you you can run those things in your mind without actually having to uh act in the world so you can run uh things vikyrus just in your in your in your brain and similarly you can experience another person's thoughts by you know having a model of how that person works and uh and running their you know putting yourself in some other person's shoes so that is being vikyrus now it's the same modeling apparatus that you're using to model the external world or some other person's thoughts you can turn it to yourself you can up you know if that same modeling thing is applied to your own modeling apparatus uh then that is what gives rise to consciousness i think well that's more like self-awareness there's the hard problem of consciousness which is like when the model becomes when when the model feels like something when the full process is like it act it's like you really are in it you feel like an entity in this world not just you know that you're an entity but it feels like something to be that entity it um it you know and thereby we attribute this you know then this starts to be where in something that has consciousness can suffer you start to have these kinds of things that we can reason about that yes much much heavier it seems like there's much greater cost as your your decisions and like mortality is tied up into that like the fact that these things end right that first of all i end at some point and then other things end and you know that that somehow seems to be at least for us humans a deep motivator yes and that you know that that idea of motivation in general we talk about goals in AI but right the goals aren't quite the same thing as like the our mortality it feels like it feels like first of all humans don't have a goal and they just kind of create goals at different levels they like make up goals because we're terrified by the mystery of the thing that gets us all so we make these goals up so we're like a goal generation machine as opposed to a machine which optimizes the trajectory towards a singular goal so it feels like that's an important part of cognition that whole mortality well it is it's a part of human cognition but there is no reason for that mortality to come to the question for a artificial system because we can copy the artificial system the problem with humans is that we I can't clone you I can I can I can I can clone even if I clone you as a you know the the hardware your experience that was stored in your brain your episodic memory all those will not be captured in the in the new clone so but that's not the same with an AI system right so but it's also possible that the the thing that you mentioned with us humans is actually fund them of fundamental importance for intelligence so like the fact that you can copy an AI system yeah means that that AI system is not yet a GI so like they're it could so if you look at existence proof yeah if we if we reason yeah based on existence proof with you could say that it doesn't feel like death is a fundamental property of an intelligent system got it but we don't yet give me an example of an immortal intelligent being we don't have those it could it's very possible that you know that's that is a fundamental property of intelligence is a thing that has a deadline for itself you can think of it like this so suppose you invent a way to freeze people for a long time it's not dying right so so you can be frozen and woken up thousands of years from now so it's not here of death well no the you're still it's not it's not about time it's about the knowledge that it's temporary uh-huh and the that aspect of it the finiteness of it I think um creates a kind of urgency correct for us for humans yeah for humans yes and that that is part of our drives but um and that's why I'm not too worried about AI you know uh having motivations to kill all humans and those kinds of things why just wait you know so why do you need to do that yeah I've never heard that before that's a good good point yeah it just murders seems like a lot of work we just wait it wait it out I've probably heard themselves let me ask you um people often kind of wonder world-class researchers such as yourself what kind of books technical fiction philosophical were um had an impact on you in your life and uh maybe once you could probably possibly recommend that others read maybe if you have three books that pop in the mind yeah so I definitely liked uh Judea Pills book uh probabilistic reasoning and intelligence systems it's um it's a very deep technical book but what I liked is that in so there are many places where you can learn about probabilistic graphical models from but throughout this book Judea Pills kind of sprinkles his philosophical observations and and he thinks about how connects us to how the brain things and attentions and resources all those things so so that whole thing uh makes it more interesting to read uh he emphasizes the importance of causality so that was in his later book so this was the first book probabilistic reasoning in intelligence systems he mentions causality but he hadn't really sunk his teeth into like you know how do you actually formalize scar yeah and uh the second book causality is 2000 more uh the one in 2000 that one is really hard so I wouldn't recommend that uh oh yes so that looks at the like the mathematical like his model of uh Duke calculus Duke calculus yeah I was pretty dense mathematics right right uh the book of why is definitely more enjoyable for sure yeah um so yeah so I would I would recommend probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems another book I liked was uh one from Doug Huffstarter uh this is a long time ago though he has a book he had a book I think called it was called the Minds Eye it was probably Huffstarter and Daniel Denet together uh yeah so and I actually was uh I bought that book it's a much I haven't read it yet but I uh I couldn't get an electronic version of it which is annoying because I read everything on kindo okay uh I had to actually purchase the physical it's like one of the only physical books I have because yeah anyway there's a lot of people recommended it highly so yeah and the third one uh I would definitely recommend reading is um this is not a technical book it is history it's called it's the name of the book I think is Bishops Boys it's about Wright Brothers and uh and they're they're their path and how it was uh it's there are multiple books on this topic and all of them are great it's uh uh fascinating how uh flight was uh uh you know treated us an unsolvable problem and and and also you know what aspects did people emphasize uh you know people thought oh it is all about uh just powerful engines you know just need to have powerful lightweight engines uh and um so you know some people thought of it as how far can we just throw the thing you know just throw it yeah yeah so uh so it is it's a very fascinating and even after they uh made the invention like you know people not believing it and uh uh uh the social aspect so yeah yeah social aspect because it's a different you know very passionate do you uh draw any parallels between you know birds fly so there's the natural approach to uh to flight and then there's the engineered approach do you um do you see the same kind of thing with the brain and are trying to engineer intelligence yeah it's a good analogy to have uh of course all analogies have their you know uh so so sure so people in uh you know AI often uh use airplanes as an example of hey we didn't learn anything from birds look right there yeah but the the funny thing is that uh and and the the saying is uh airplanes don't flap wings yeah right this is what they say the funny thing and the ironic thing is that that you don't need to flap to fly is something right where they're found by observing birds yeah so they they have in their notebook you know in some of these uh books they show their their notebook drawings right they they make detailed notes about buzzards uh just soaring over uh thermals yeah they basically say look flapping is not the important the proposition is not the important problem to solve here we want to solve control uh and uh once you solve control proposition will fall into place all of all of these are people you know they realize this by observing birds beautiful part that's actually brilliant uh because people do use that analogy I'm gonna have to remember that one do you have a advice for people interested in artificial intelligence like young folks today I talked to undergraduate students all the time uh interested neuroscience and engineering in uh understanding how the brain works is there advice you would give them about their career maybe about their life uh sure I think every you know every piece of advice should be taken with a pint of salt of course because you know each person is different their motivations are different uh but I can I can definitely say if your goal is to understand the brain from the angle of wanting to build one you know uh then uh being an experimental neuroscience this might not be the way to go about it it might a better way to pursue it might be through um computer science electrical engineering machine learning and AI and of course you have to study up the neuroscience but that you can do on your own um if you are more uh attracted by finding something intriguing about discovering something intriguing about the brain uh then of course it is uh better to be an experimentalist uh so find that motivation what are you intrigued by and of course find your strengths too some people are very good experimentalist uh and and they enjoy doing that uh and essentially to see which department if you're if you're picking in terms of like your education path whether to um to go with like an MIT it's a branding computer uh no uh the BCS yeah brain and cognitive science yeah uh or or the CS side of things right and actually uh the brain folks the neuroscience folks are more and more now embracing of uh you know learning tensor flow and pintorge right there they they see the power of uh trying to engineer ideas uh that uh that they get from the brain into and then explore how those could be used to uh to create intelligent systems so that might be the right department actually yeah to uh so this was a question in uh uh you know one of the Red Bull neuroscience institute workshops or uh that Jeff Hawkins organized uh almost 10 years ago this question was put to a panel right what what should be the undergrad major uh you should take if you want to understand the brain and uh and the majority opinion that one was uh electrical engineering interesting uh because i mean i'm a doubly undergrad so i got lucky in that way but it i think it does have some of the right ingredients because you learn about circuits you learn about how you can construct circuits to uh you know approach you know do functions uh you learn about microprocessors um you learn information theory you learn signal processing uh you learn continuous math so um so in that way it's it's a good step to if you want to go to computer science or neuroscience you can it's it's a good step the downside you're more likely to be forcey's matlab so so one of the one of the interesting things about i mean this is changing the world is changing but uh like certain departments lagged on the programming side of things on developing good uh good happens as a software engineering but i think that's more and more changing and and students can take the enter their own hands like learn to program i feel like everybody should learn to program because it uh it like everyone in the sciences because it empowers it puts the data at your fingertips so you can organize it you can find all kinds of things in the data and then you can also for the appropriate sciences build systems that like based on that so like then engineer intelligence systems uh we already talked about mortality so we hit them in a ridiculous uh point but let me ask you the uh uh you know one of the things about intelligence is it's goal driven and uh you study the brain so the question is like what's the goal that the brain is operating under what's what's the meaning of it off us humans in your view what's the meaning of life the meaning of life is what about you consta count of it it's completely open it's open so there's nothing uh uh like you mentioned you like constraints so there's what's uh it's it's wide open is there is there some useful aspect that you think about in terms of like the openness of it and just the basic mechanisms of generating goals um in studying cognition in the brain that you think about or is it just about because everything we've talked about kind of the perception system is to understand the environment that's like to be able to like not die kind of exactly like not fall over and like be able to uh you don't think we need to um think about anything bigger than that yeah I think so because it's it's basically being able to understand the machinery of the world uh such that you can push to whatever goals you want right so the machinery of the world is is really ultimately we should be uh striving to understand the rest is just the rest is just whatever the yeah you want to do or whatever whatever fun you are is culturally popular i think that's uh i that's beautifully put i don't think there's a better way to end it delete i'm so honored that you you show up here and waste your time with me it's been awesome conversation thanks so much for talking today oh thank you so much this was this was so much more fun than i expected thank you thanks for listening to this conversation with delete george and thank you to our sponsors babble rake on airbos and masterclass please consider supporting this podcast by going to babble.com and use code lex going to buy rake on.com slash lex and signing up at masterclass.com slash lex click the links get the discount it really is the best way to support this podcast if you enjoyed this thing subscribe on youtube review the five stars and upper podcast supporting on patreon connect with me on twitter. Alex Friedman spelled yes without the e just f-r-i-d-m-a-n and now let me leave you with some words from Marcus Aurelius you have power over your mind not outside events realize this and you will find strength thank you for listening and hope to see you next time