 The following is a conversation with Josh Barnett, one of the greatest fighters in submission wrestlers in history, with an epic 25-year career that includes being the UFC Heavyweight Champion and countless other accolades. He also happens to be one of the most intelligent and brutally honest human beings in all of martial arts, and especially so about his appreciation of and fascination with violence. Quick mention of our sponsors, which feels ridiculous to say after that introduction, Monk Pack Low Carb Snacks, Element Electrally Drinks, 8 Sleep Self-Coling mattress, and Rev Transcription and Captionary Service. Click the sponsor links to get a discount at the support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that I've been a fan of Josh Barnett for a long time. This conversation was indeed a long time coming and I'm sure we'll talk many times again. For what is worth, I'm a student of combat sports and admire when they're done at the highest level, either through masterful execution of skill or relentless dominance of pure guts. For context, I'm a Black Belt in Jiu-Jitsu and have competed in wrestling, submission grappling, Jiu-Jitsu, Jiro, and even catch wrestling, which is a variant of submission grappling that Josh is one of the great practitioner scholars and teachers of. I could probably talk for hours about what I've learned from my time on the mat, but if I were to say one thing, it is that the mat is honest. You can't run away from yourself when you step on the mat. It reveals your fears, the lies you might tell yourself, all the delusions you might have, or at least I had, that there's anything in this world that can be achieved except through blood, sweat, and tears. That honesty, taken to the highest levels, as is the case with Josh, creates the most special of human beings, and definitely someone who's fascinating to talk to. If you enjoyed this thing, subscribe by YouTube, review it on Apple Podcasts, follow on Spotify, support on Patreon, or connect with me on Twitter, Alex Friedman. As usual, I do a few minutes of ads now, not in the middle. I'll try to make it more fun as time goes on, but if you skipped, still check out the links in the description. It really is the best way to support this podcast. This episode is brought to you by Monkpack, Keto Granola bars that contain just one gram of sugar, two grams of net carbs, and there are only 140 calories. I've been on all kinds of diets my whole life. I did maybe in college, there was like a powerlifting phase where I would eat like four or five, maybe six meals a day, protein and veggies, just small meals. That was like the what I would call, like the bro diet. And then I think when I started training Jiu Jitsu, especially hard, I discovered fasting. And that was a game changer. I think I realized that I have to become more and more scholar of my own body as opposed to sort of consuming the nutrition science that's out there. So you have to use kind of the basic knowledge of nutrition science that people are talking about all the different debates. You have to consume that as a base starting point, but ultimately you have to become a scholar of your own body. And at least for me throughout that, the number one priority is to not stress too much about it. So anyway, that's to give you a little bit of context of where I'm coming from with all this diet stuff. Okay, back to whatever I'm supposed to say in this ad read. Get 20% off your first purchase of any Monkpack product by visiting Monkpack.com and entering code, you guess the Lex at checkout. If you don't like it, they'll exchange your product or refund your money guaranteed. That's Monkpack.com and enter code Lex. This episode is also brought to you by element electrolyte drink mix spelled LMNT. Just like with my last name, they don't have an E in their name. To do low carb diets correctly, the number one thing you have to get right in my opinion is the electrolytes, specifically sodium potassium magnesium. That's where these guys come in. They take care of it. I don't have to think about it. And it's kind of fascinating. So both in the fast thing in the keto in general, how much of a difference of electrolytes and like sodium potassium magnesium can make? You can really feel shady. That's like the keto fluid that they talk about. You feel terrible. And almost in a matter of minutes, if you consume salt with water, you just feel much better. I'm sure other people have this experience, especially if you do like long distance running, that kind of thing. Electrolites are magic. They can make the difference between sadness and happiness. Okay, Olympians use a tech people use it. I swear about this stuff. Try it at drink element dot com slash Lex. That's drink LMNT dot com slash Lex. This episode is sponsored by A Sleep and it's pod pro mattress. It controls temperature with an app. It's packed with sensors. It can cool down to as low as 55 degrees. I need side of the bed separately. You can also heat up to some ridiculous temperature, but I don't know why you would want to do that. I got to be honest about power and apps. They have been amazing recently. I've been basically doing this thing where I sleep for like six hours and then do a nap for maybe 30 minutes to an hour. There's no signs to it. I just enjoy it. Like a big warm blanket with a cool bed. That's like the definition of heaven. I also like that whole idea of making the things where we rely on smarter and smarter like a smart bed, which is what this says with a bunch of sensors. It's almost like taking broadly. It's actually kind of expanding the compute surface of our lives. And so basically everything around this becomes a computer and it integrates. There's of course privacy, surveillance, all those kinds of questions but we can't run away from them. We have to face them. Just because things are difficult. This doesn't mean we should like do the ostrich thing and hide from them. It's coming. Let's embrace it. But let's be serious adults slash serious engineers about it. 8th-thief has a pod pro cover so you can just add it to your mattress without having to buy the errors, but theirs is pretty nice. I gotta tell you. It can track a bunch of metrics like heart rate variability, but the cooling alone is honestly worth the money. Go to 8sleep.com slash Lex to get special savings. That's 8sleep.com slash Lex. This show is also brought to you by Rev and Rev.ai, which is by many metrics the best speech detects the AI engine in the world. Rev in general is a company that does captioning and transcription of audio by humans and by artificial intelligence. I've been hanging out on clubhouse on occasion recently and it's kind of interesting to think of this kind of technology being used in all kinds of contacts like during meetings, for example, like zoom meetings, but at clubhouse to be able to take a conversation, see this is where like privacy comes into play with consent of the speakers, which of course journalists often ignore this kind of notion of consent and transcribe the conversations so they can be consumed and analyze and thought about more broadly. One way to deal with cancel cultures to run away from it, the other way is to run into it and deal with our ridiculousness with our hypocrisy with all the mess of human nature. So I'm a big fan of technologies that allow us to go through the fire as opposed to run away from the fire. Rev has processed over 16 billion minutes of audio and video to date. Rev.ai is the API part of Rev that allows you to use speech detects programmatically as a service. You can check out how well Rev AI performs in a seven day free trial at Rev.ai slash Lex. You can tell English is my second language, although I can't speak Russian that well either. I'm hopelessly lost in this problem of human communication. So again, that's Rev.ai slash Lex the tap into the world's most accurate speech AI. And now here's my conversation with Josh Barnett. Who were the philosophers and philosophical ideas that influence you the most? Are we just jumping right in that right in the deep before play on camera? I had an interesting philosophical journey. At least I think it's interesting. And that was I think as far as organized philosophy or maybe authentic authentic not the right word, but like we'll say organized. I would say that Nietzsche is probably one of the people with the most influence on me. But I also feel like to a degree, your personality will oftentimes dictate what philosophers that you can vibe with. So what what ideas from Nietzsche was it the Ubermatch? Definitely the Ubermatch is huge to me because I see it as an extension of basically the religious concepts of God and higher ideals, but just put into a different secular context. And the idea also that the Ubermatch is striving and overcoming something that you're always working towards that very few will ever. It's not like the the concept that you can just make them. It doesn't happen that way. And it's not based simply upon if you were say put through a genetic program and and turned into a super soldier, like I wouldn't that wouldn't make it. You know, that's like the the the very surface level and incorrect understanding what the Ubermatch is. The Ubermatch is the idea of this this kind of human that transcends all the the weaker lower aspects of humans, which were full of. But I also think that there's an element in Nietzsche's writing that suggests that it's not something you can even be in all the time. Like it's even a temporary state because it's not something that we're capable of maintaining. It's something to strive for. Like a morality, an image, the ideal set of principles that we can connect to that doesn't rely on otherworldly kind of out there things. Yeah. With Nietzsche, I feel like the concept of the Ubermatch is something built on authenticity as well. It's Heiterger, it was like, doesign, right? So when you are authentic and Heiterger being a follower of Nietzsche's and highly influenced by him, with I think that the Ubermatch is an example of authenticity in that it isn't about trying to be anything that you cannot be or to go against who you are, but to actually understand that, accept that and then work with what you can work with and create from your lump of clay that is you. Because I can't become certain, there's certain things that are just not going to happen for me because it's not in my proclivity. I mean, I'm never going to be five foot tall and 120 pounds. I mean, that again. I guess. But I know, but as you get more in tune with who you are, as you start learning more about what unique things or at least what that combination that makes you that gestalt part of yourself, what those things are and how you can use them, then you can work towards being that, taking what that is and seeing if you can get to that point. Now, the likelihood is, no, maybe probably never. I mean, but we can never achieve Godhood yet. Religion is a constant striving and a look at a higher ideal concept, even if it's multiple gods or one god, it's still essentially all built around this concept. Like, I like the idea of Catholics, original sin. If you think of sin not as evil, but as missing the mark, the archer's term where it derives or even like in Spanish without. So as being, if you accept that you are imperfect, if you accept that you need to constantly strive even against yourself, because you will figure out the best ways at which to submarine your own capabilities, submarine your own dreams and wishes and whatever. You will ruin them more than anything else. And you will tell yourself that you ruined them on purpose for a good reason, or you'll say that you'll figure out a way to put it on everything else but yourself. And so the idea of thinking of, well, as I'm starting off on this whole thing, I got a lot of work to do. And that's just the way it is. And I got to figure out what areas those are going to be. And so, you know, I thought, if I think of a original sin actually can be, that can be kind of a clever idea, but it's also just accepting that we're all uniquely strange and unequal in our own ways. But we have to figure out how that fits in. The word authenticity kind of connects to all of that. So striving to be your authentic self means figuring out exactly the shape of the flaws. The character of your little demons you get to play with and around them finding a path to whatever the hell. Ideal versions of yourself you can carve and pretending like that's such a thing as even possible. The other idea about Nietzsche is on his idea of morality. He presents the argument that morality is a human illusion and that, you know, there's not such a thing as good and evil. And these are all kind of constructs. Do you think there's such a thing as good and evil that's connected to some objective reality? I think that there are some, I actually do believe that there are some universals. I'm not Kantian in any way, but I do think that there are some universals. And the thing that actually brought me to even the concept of that was Jung. So, you know, Jung's concept of the collective unconsciousness. And then taking that thought and then applying it to looking through history. And the most varied history you can find. So I would say probably religion is your earliest one to that you can get for written history or written examples of human behavior and psychology at the furthest that we can look into it with from man's hand to whatever the medium is, uniform or whatever. But as you do that and then let's say going from Mesopotamia to India to Europe to and just going from all these places as disparate as they may seem as many different cultures and ethnicities and religions and how the religions will vary quite a bit from monotheist to polytheist and so on and so forth. But then just seeing how there's all the through lines and of course Campbell, he did this much earlier than me thinking about it. But I think that by looking at things that way and starting to find the threads instead of always just looking at everything as being its own compartmentalized concept, if it only applies to this time, this people like getting overly pomo about it is just a really idiotic postmodern. So you think that there is just like Joseph Campbell, there's a thread that connects all of these stories, narratives that we construct the far ourselves as we evolve and that thread is grounded in some kind of absolute ideas of maybe on the morality side which is the trickiest one I'm good at evil. Yeah, I think that a lot of this stuff is just derived from a biological perspective. I feel like these things are innate within us. Do you think our innately humans are good? No, I don't. I feel like I also feel like there's an issue of scale too. Like Nassim Taleb likes to talk about how he views his the way he interacts with groups in terms of scale. What is this thing about at the familial level? I'm a communist and at the civic level, I'm a Republican or something at that other level and then it goes on at the widest level he's a libertarian or something of that in our nature. Like fundamental human interaction changes on scale and scale and also from subjective to the environment around them. So and I don't even mean environment just in the sake of physical environment nature. Like nature is constantly trying to murder you. Well, it's not really trying. It's just nature is being nature. The universe is the universe and at times it takes you out. It's just not with any particular compunction or prejudice. It just oops, sorry, there's no more dodo's. My bad. Well, don't you think the particular flavor of the complexity that is the human mind was created like let me make an argument for that all people are fundamentally good. Okay. Is there's an evolutionary advantage to being, to striving to cooperate, to add more love into the world of like compassion, empathy, all that kind of stuff and that the very thing that created the human mind was this evolutionary advantage. What have the forces become this evolutionary advantage and scale? Yes. So when we're dealing with a small tribe, sure. Yeah. When you meet another tribe, maybe there are other factors that are going to end to that. Let's say you scale up and so your 150 has exceeded their 150 and like you start to get to a certain point where you can't really be close enough to someone down the line of some of that next like that 150's 150, 150 and they just now all of a sudden become some some guy, whatever. And when it comes to some guy at once it starts hitting scale. I don't know that it's capable. People can be as as magnanimous to a stranger as to the known. If they orient themselves to be secure enough because it does come a security insecurity and one way or the other either brought on by the unknown, brought on by an actual threat brought on by even their own as we would use the word insecurity in that their own insecurity within their own capabilities, their own belief in themselves. All these things can change things from being compassionate and what have you to at least at the very least, maybe not evil but self-interest driven to the point of a negative results for those that aren't, you know what I mean? Right. But another way to frame that is maybe it's less about scale and more about the amount of resources available. So if we're overflowing with resources in terms of security and safety, all the things you've mentioned, if we have more than enough resources than the way which we treat a stranger, the way we position ourselves towards that stranger might be in a way that allows us to be our real human selves as opposed to sort of our animal self. And therefore it's mostly about how clever can we descend and survey its beat in coming up with all cool kinds of technologies and ways to officially use the resources we have such that we're not constrained. And my hope is that we can, that human innovation will outpace the growth of our, the number of people that are starving for resources. Yes, I think that there's a lot of rationality behind this argument. And in some ways I agree, and in a lot of ways I see it as missing the point of how this experiment has been playing out across time. When you look at what for one, it's like defying resources. What is a resource of humans would define it, right, or wealth even. And so you can say, well, an iPhone is a resource, the internet is a resource, water obviously is a resource. But if we weigh them, what is more important to human beings? Water, internet, or iPhones, it's water, right? So if we look at resources, if we start with what do human beings need to live? I mean, actually live, not live here in this bullshit fantasy creation extension of our own ingenuity and, you know, a prison of our own creation and also a paradise of our own creation. But this is not how human beings normally live. This is all built upon stuff on, on, this built on concept on idea and some, and some of its built on just, well, this is the paradigm. So this is what you do. Human beings need food, they need water to survive, they need shelter from the elements. And they need certain skills to perpetuate these things and be able to pass them down so that they can, so that these things don't become, you don't end up in this gap where you have to relearn things because if it's lost, then that time before you can get it back again is going to be a dark ages of sorts, you know, or it's going to be highly detrimental to, to your group because not knowing how to fish, not knowing how to hunt, not knowing how to even clean and cook the game once you have it could be lethal. That's fascinating. I think that is a basic resource. The knowledge to attain the very low level things of water. Right. And we'll figure it out. We did it once before and we've done it over and over and over and over again. Just costly. Yes, it has costs for sure. But when you think of how you look at the, we'll just deal with the first world of the West, you look at the path line, the pathway of Western civilization and its growth and then you look at how technology injected into it over time, how it magnifies things or pushes things at orders of magnitude faster. And then the internet comes along and even faster, you know. So you're watching Industrial Revolution too. What is it? The capacitor and then so on. It goes further and further. And as the internet and technology, especially on electronic side of things, start increasing in capability, it massively outpaces even our necessity for it at times. It becomes, you know, plant obsolescence happens quicker and over and over and over again. And wealth increases, increases, increases, increases in terms of the things that we're able to acquire. Right. I mean, I've seen homeless people with smartphones, you know. So we're living in the most wealth laden, luxury laden age of all of humanity yet. What happens when we see calamity or people going hard time? What are the things that they value? What are the people go to an argument about the cost of things that are luxury items generally and not necessity items? You know, we get into fights about things that are at the end of the day, not necessities to us. You know, people are so concerned about Netflix and the internet and personally, I'm very concerned about the internet because I look at it as my own little personal library of Alexandria in my pocket. That's what I love about it. And the ability to have a tool as effective as it is, even though I'm in a constant battle to not let that tool become a vice or to become something that that actually bring me to a lower state. But we will. The question is over the, are we willing to murder each other over Netflix versus murder each other over water? We're willing to murder each other over water. That's a given. Right. But that's our animalistic selves. Well, it's also a necessity for it's animalistic, but it's also either you do it or you don't. Right? Like unless somebody's willing to share that water or if that water is of such a limited capability or such a limited amount, then you will have to murder to have that one. Netflix, the argument is the higher we get up to this hierarchy of what we consider in Los Angeles resources. Yes, we were less willing to commit violence. We're less willing to commit violence that, oh, I would say over Netflix, but we are willing to commit violence over Netflix over everything associated with Netflix over televisions, over sneakers, over, over, you know, I mean, when we look at a good, I mean, the majority of the stuff that came with the riots, I mean, it was use car dealerships, targets. I mean, and then you look and it's like, well, okay, what are people? What do they got? What are they? So hell bent to get out of this whole thing. And I'm even talking about the ideological elements or anything like that. Just like, okay, something's going on, boom, looting, whatever. Yeah, you know, what are you going to loop? Yeah, you know, you'll have AOC say, oh, people need bread. I mean, I didn't see a single loaf of bread. You know, I saw televisions and poetry jobs. But to me, it is poetry in a sense because you get to see who we, how we actually are operating, you know, what are, what is becoming first principles to most people. But wait, wait, but you could also argue that those riots were more like the madness of crowds, which is definitely a lot more than just that. I'm just saying that given a chance, it's like, okay, boom, the lights are off, the grid is down. We've hacked into the whole system. Turn into an 80s movie. And you have the ability to go get a hold of whatever it is that you think is most important. And what do we do? And I say we, as in, you know, including all of us, we grab a TV. We, we attack it. We, we, we break into a sneaker store in Melrose. We do, it's just like, we still giant cause statues where the value of that is completely market driven. Like, it's just a piece of polypropylene or whatever, butyl. And, you know, it's cool. I'm big fan of art. But it's like, you know, I can't eat that. And at the end of the day, man, you're sitting there with your, like, what'd you do today, honey? What'd you get? You know, man, we were able to, you know, oh, I got this, I got this designer art statue. Are you going to go, well, you can't really sell it on the, on like the art markets where people were really going to pay for it. So are you going to become an underground art dealer with your one piece of cause art? One interesting thing just said before I forget it, you mentioned the library of Alexandria and your phone. Well, your phone, but also just thinking of your little world that you're creating for yourself on the internet. This is a really powerful way to actually raise it. One of the things that, you've been on Joe Rogan several times. Although, everybody always comes to me, oh, that was so great. I didn't know. You're on Joe Rogan. I go, this is like my fifth time, dude. I've been a fan of yours for a long time from from other avenues. This is a long time coming, actually. Everybody, you have no idea, like how many times through messaging and missing each other over the years. This is ridiculous. This is a long time coming. You don't realize how special this is for us. This is a, well, I'm also a starstruck. We'll talk about this, but you symbolize something very important to me through my journey, through wrestling, through jiu-jitsu, through judo, through just street fighting, through just combat. There's a, you're the, in some sense, the devil on my shoulder of violence in a good, in a devil gets a bad rap. It does. He does get a bad rap. I realize, you know, sitting in case, and ice down at that low ass level, you know. Yeah. But, you know, the angel side is more like the athletic, the sport, the science, the the technical, the chess side of things. But on the library, Alexander, let me ask, because you're on Joe Rogan, it does make me really sad. And I realize that I'm just probably being romantic, that his, most of his library of interviews that were on YouTube have not been taking down, because he wouldn't Spotify. And that was the first, I'm probably an idiot, but it was the first time I realized that this knowledge that we've been building up on the internet doesn't necessarily last forever. No, it doesn't. Unless you preserve it. I mean, it's like all things. If you do not preserve them, if you do not make efforts, you know, so many of my, it just really brings to mind around the top of my head, so many friends of mine that are Jewish, you know, they're basically secular. But yet, through even the secular aspect of just keeping the traditions alive, it's like, well, you could always pick a book and read about it. Read about it. Clearly, it's called the Torah. But if you don't put these things into action, if you don't make them a part of your consciousness, maybe even on the subconsciousness, just through repetition, they will die. They will become simply something that exists somewhere until you find it again. And Carl got used to say something. He would say that I don't invent moves. I just rediscover them. But yet, gotch and Billy Robinson also would understand that you, if someone's not carrying the torch, it'll go out. Now, it doesn't mean fire can't be rekindled. It just means that that torch no longer is lighting the way on this knowledge. And so it's important to be an individual, even on an individual level, to be a repository for aspects of knowledge. You mentioned, God, you consider yourself catch wrestler. So I've mentioned to you offline that I competed in a couple of catch-rests tournaments. Can we go Wikipedia level at the very basic year, the exactly right person to ask what is catch wrestling and what are its defining principles? I would say the easiest way for us to talk about and give an overview of what catch is, and the simplest terms is think of collegiate wrestling with submissions. That is essentially what catch is. And it's not surprising because collegiate wrestling is actually derived from catch's catch can. It's just that over time, certain aspects were removed from the competition structure so that they became null elements, things that were discarded. But it's funny that you can take high level amateur collegiate types and you can show them a move and then add a little bit to it and go, oh, well, hey, that was just like what we already do here, but except, oh, I didn't know you could take it all the way to this point or things of that nature, especially when it comes to professional wrestling, like teaching people like, no, I know you're just using this in a show, but this is actually a real move and here's how it really feels. And so collegiate wrestling and wrestling in general for people who are not aware is basically two people starting their feet and they have to score, trying to take each other down and they have to score points along the way. You can end matches by pinning them, for example, on their back. I think one way to describe wrestling is it's very much about figuring out ways to establish control and leverage in these kind of tie ups or there's different styles where you can do more from a distance to where it's more about the timing and all that kind of stuff. Ultimately, it's an art of like both upper body and lower body and you could choose the different puzzles that you solve there. You could be attacking the head, the arms, you could be attacking the legs. There's also part of collegiate wrestling that's on the ground that has more, what's called like a referee's position over there. Right. The referee's position where you're on your hands and knees, basically. And so do you understand what that's supposed to simulate? Why is that one of the standard positions? It's one of the standard positions because one is one of the easiest ways to actually get up. But two, it's because you cannot be on your back. If you're on your back, you're getting pinned. And the back exposure or being pinned is pretty much the universal wrestling thing. One, taking the guy from their feet to the floor and two, pinning them. As you go from like, was it Cornish wrestling, Turkish oil wrestling, Mongolian, sumo, Indian, what I call it, Pelwani. It's also called kushti, jujitsu, judo. So many of them is, there's a Yvesambo. Even if it doesn't end the match, it's still like one of the most important aspects of the competition itself across. So, but every style. And this is where submission, like catch wrestling or submission wrestling or jujitsu feels different, which it seems like for most wrestling, for a lot of wrestling, the dominance is the goal as opposed to submission, which I guess those are two are related, but dominating the position. So that's what pinning is. It's almost like breaking your opponent, like breaking through all of their defenses to where they're completely defenses and you could do anything with them that you want. Maybe it's a, we could be a definition of dominance, I don't know. And then it sounds very much like a chain to a radiator. Yeah. Yeah, there's a threat that connects all the winners. But submission feels different. I mean, it is actually different when you think about it across the landscape. I don't think radically different, but distilled, slightly different in that if you think of wrestling as being derived from, from, from combat, right? So, well, it is combat sports, but more lethal combat. Getting somebody off their feet and onto their back is about a lethal place for the person on bottom to be in general. I mean, I don't, don't come at me with your talks about your fucking worm guards and blah, blah, blah, and whatever fit spider, barram. Okay, get out of here with that. This is, we're not talking about you in this highly regimented sporting environment. We're talking about general, you know, all the body hair, none of the waxing human beings. So getting someone on their back. Okay, there, you guys, you're trying to get up, you're getting hit with a rock or stabbed or what have you set on fire? Who knows? Generally, these conflicts are not just isolated to one on one. It's if it's four on two, you're, you're, your, your buddy that was with you back to back. Now he's on his back. What do you think? And now it's going to be one on one, well, three go on one. So, and then you go, you elevate this to, to armored combat, right? And it's boom, put them on the ground. All crap. It's hard to get up. Well, while you're struggling to get up, stab, you know, that's where Jiu-Jitsu's concepts come from with all their leveraging and off balancing is, oh man, if I end up in this situation and tight close quarters combat, yes, we could fight it out with swords and knives and what have you. But it's way easier if the first thing I can do is foot sweep you on your back and then pull my knife and just go stick. Is there a thread that connects all of these different arts from not just arts, but from the very base violence of war, just like you said, that there's no rules to the very regimented, I be a JF. I do it Jiu-Jitsu tournaments and just you've kind of laid out some of it, but can you go all the way to the well, so when you start off with absolute skills in the sense of absolute offense and defense in the taking or preserving of life, right? Full on at its, at its purest form of self-defense and self-preservation, okay? And then you extrapolate part of that in that all animals train in violence. All play usually degenerates into some sort of soft violence, so be it cats, when they're kittens and puppies and everything learns how to kill, how to fight. Not that, you know, just that dumb alpha meme stuff where the idea is that oh, by being alpha, that means you've run around, like basically just being a bully in a shithead and it's no, actually, alpha wolves spend very little time fighting because if you were actually alpha, you don't get into fights. There's no need to. And if you're probably getting into any large amount of fights, it's probably because you're being a shitty at being an alpha and now people are tired of you being in charge. And yet in the animal world, and it would be the same for human beings at that, that, that base beginning level of violence, there's a big risk. So I know that we live in this place with healthcare and where, or you might be in a place with nationalized health, whatever, right? There's there's there's band-aids, there's there's penicillin, there's all that kind of stuff. But that's not the normal way of things, you know. Yeah, there's a channel that just hurts me every time I used to follow and I had to unfollow because it was too painful for me as a human being called Nature's Metal. Ah, yes. Instagram. It was sobering and then it was like this is too sober. I have very sobering. So in there, the risk is at its highest level. They're the damage you take. The winner walks away. Hurt. Getting lame. And when you need every aspect of your physical and athletic faculties to survive because it isn't going to be the, this isn't the first and it's definitely not going to be the last, especially if you're the slowest one. You know, it's, it was it, was it, is a lyric from a clutch song? Don't go for the fat ones, just go for the slow ones. Man, but that the universal truth of the way nature works is not cruel. It's not cruel is just the way it is. Yeah, I mean, watch animals getting the fights on on any of these sort of documentary stuff. You'll see an intense short and then dispersal. Like you'll see as soon as one feels like uh, things have switched just enough to boom the bear or whatever it is takes off. It's like I'm not, I'm done with this because if you can get out of there with just some scars and what have you, okay, you lose an eye. No, it's not as good. You really get hurt bad and get infected. You're done. You know, so it, there's a serious risk to be that can come with these sort of things yet. I believe that we are inherently born for at least aspects of and use of violence. And so at the end of the day, we need these things not just to, not just survive each other, but they're, they're a part of being able to hunt and other things. But uh, so violence is a part of human nature. Violence is a, it's a, it's an absolute, it is in every person. It is a part of every interaction. It isn't part of every, every law, everything. And I'm not, by the way, not an Ann Cap. So don't even, don't, don't hit your wagon to me on that one. Ann Cap is an, Ann Cap, Ann Acre Capitalist. Yes. Not, not an Ann Cap. They have nice book, book shops. Yeah, they do. I mean, I'm not, I'm like it is, you know, sit here and, and shit talk Ann Cap's. Although I also used to get into the conversations with, uh, with an Ann Calm, uh, Ann Arco communist, a good friend of mine. And he would, he would bring up this stuff and I'm like, yeah, cool man. I'm down with Ann Arkey. You ain't gonna like it. What do you mean? I go, because I'm gonna take, I'm gonna gather all kinds of people to, I'm gonna make this, I'm gonna get the strongest together and I'm going to take yours, yeah. Okay. Okay. Actually, on that topic, I've, uh, a friend of mine now, uh, a fellow Russian, uh, Ukrainian, uh, Michael Malas. Oh, I, yeah, I'm familiar with Michael Malas. I watched a little bit of your guys's, uh, conversation. So this is really good to ask you because, uh, I like how he's in the white suit and you're in the white and black. But he lives in New York City. He is, uh, as well as his ideas at Manarchism. And his idea, and this is different than, um, sort of the iron Rand set of ideas that there's a line between sort of capitalism that's backed by the state and pure anarchism. And his idea that violence won't take over in an anarchism is one that feels to me not grounded in reality. I may be, I may be wrong. So is there some, so, uh, the idea with pure capitalism is that you mean laissez faire completely deregulated. Yeah. Yeah. Well, well, what it will agree, it'll end up in one, it'll end up in if you're anti-globalist, it's going to be that it's going to be globalist 100% because it has no, pure capitalism has no consideration for, uh, has no consideration for your, your native users or of any sort. Like, doesn't matter. But the idea of governments is that the land, the little piece of land, geographically, you're born on means you're going to stick to whatever founding documents created that little land. So anarchism is against that. And the argument is you should be able to choose which ideas you live with. And the concern there is nobody, uh, this geographical little land, the governments that organize on that land will not, do not need to protect you from the violence. And my sense is there does need to be an army. There does need to be police that help. What, however, the form that police takes, but there needs to be a more centralized, not completely centralized, but more centralized safety net of the protection from the violence scale again, right? So if you want to have your anarchist utopia, well, will you call your, your anarchist creation here at certain scale? I'm sure it's doable, you know, um, but as it scales, as the scale increases, it's completely untenable and a state will emerge, a state will always emerge because because even people always think of states as like people rubbing their hands and smoking cigars and back rooms and just out of nowhere coming along is like, oh, we're going to create this big centralized thing and just so we can tell everybody what to do and we can be in charge. I mean, I know that there are people like that that exist that they would like to do things of that nature and that they see the use of power as something to be used more for their, their personal gains over first, which again, self interest in human beings, but, um, uh, but eventually a state people want a, they want something to go like, okay, who's taking care of this and who's taking care of that and who and how do we create some sort of, uh, some sort of protocol for this like, okay, well, when it's not Bob, when is it Susie, when is it whatever, I mean, like, how do we, you know, it's got to get done if we want this thing to become bigger if we want our, all of our plumbing to work right? If we want, it's just, I'm sorry, a state's going to happen. A state is also, when you think about it, it's supposed to have consideration to tribe, right? So if people think that we're not tribes, well, you're not, you're not really thinking very deeply. We're all tribes of a sort and everybody likes to use the word tribalism in this idea of, of this antagonistic concept, but and while sure tribalism can be antagonistic, tribalism can also be a positive thing or I could just say it just seems to be a natural thing. People, they create their, their groups of one sort or another. And so when you have, well, when you think about where, when nation states really started to become a thing, uh, and I don't mean even the more modern looking variants that we could think back up and say the 19th century or something like that, right? Even older than that. I mean, you think the Assyrians didn't have a state of some sort. Of course they did. Um, they, how do you increase your, your, your, your empire, if you don't actually have a place to start for us to be a ruler. So you're saying like naturally, when you start talking and thinking about scale of humans, naturally states emerge. And so can we try to make an argument for anarchism, which is, uh, okay, okay, okay. So, uh, uh, anarchy in a sense is an opposition to the unhelpful, unproductive, inefficient bureaucracies that eventually the states lead to. So that's what we can see. I mean, I would say less anarchy let more study James Burnham, you know, uh, or well, anybody that wants to talk about the, the managerial problem and the message. So you, you have a sense, uh, hope, maybe let's think like what is the path forward with the, uh, inefficient state? Is it revolution or is it to work within the system to constantly improve it? Man, I don't know that one. I mean, my general sense, uh, and maybe this is the Nietzschean part of me is that, yeah, it'll, it would take maybe not even just, maybe not even defining, uh, it specifically as revolution. Maybe it would just take just total calamity to, to get people to stop being shitty, to not stop being a lesser version of themselves to stop thinking more about, uh, things from, um, you know, the paradigm that we existed now where we're, we're giving so much value to stuff that isn't really all that valuable. Yeah. Where we're so concerned about likes and I don't just mean like whether we get them or not, but that, oh, man, maybe we should take this off of our platform because this is too destabilizing to people. And it's like, because once you exceed Dunbar's number, I think it's actually without having the right faculties, which would need to be developed, because this is dealing with, this is dealing with tech that brings things, ways of approaching being that we are not naturally programmed to be able to handle appropriately. So, and I think it's even, even more, it's even more detrimental to women than men, because I think, uh, women have a more natural percolivity towards, um, uh, group association and, and more group oriented thinking and patterning. And now, and with also coupled with, seemingly more sensitivity towards, towards human, uh, states. So I feel like women, like the classic idea is like, oh, you know, women are psychic and I have a sixth sense and what have you. And I think that's just a, uh, a way of, uh, simplifying what I think is that women may be more in tune with picking up on the unsaid, like they might be better at that, at seeing, um, physical cues, uh, inflection and tone, like different, like they may be far more sensitive to these things, which to me would make sense, because dealing with children that can't, uh, communicate, uh, so, so, generally more, I'm just thinking of like, right now, okay, now whether it be a woman or a man, but especially with even the social, uh, push on this concept of empathy, which of course, it gets to the point where it loses any meaning anymore, like people use an empathy, absolutely incorrectly all the time, and they don't even understand what you're really asking out people. But let's just take it as, as we're using empathy in the correct sense and you're taking on the emotional content of the thing itself. Now you open that up to thousands of people, maybe hundreds of thousands of people all across the world that you will never meet, that you will never know that you're not even getting an actual true representation most of the time of who these people are. You're, you're meeting persona. And some of these personas are even deliberately created, to elicit a response in authentically. Are you referring to bots or, uh, our bots or actual people? Bots are one thing, but I mean, there are literal people out there that will create something, create, uh, go find these for, for tragedies that never didn't really, or events that didn't happen or any number of things. Okay, I mean, burn their own house down and then say, you know, we were attacked and then it comes down, oh, you did it to yourself because you wanted money and empathy and this that and you wanted all this, this emotional, well, well, let's say, this emotional coin as well as actual if possible. You wanted to leverage it in some way. That's not the majority of people, but I would say a good amount of folks are thinking, well, if I post this photo, um, and I put this little blurb in there, I bet I can get this much cash out of it in the sense. And I'm not even, and this isn't just a reference to like, butt picks and stuff like that because clearly, obviously, people understand that, that, uh, are inborn, uh, sexual nature is easy to manipulate. I mean, that's pretty, pretty obvious. Well, you're, you're saying this kind of new medium of communication on social media is, uh, is, is unnatural and it prays on us. And so as you, you want this, you know, you look at, you look at an anarchist kind of mindset, right? And so he's just like, there's no, there, there is no overarching state to, to create any kind of, uh, structure, right? And so if you have that unfettered capitalism aspect with it, and before I say anything, particularly damning about unfettered capitalism, uh, I'm a massive capitalist because I view capitalism essentially as what do boils down to it? Uh, these arguments of people too, they, they start, give me all these extra definitions about capitalism, like, no, no, this is obviously some sort of theory you're taking from other ship, but that doesn't describe capitalism. Capitalism is, the ability for us to create whatever we want, you know, create our, our thoughts, ideas, physical things and trade them freely amongst each other in ways that we find, um, acceptable. Right? You know, I'm not even using the word fair because I might think it's fair to me. You might think, huh, well, I mean, that was actually, I think he, what he thought was unfair to him, and it's more fair to me. And then someone, a third observer goes, oh, man, you should have, you should not have paid that for that. You should have paid this. And it's like, well, you know, what? It works for me without sufficiently acceptable that you, you both agree to the transaction. Correct. And, uh, you know, but, but also at the, at the root of that is freedom, right? And as far as I can tell, I've been banging this around on my head. It's like for everyone unit of freedom, you need two units of accountability. And if you don't have that, what you end up with is, it's human self-interest. We're not even going to get into evil. Human self-interest, sabotaging other things, even not in a sense to be malicious. Okay. So in terms of, uh, let's put this as mathematically speaking, I love this. So anarchism is more like two units of freedom and one unit of accountability or maybe zero units of accountability. Possibly. I mean, the anarchists tend to think like, no, everyone will be accountable. It's like, fuck they will. When have you seen this happen in real life? You know, I mean, people aren't even accountable in their revolutions after that time. So, uh, you aren't looking at the way people really are. It's like Marx is like, yeah, the people are like this. They're like that. Look at how capitalism does it. I mean, he, of course, assigns a lot of really ridiculous economic principles and practice. But, and also assumes that everybody, you know, who makes any profit from anything is somehow stealing it and, you know, really assigns a negative moral aspect to them. And then it's like, oh, yeah, but eventually, communism will happen every no one will act that way anymore. And you're like, whoa, hold on. You just said that people are all, are you saying it's all due to capitalism? Or it's, is it an A? It's it's a fundamental unmisunderstanding of, and it's like, hey, look at you. You're like a notorious like anti-Semitic angry, like, uh, just absolute curmudgeon of a human being who seems to be really not all that fun to be around. Yeah. Yeah. And then it's just like, she has to think like if if there was one billion Marxists in the world, they would behave. It would be absolutely. They would aid each other so bad. And, you know, this isn't for me to even poison the well on Marx is like, oh, his personality sucks. Like there's lots of people whose personality sucks. That doesn't mean they can't make, but I don't know that it's never what, you know, somebody argues, he's just a he's a loner. I mean, I don't know this personality sucked at all. Let me walk that back and that he was human. I say his personality sucked. He was sometimes contradictory, irrational. Sometimes he was quite sexist despite the emails I've gotten that that that that's like the emails I've got. That told me that that there's that there's people who's written to me that Nietzsche has been unfairly labeled a sexist in his discussion about women. I'm pretty sure there's a bunch of documents where he's just like he's just the bitter guy. I will agree with you and Marx is as bitter as they come to, but you know, a bitterness in and of itself doesn't make like what why I hate Marxism comes from, you know, the whole the entirety of the thing. But the dismissal of human nature. But I'm not going to say that Marxism or practical man, you can find any forbidden book and it could have something good in it. It's Colonel's a good idea. Yeah, and like at the end of the day, you know, Marx is a human being. He's got a nice beard. He does. He had a hell of a beard. Yeah, it'd be some portrait. I mean, he looks like the kind of guy like I wouldn't want to meet him in a dark alley, but thankfully, I don't think he was much of a fighter. But in any case, I mean, not the anarchists are more hot for like Max Steiner. People like to think that Nietzsche borrowed a lot from Steiner and my argument is one, you don't have any real evidence for that and two bullshit. You know, I mean, anybody could, I the fact that they have some overlapping thoughts doesn't make it lifted, not to mention go read more philosophy and see how there's so many different things. Oh, this guy said it in 1722. Well, and then this guy says that again in 1922, does that mean he read the other guy's stuff? Not necessarily. I mean, he's working from the same type of human physiological construct as anybody else. Of course, it's possible with this guy could think the same thing. We think a lot of the same things to be perfectly honest. I mean, reading the Haga Curry, going back to philosophy books, this was really impactful on me as a younger adult because here's a book written in the 19th century about someone who lived through the 19th and 18th century at times as a samurai now a monk and his objections to society at the time, the same objections one was having to society as I was reading it like the same human behavior is the same impetus for action that he found a problem. Like, what that's the same, this is the same shit now. Like, we're not, and this was the thing and then I'm reading more religion. I go, oh, we're no different than anyone who wrote the Torah or older. We are the same thing with the same problems with the same psychological issues, same human behaviors like these things are not different. Yeah, and we haven't changed. Growing set of tools though to kill each other with or to communicate together and all the kind of stuff but underlying it as a human nature. Well, we're also trying to understand that human nature. I think we've just like you said, learning how to fish acquired more and more knowledge about that human nature, but it's been a very slow journey. It's slower than people realize in terms of understanding human nature. Let me ask in terms of egoism to be curious to get your sense about iron rand and her whole idea of virtue of selfishness and her because you mentioned that everybody has a kernel of truth. There is potential for a kernel truth to be discovered in anything. For example, I've been recently reading Mein Kampf. I'm, you know what, that's a thing. There's something in, there's probably things in Mein Kampf that are not the surface level read. If you get all hung up on all, probably all his crap about, you know, his anger, anger at Jews and this and that, all this crap. It's like, okay, yeah, that's right on the surface. Try to get below that. Try to see, you know, how is he, how is he creating the Jews as a cope somehow? Like, how is he using, why are they his scapegoat? And I mean scapegoat in the, so Renny Gerard's concept of the scapegoat, I mean, in that sense, whereas Hitler uses, it wants to make the Jews the scapegoat for World War One. Yeah, I mean, for me, the starting point similar to that in Rand is, like, Mein Kampf is not a good place to search, not just because Hitler is evil, but it's just not full of ideas. No, it is not, it has its significance due to a lot of things. Historically speaking, but the starting point for me with Hitler is like, to acknowledge that he's human and to at least consider the possibility that any one of us could have been Hitler. So like that, not that... That's a Peterson kind of concept. Also, Jonathan Height has a thing about the difference between hate and disgust mechanisms and things like that. And so he goes into the looking at Hitler and through his diary entries and journals and stuff like that to look and see it more as the disgust mechanism than also try and see, like if there's any evolutionary biological attachment to this, whatever, I mean, you're right, he is a human being. Any of us, or we're all human beings, it's not that it's probably jarring for people to think, but we're all, I guess, supposed potentially capable of just being in all these evil people in the world. Think they're doing it for the sake of good, which makes them the most dangerous. And there's some differences in levels of insane. I think Hitler was way more insane than Stalin. I think Stalin, a gentleman he thought he was being doing good. I would say that's probably true. Stalin was just outright brutal. But he had his five-year plan, he had to look at the things. He's just had a much lower value for human life. Yes. And so he was willing to take, make decisions about what he actually, as a good executive, which he was of managing different bureaucracies and so on. He was willing to make decisions that resulted in mass human suffering, where Hitler was, it seems like to me, much moody air. So a lot of emotions and moves to make decisions. I think we also have to consider the different trajectories and how, where and when they were making their decisions. And I mean, not by time specifically, but Hitler engaged into this conflict across multiple continents. And then that, everything that comes with basically fighting the whole world, Stalin had his conflict and then he really mostly compartmentalized the rest of it. So he was dealing with his own internal instead of dealing with the internal and the external. So if Stalin was put under a World War scenario, I don't know, maybe he would have eventually lost his marbles too. Yeah, I'm not sure that you're right. The hunger for power was more internalized for Stalin. He wanted to control the land that already existed as opposed to wanting to colonize other land. He was as nationalistic as Hitler, but and was as capable and willing for violent conflict as Hitler for the aims of the state. But he centered an internalized prior to then externalizing and moving outwards. Whereas even maybe prior to him, there was an interest to continually push communism in an aggressive sense following on the momentum from the 1918 revolution. And the halting of that through various aspects, I guess in Germany, part of that was the national socialist. They came up and they were the other ones to fight the communist, and so you had the two totalitarians going after it. But then in the rest of the world that was not dealing with totalitarian aspects, it wasn't going to stick, especially in the West and other places. But Stalin, just casually thinking, Stalin decided, all right, we're not going to go just start launching right into more conflicts here. These doves are going down, so that's cool for us, because they hate us and we hate them. But now we're going to focus internally, and then we're going to work on growing at a slower rate and picking our battles a bit more specifically. Of course, you can get to even this as after Stalin, but you've got the bezmanov type stuff talking about subversion in cultural aspects. Yeah, I mean, this fascinating dynamics to propaganda throughout the liberal period, that's a whole another kernel. Do you think Hitler could have been stopped? One of the things that's kind of fascinating to look at is how many nations, both journalists and nations, wanted almost crave to take Hitler's word that he wanted peace until it was too late. They almost wanted to be delude themselves. I mean, the same is true with the Stalin. People wanted to take Stalin at his word. Are they still delude themselves? Yeah. We will delude ourselves over any number of things until even after the fact where the history just says, hey, fuckface, you know, you cannot supplement your pseudo reality onto actual reality here. But yet, we deal with people in pseudo realities constantly. I mean, we will always find a way to change reality to suit our needs. Well, the nature of truth now, there's now multiple actual truths. It's kind of fascinating. There's multiple versions of history that people are telling, you know, the version of the great patriotic war in Russia, the World War II, and Russia is very different today under Putin than the version that we're learning in the United States and a different than the version in Europe. In the United States, the hero of the war is the United States. In Europe, there's a much more sad and solemn story of suffering and so on. Sure. In Russia, it's the great patriotic war. Yes. It was a unifier, in a sense. And it, I mean, yeah, I mean, you can't argue that war and conflict that, or I just even reducing that to stressors, agitation, suffering, doesn't create human motivation. You know, we started this off. You brought up a franco. I'm like, yeah, franco is dope. Man, it's here's for meaning. Uh, Maslow's great. And, and I talked to you about how I started to think like, man, the ability for human beings to, to, to live and, or potentially flourish in the worst environments you can think of is pretty incredible in and of itself and that it's a crazy thought to think that without franco and Maslow ending up in concentration camps, do they write some of the most important books on philosophy in the 20th century? And that's insane on a lot of different levels. But, uh, suffering is a creative force. I mean, I don't, do you think we'll always have war? Yes. We will always have war in some form or another. We, we need, quote unquote, air quotes for those just listening, uh, war to survive. We need war to flourish. We need at least, can you explain the quote of the air quotes of war? Well, because, uh, take, take, take, take the wars as violence. No, wars of violence. So like, so, no, we're talking about because, uh, while, you know what, us getting on the mat or just getting on these hardwood floors and wrestling around, yeah, is not literal war. It's war of the sorts. You know, work, you know, it is, it is a deluded form of war. American football is a deluded form of war. All this, these are deluded forms of war. Tennis is a deluded form of war. Um, and I think the, one of the best explanations I ever got from this, another person very, um, impactful on my life and outlook and thinking about things, Cornback McCarthy. And so in Blood Meridian, there's this fantastic speech about war given by the judge, which there's a ton of fantastic speeches on things given by the judge. Yeah. All that exists in creation without my knowledge does so without my consent. Okay. That's pretty heavy. That's, that's hard. Can you break that up? Can you say that again? Uh, all things that exist in creation, all things that exist without my knowledge do so without my consent. What, what does that mean? Well, I think from the judge's perspective, it's like, well, I didn't consent to, to that bird or that dog or this building or all this like all of this, you know, I didn't create it. So it's done so without my consent. And if it's up to my consent, well, I'll design it how I want to. There's another similar look into how the judges in that book is he would study everything everywhere he went. And so he's collected this group of Nair duels from all over to go on these hunts against certain tribes in the Southwest and getting paid by the U.S. government, the Mexican government. So he's on these Indian hunts and yet they're going to all these different places and they would stay the night in a cave somewhere and he would find cave panties, he would write them all down or he would find old pieces. There's an example of him, the narrator explaining how watching the judge and how he drawing everything gets notebook just full of things, drawings and writings and how he found like a piece of armor from a conquistador or something way back in the day of Spanish armor and he draws it into his book and then crushes it. So that's so the reason we'll always have war in the societies because there's these struggle amongst people that want to be the designers. There's that but it's I'm just saying that he's got this whole quote on war like war is a is is play. War is a game and the difference is is that what's at stake. So all things are a game of some sort and some you're putting up for it or what you're willing to put up for it determines whether or not you're going to participate or not and you know all all aspects of any game is war and it's just what what does it stake you know if it's your life it's a different story if it's just a coin it's another thing. A nice way to put it is humans play a game in this kind of pursuit of creating. Whatever the hell the reason is that we keep creating cool and cooler things that that it seems to be the result of a game that wouldn't naturally play it wouldn't naturally crave. I don't know I mean that's been the struggle of philosophy is to understand what is the underlying force of all that is that the will to power is I think will to power is a really great way of describing it. Do you want to be the winner of the game? No not just I don't look at will to power as being the winner of the game. Well I mean if we're going to get philosophical yes you want to be the winner of the game. What does winning the game define how you win? Everyone is going to define that win differently. You know you could define the win in the most base level like oh I got all the things. Well if you got all those things without the the needing component of fulfillment then you're going to be a very unhappy person with a whole lot of things. There's a self-referential aspect to where to me the winner of the game is defined by the people playing the game. So if I'm playing a game I want to win in the sense that most of the other people who are playing the game will say yeah that guy won by there by our collective definition of what if I just come up listen I'm sort of if I come up that's a lot of that's a lot of weight on the external on you. Right but that's that's how games seem to work somewhat. So I'm already a winner in my life by defining my own. I'm basically the best person in the world at doing me at being Lex. Yeah so like and then I'm really happy with that that's that's the source of well I mean think about games are also what iterated right so you start off with your game and then your game with your immediate and then the game further than that and the game further than that and then the game today and the game tomorrow and the game next week and so it never ends and if you try to keep thinking about it that way no wonder people go crazy but we don't want to think about things that way we don't want to think about being towards death we don't want to think about whether or not I'm going anywhere after this other than in the ground or what have you like we you know well all these games are since some distraction this is where we are right now but I mean it's it's violence is that we need to let this out and so it is of our kids need a wrestling play just like animals need a wrestling play we need to have forms of competition we need to have ways to to test ourselves to create when what is it when a piece a man of war makes war with himself and so we need to be able to competently go at war with ourselves and go at war with our neighbor and go at war with our neighbor's neighbor in a way that is repeatable at the very least so one one way of saying that there will always be war I mean that's my hopeful view is that most of the war conducted in the future will be like you said the man might go to war with himself that would be great that that's that's what to me love is is like focusing on yourself and your own improvement on your own creativity and towards others feeling sort of emphasizing cooperative behavior and compassion and empathy it would be great but I mean you can have well I'll put it to you this way if you have a whole community of randians and a whole community of andcoms and they could all like I don't know a toast of London on Netflix and they love Netflix and they love the internet and they love picking apart Moncomp with you they love like they like they all these things even the esoteric that they can they can they can get on with but at the at the fundamental route they cannot help but go to war because they are literally oil and water no the perceived but they would the very labels the assigned to themselves would need to dissipate well well then you would have to stop being whatever it is that you took on as your ideological or religious point right yeah I mean I there's some days I'm uh and calm some days I'm in and caps and uh whatever that an arctic an arctic capital I mean there's it depends on the the hour the minute of the day you constantly changing moods and embracing that flow the change of opinions of ideas as there's some days where like I'm actually cognizant of the fact because we're not getting my sleep and after I get some sleep I see I'm so much more optimistic about the world the less than asleep I get the more sad and cynical I get you can see that I'm up and down I don't even let my well okay I try not to let and most days it's never a problem any sort of like uh what the kids call it now black pilled way of thinking be my my my over my the umbrella which I hang under so we actually uh to drag us back can we talk about Carl got you catch wrestling cuz I do want to make sure I touch it I mean what uh who worked y'all Carl gotch is uh is he the greatest catch wrestler I don't know anyone was the greatest catch wrestler ever I don't I don't I mean he's one of them and for a more you know Carl gotch uh Billy Robinson uh gotcha and Robinson's trainer Billy Riley um so who are these figures and what do they make me so my Ada he's one of the greatest catch wrestlers ever because he's responsible for Brazilian Jiu Jitsu right along with Gustavo Gracie okay there's so much of things I'd like to say here but one of the things that catch wrestling seem to as spouse as a principle is that of violence I just the determinants that competed at uh the unfortunate thing and we'll probably hopefully talk about a little bit they weren't disorganized and the level of competition is pretty low where people really sucked pretty typical is that typical okay well it's it's I mean think about um we have local run of the mill yes uh Jiu Jitsu tournament versus IB JJF created you know vast difference so so I you know but there is a to me as a human being that like intellectually philosophically it was more interesting to go to catch wrestling tournament it seemed more real and honest because of the way they communicated about violence I love questions so it is it is often more honest I think that always that from is that originated from gosh that's what I had it originates from all wrestling in that uh even weight weight shallus not a not a classically considered catch wrestler yet the reason why he has the world record for most amount of world champions pinned or the record for pins and the events EWA is because well of course the idea is to put you on your back and opinion but you're there's no way you're gonna let me do that uh so how do I make it so that you want me to pin you well it's by you put him in excruciating pain yeah so at the end of the day you're both there you both want to win neither one wants to allow anything to the other yeah so how do I how do I get you to lose to me I make it so unbearable for you that you decide losing is better than staying so those that those two are so fascinating because so coming from Russia I don't know if that's where I got it or if it's just my own predisposition as I always love the there's two ways to get you to want to pin yourself yeah one is to make it so painful not to pin yourself that you pin yourself or whatever and the other is it's sort of like uh brucially water flows make it so easy to pin yourself so it's technique it's like the elegance the ease of movement this is the uh satiate brothers uh vocius satiate like the just the elegance the efficiency they're pretty attractive I like watching those guys you know those incredible satiate brothers are massive and uh and those are the two paths right also caveat a little bit that like uh if you're if you're approaching this from a a Russian perspective Russians are quite truthful about things uh especially when it comes to something like combat they just this is how it is yeah this is how it's going to be it's honest yes and honesty is what I really like about uh catch wrestling because I find that we given any opportunity for us to be dishonest for any number of reasons we're gonna especially if it's a dishonesty towards a positive right like oh well you know it's all technique and it's all this and it's the gentle art blah bro I have rolled with 80 CC world champions you know some of the best you have ever heard of varying a lot of gentleness when it comes to like oh yeah they wanted to sweep you and you said no and then you did said no again yeah and then you said no and attack their leg yeah it's ceases to be all that gentle because at the end of the day these dudes are strong as hell they're flexible they're all I mean they're they're the difference between the athleticism and and the the ability to actually win is a pretty wide gap the athleticism shows up but then there's all that other extra and part of that is meanness and and pain and uh getting what you need out of it but see there's a philosophical difference in the way it's thought because I think some of it is just they just in denial like oh people will they like to people like to espouse a lot of things it's theory and then it's like okay let me watch oh you're not doing anything about what you said right now in fact you're doing the opposite you're you're literally hurting that guy because you your shit ain't working in the way that you'd like it to so you're having to use strength you're having to much one of my favorite is like oh you're using too much strength and it's like well hold on do we want people not to use strength at this point to understand more of mechanics or you trying to tell people if they use strength at all uh that there's somehow bad at what they do because you know it's not my fault you're not stronger than this you have to begin with something else that's that's why I tend to think what it comes down to is like strength is fine until you beat me with it then it sucks okay so strength is another thing I'm speaking I'm thinking about more like anger oh sure okay so like a lot of angry guys and she just do I know that really okay okay good well but let's talk about let's talk about they're only the highest level of competition there's a book called wrestling tough yeah there's a really good book there's I've encountered in my life a few especially wrestling people who really try to find a way to use anger to get really anger at their opponent not like stupid anger but just like intense pointed anger distilled into something that you can use fuel yeah and like I remember this story I don't know where I read it might be wrestling tough where a person was imagining that their opponent just rape their mother rape their girlfriend or something like that to to create this like method acting thing in their head to be like to snap them out of this polite interaction of usual like athletic convention and like you know really good at the competitive side. Design of necessity so my anecdote for this was I was sitting with backstage before a fight not my fight and I'm working with this guy and the dude is this is a this is a world champion guy I need to compete at the highest levels any he looks at me and he goes you know you ever get nervous before fights I looked at him and I went no I don't and he just looks at me he's like fuck man I'm so nervous you know how do you do it man or you know I always should be like you know I said you know what that doesn't mean that what I'm doing is better it's just what is necessary for me it's the way I am and I told him and so this anecdote goes into another anecdote this is a family guy episode I guess so where some another famous high level guy told me about this experience with a world champion boxer in Japan and this guy would get insanely nervous and worked up and anxious before his matches and he hated it and hated it and hated it and so he wanted to get rid of that feeling so he went to a hypnotist for a bunch of sessions and managed to and he goes in and in the next fight he's cool as a cucumber and doesn't perform and loses and so what I said going back to anecdote one was you know whatever is necessary for you to get yourself in the best state of being right now to compete whatever that may be it could be absolute stress and fear it could be anger it could be calmness it could be whatever but there is a there's a state at which you need to be in to do your best and use the individual you have to find that can you comment on Tyson Mike Tyson oh yeah that thing so first so he uh there's two things I want to so he's uh in terms of fear there's a clip there I think from a documentary where he talks about he is like fully afraid as he walks up to the ring and as he gets closer and closer and closer he gets more confident until he gets in and then he's a god or something like that that coupled with his statement on Joe Rogan that he gets aroused at the possibility of truth like I've hurting somebody in the ring so like he gets aroused at the violence yeah uh I like it because it's coupled to your basically statement that we need to find our own unique way of existing at our top level of performance and that perhaps is Mike Tyson but do you think there's something more deeply universal to the Mike Tyson speaking to the fact that he's aroused at the possibility of that I do actually although I don't think that it always equates to arousal for people in fact I would say in general it doesn't yeah uh I can say I've never had a boner in the ring the fact of anything you know old combat cock is like we're not hanging around we're leaving we're going up yeah we're taking off yeah we don't why I need to do with this yes you have fun come back to us when you have something warmer softer smells better yeah but the power with the feeling of aliveness yeah I could see it being you know back to the even the concept of the uber bench I feel like the states the highest states of being I've ever been in were in the midst of conflict I felt like that was the time those are the those are the moments in my life where I felt like I was at the highest level of of being as a human in existence but yet even being in that state was not it was not something that you could interact with people that weren't in that state with you like they wouldn't get it you would almost seem and to be that way all the time either a might drive you mad or be is you're not you're something that's untenable to the rest of society like you can't function with everybody else it will not work it's just like you said with the uber bench it's like it's perhaps that ideal is not something you can hold for long that's the very nature of it is yeah well there was an example in less books that Zarthurstra about snake being down the person's throat and biting it and then having this maniacal laughter erupting and you know to me it was at least I read it as yeah okay there's this insane moment that isn't forever but that it is life and death and it is and and the overcoming it is the thing that all of a sudden gives you that tapping into the year your highest state right this is you know man is a chasm a tightrope between man and uber bench well I don't want to leave your thought about we'll call those things flourishes to to the aspect of Tyson's interpretation or his his his expression of his feelings in combat and so I gave this antidote to the guy and I just you know at my first anecdote to that athlete I was working with and I said it you know this isn't there isn't a superior way in this sense there is the way that works for you that may be something you can implement to other people if you find that person because we all have different personalities and to me that's a that is that's an absolute I don't want to know don't come at me with all your other fucking social sciences crap no we have distinct personalities that that personality that that who you really are and this you know again height agar dazine like being authentic if you're authentic with who you are goods and beds you will know how to create what that is and for me violence and fighting and conflict was something that always felt normal to me and I don't mean normal and like I grew up in a war zone or abuse of household or something like that I just meant that and I was a kid who is very joyful and inquisitive and spent a lot of time around older people of all things and also while I don't think I have much capability toward the engineering my mom said that one of the first things as like a little baby when she put me in my sister's old crib instead of my sister who just milled about and was fine with it all the first thing I did was I completely deconstructed it and break it I figured out how to pull it apart curiosity about the world and yet that wasn't in conflict with the idea of violence no not at all and so being a very joyful and nice kid but you know kids are kids and and if if kids can find that you respond maybe more easily to agitation they will agitate you and if you should stand out in some way by being taller or bigger or something or caring especially they will agitate you they don't really fully understand it either and so I don't I don't hold anything against like any of the kids used to pick on me or whatever especially at the youngest age is like man they don't know shit either so but once that line was pushed for me it was oh well I was I was being cool now you're being uncool yeah well then that gives me license for everything and so boom we would just go at it or kids that would try to initiate a fight and okay and being in that moment I'm just going going to town with someone else it just felt like this is I will I belong here yeah it was it was never a problem for me like the in fact if anything the over what I had to understand was well not only did I learn the hard way that it doesn't matter at the end of the day it doesn't really matter what anybody else does if your response and violence even to their violence if you're the winner is often going to be penalized severely you know society state apparatus they don't want any of that they want to be the only arbiter of violence in the world always but I learned a very difficult lesson with that and it was really impactful in a negative way on me but also I had to learn on a individual sense to you need to manage violence too because hey if someone attacks you or starts a fight with you and you go at it okay beating him up is one thing you know you know trying to grab a handful of broken glass from the street and throw it in their face maybe that's a bit much at seven so you need to learn what what level is necessary and you need to learn what comes with with all what's the responsibility of of when you enact violence I mean you take on something when you you have a responsibility for that this is extension of your actions so but as I got older and especially as I found sports and then combat sports and now this was a place for me to flourish and to the point where I was more myself in that space than I was outside of it until time enough where I could learn to to get this back together again and I never say that I that I'll merge the two or anything like that no all what happened my my my journey from adolescence onto to manhood a huge portion of it besides the normal finding yourself whatever whatever actually what it was was re getting back to who I always was getting back curious kid the kind kid getting back to the guy that I should have been allowed to become instead of what happened under the pressures of other things yeah and the attempt for society and and certain people within you know a managerial positions to to compress what that was into something that they found more suitable yeah but those pressures allow you to discover this little world forbidden world in many ways of violence then you could explore through sport you can explore it and it's more socially acceptable to explore at the sport for sure and even even but even then there's like at times it's socially unacceptable so I beat Sam Shill I'm he cut my right eyebrow I cut him and busted his nose and he's bleeding all over me as I have an arm bar on top I'm you know it's raining blood quote some slayer from a lacerated stem shill leading in his horror creating my structures now I shall rain in blood but I win the fight arm bar nasty one I get on my feet and the first thing I do is I wipe all the blood off onto my hands and I lick it and I do my thing and all the MMA journalists freaked out Dana wise like man I don't know about that you know we don't want him doing everybody had this huge problem and then some folks would even contend with oh you know we're trying to do like no no this isn't planned this isn't you don't think of these things this isn't this is how I really feel this is who I really am and you know it was even kind of comical after the fact you know and BJ pan was on the very card with me watching him at some point in his career all of a sudden win fights and then and then do this licking the glove thing and everyone thinks it's the coolest thing I've earned I'm like hey fuck faces I did this in 2002 or one 2001 and BJ pan actually back then was like dude you're a badass you're killer you know where did that come from because that seems like a deeply human moment I could say I could just be you know goofy about it called or geastic I would back to my Tyson yeah but Tyson but uh no no it isn't it's beyond that is it a celebration pretty decent orgasms in my life at this point of 43 so but no none have ever compared to that like I said it is a feeling of highest being to me and I see uba mentioned this is this is where I feel like the restrictions of general existence in society are gone and I get to fully live uh in a state that feels more meaningful of the most meaning you know I think of this life and death and it's just it is the way I'm built and I don't have I've never had any problem applying violence like it doesn't I don't know where it comes from or how you would define it or whatever if you want to stick me under in a psychologist chair but like I don't there's a part of me that can just like I know if I'm gonna apply I can apply violence to any level and be okay with it and it doesn't I don't lose sleep it doesn't bother me it's not a problem it's it was me learning how to fully understand violence humans and the broader perspective that allowed me to think about things and like well what am I what what do I really want to accomplish with my actions in the world just on a whole you know not compartmentalizing my sporting career even when I get in the ring I don't have any mercy generally and if I do it's because I make a a really deliberate attempt to be in a state where I can have mercy if I just go in there to fight with everything I got there is zero the natural state there's nothing there's nothing that will hold me back other than the referee and that's that you know I I know I agreed to to be allowed to do and not to do but but within that no and I expect it to be done to me but in terms of values in terms of seeing what to me violence is is just yet another canvas that humans can paint beautifully clearly I mean we have venerated the violent there are communists that venerate the violent on their behalf there are national socialists that venerate the violent there and then if you remove it from an ideological perspective we venerate the violent when they're a hero we venerate the violent in our religion well I mean I guess some people venerate the violence of Yahweh and Saddam and Gomorrah right so or do we say Jehovah I don't know is there you've already mentioned one but is there a fight where you've achieved the highest of heights for your personal being just when you look within yourself that you're the proudest of or maybe was your most beautiful creation is this something that stands out there there are a few actually fighting semi-sale and a rematch well the first one was pretty good too but the rematch was I was suffering I suffered early prior the week prior to food poisoning and so while my abs are looking all right I in the ring didn't have the power that I expected to and I was struggling in ways in some of the grappling with the submission stuff that I had an accounted for just exhaustion or mental exhaustion no I mean like just physical this I wasn't back up to a hundred percent in terms of this power output and semi was well he's always seven foot tall but this time he was the first time I fought him he was two sixty or two fifty seven or two sixty something something like that this time he was like two ninety and so he was a significantly bigger cat and he was he's a big dude and I just remember being in up against the ropes with him changing levels trying to take him down and he's fighting he's hip-and and I just thought in my head there's no fucking way I'm gonna lose this fight there's no way you are not going to beat me it's not gonna happen and I on barred him the other arm even out of the fat he's like I really wanted to get you for that I wanted to get that match back and you fucking got my other arm dick dude I still love you though yeah you know I know but the whole time you're like so this has to do the the dichotomy of your feeling your worst and having to overcome and you're like literally mentally telling yourself there's no way there's no fucking way I'm gonna lose this fight and then there's even my last barrenuckle match and getting in the ring and fighting barrenuckle boxing for the first time and just thinking this being in a great state and just looking so forward to seeing I mean I called someone and I was talking to them the night before and I said yeah well I want you know I video called you because this face might not look like this when I see you next and they're just like okay that's not just like empty trash talk that's no that's like a clarity of mind and the seriousness of all I might die I'm most pretty high of chance of being deformed some way so the fuck it I don't really you do you think about are you accepting your own death yes 100 percent yeah I in fact and that's in a strange way that's partially what makes it so elevated in terms of my my sense of feeling by being able to have death at my side it feels good and to be there and to think that this could be the one like why not you know I'm not a religious person at all even though I very much have to seem seems to bang on the drum about the usefulness or the understanding the usefulness of religion for people but you know if if if I got to do something then yeah put me in Valhalla man I don't want to be anywhere else nothing else seems like a good place for me to be I want to I want to fight all day long and feast all night you know that sounds great I saw you throw your hat into the ring of fader I'm a million angus yes he got COVID I guess I hope he I hope he overcomes it and comes out just as good if not better epic with that did I understand correctly that might be his last fight yes that's my understanding and it would be epic as hell and it would be epic as hell because the the person that I want to give my most to is a person that I respect especially at this this this long this this this long career of mine and getting at this this this is why I'm here it's like two warriors and and and that's the thing about even this going in there with the aspect of being with death and all that is that when that person is in there there my brother with me in this and that so when you give me your best even if I even if I win dominant fashion but if you show up and you're as authentic and being here as I am then then I love you and I'm glad for you to be here and we're in this together and and at this point you know your loss or my loss or whatever is no less deserving of veneration than the win like we're here in this and so to be in the ring with Fjordor and to venerate him in win or defeat to be in there with with someone like that is to me it's so rare so it's incredible how the ultimate violence is coupled with like love or respect and it's like it's weird how this is how the competition and his violent form is also a veneration of just human connection it's also the removal I feel like it's the purest honest ways purest on at most honest places a person can exist that line and fight club you don't know really who you are until you've been in a fight I mean believe that and I've seen so many examples of people trying to portray themselves as one thing and then in the ring you see who they really are or even when they're trying to pursue themselves as one thing and they're winning the crowd at times we'll see who they really are and still hate them you know and it's like I said all the good things yeah bro don't work that way yeah but speaking of Fjordor if we take you out of the picture who are the greatest mixed martial arts fighters of all time I feel you out of the picture as a cop out to some degree I feel like we need a little bit more time you know so to see how this unfolds because you got to compare a lot of things and I did I think I'm like centuries I did an interview I don't know about centuries but that would help if we can keep accurate records and not allow too much bias to fall into too much problem I can't just tell the story yeah but I made an argument I was in a I get a interview with an MMA outlet of some sort and I can't recall who it was but oh it was argument about will the winner of Canva Lasquez versus steep in me oh chick be the greatest MMA heavyweight of all time and I said fucking no way oh no is Kormier in me oh chick that's what it was I said absolutely not not even close and I said these guys need a bit more time to see how things go and also how things go for some of their opponents and like there's more factors in just this one fight it really is and I go and when you want to weigh these people even if let's say we'll bring Alistair or yeah Alistair over him into the into the equation okay you judge him on what you know now what he's done for you lately okay right which is a very myopic way of doing it yeah what has he done over his career K1 champion he was a champion in a dream he strike force blah blah blah is overall record the entirety of all the the different opponents he's fought and I just sit back and I go okay he's not the UFC champ but his accolades his merits in some ways actually stand up higher than Kormier's and me oh chick is so what about the moments do you give much value to the special moments like the highest heights you rise to not in terms of records or the strikes landed but just creating a magical moment in a in a fight it doesn't have to be even championship fight but just you know Conor McGregor yes an example of somebody who creates a narrative who gets a story creates a drama and a special magic happens even if it's like not with this greater than reality and that is always the case but do you do you and so I understand that so very much and it takes an asshole like me to to poo poo on your myth yeah at least get you at the end of the day you're not going to abandon your myth but perhaps temperate with the facts and logic but uh so you're not a fan of myth no I'm a absolute massive fan of myth but you're perfect it's like when I know I mean I like saying facts and logic because people I also I am not a materialist in that sense I don't think that materialism can solve for everything it's not enough it's not it's not robust enough I'm sorry if facts and logic and or a reason as the enlightenment scholars all thought including marks was enough for people then we would never we wouldn't have any religions yeah we wouldn't have any like there would be no we wouldn't have narratives and myths and all this kind of stuff it would not it's just I'm sorry there is no there's nothing about history that supports the idea that rationality will overcome will overcome all there's something about bench appearance facts don't care about your feelings that feels to be miss feels to be missing something fundamental about human nature it's not clear to me exactly what is missing to give old old Ben a fair shake yeah and you know I don't know Ben Shapiro I don't really listen to Ben Shapiro not against Ben Shapiro I don't I'm not here to say anything particularly bad about him although I will say at one time Tom Arnold was seemingly trying to pick an actionable fight with Ben Shapiro in the ring or somewhere yeah and I just and I actually responded like art and I tried to get him to clarify I say hey are you saying that you want to fight Ben Shapiro that you're looking to actually because I was waiting for him to say something and then I can be like okay well it's one thing to want to get into a fight with someone it's another thing to go pick on a little tiny you know guy like Ben who's much smaller than you and doesn't train or whatever but you know if it's not me I can find someone your size and you can go fight him you know don't be a basically don't be a bully piece of shit yeah you know it which by the way Tom Arnold you are a mental midget you were never going to be able to compete even with Ben Shapiro in an argument on any level about anything only to like the argument yeah intellectual argument you can screw maybe you can scream louder than him but whatever but nevertheless in the discussion of greatness in fighting I think you need to look at numbers you need numbers and there's the magic there is some context also in that where did Alice they're over in fight oh we found pride where you could soccer kick people and stop their head and this and that and so the the the the game environment is actually different too so more uncertainty there's more chaos and pride there's more go back a little further and go like what about the guys used to like dance ever fought bear knuckle headbutts the whole nine you be done seven right I did beat that seven that was that was killing an idol so to speak although I didn't really kill him because I still love you know he's still and I mean he's still responsible for inspiration along this whole pathway you know it's it's meeting meeting your god and then putting an eye for it I guess making realizing they're human and then bringing them down to your level exactly but also there's a there's a huge misconception there and that is that I could bring maybe I could bring Dan Severin down to my level but I couldn't bring his mustache down to my level oh it is it is of mythic proportions and greater than yours great your facial hair is great in yours my facial hair is is is is creating its own legacy but it is not Dan Severin mustache level or now Don Frey mustache so Don Frey mustache Dan Sever mustache you know now you have like shea versus Sunni like yeah you think there'll be a calm marks like painting of Josh Barnett one day with the beard and is that is that basically I hope so I will actually comb my hair on like marks but um K Chaos is has a charm to it it does it does I mean we all thought Doc Brown in Back to the Future was was quite charming so you have to throw that into the calculation where they fought yes and the rules that they fought under you know someone got like a year of of change in one a 32-man tournament or something like that I go okay uh steep and Daniel Kormay are awesome and they may they will they will for sure be uh revered as when they're as for their careers 100% can you say that they're particularly even better overall than eager of change in maybe one of them could have beat them maybe maybe one of them wouldn't have you know maybe maybe eager would have gotten with the knuckles right away well maybe if they fought them in pride they wouldn't have won maybe if they fought them barren knuckle they wouldn't one I don't know you know and there's something about the cat like do you put who is gracing the top 10 you know there's something about top 10 of all time in terms of competitors capable um I don't know I'd have to think about that maybe not but I because it's crazy as like pyramid level like wow dude what what an amazing man yeah it's so important absolutely incredibly important but there's something about stepping into uh like fighting another human being under all the uncertainty that the early UFC's had I mean you don't know yep what is going to have and coupled that with not much money yeah all of it yes so that the purity of it too there's something about money I mean that yes shit for that yes that's world but that ruins the purity of the violence yeah people given the opportunity for yeah yeah well the bigger things get the more I love the fact that that fighting has opened up to such a degree that the career business side of it because I I absolutely distinctly separate the two the business side of it has opened up to give me far more possibilities open way more doors for me than I ever intended it to uh whereas the the athlete side of things has if anything just gotten substantially worse I would say and uh some of this can be some of this is due to all the the nature of all games will be learned will be gamed uh without even the rules being broken and once that's figured out you need to make an adjustment no adjustments have been made so the game just appears to be the same game over and over and over and over and over and over again on ESPN plus on whatever on whatever on whatever it doesn't really matter which night you watch it's the same game constantly and that's not because the the athletes are worse or better it's because they have had that game uh structure long enough that they figured out well what do you do to be to be the most successful at it what is the highest percentage way of approaching it essentially even if you're not thinking of percentages what would the if we take a step back it's really fascinating to think about the early UFC's did you fight dance every new UFC I found him in super brawl super brawl so that was in the early early days you're undefeated 2000 uh what were those early days let's say of mixed martial arts like div let me tell you the day of high adventure don't don't don't don't don't don't don't don't don't don't yeah it is it was so much fun and it made you feel absolutely like you were a part of a novel a comic book I mean I I would love to transcribe my experiences as what I consider a second generation MMA athlete I'm way too sensitive to anybody's personal anything that are not not even to you know I'm not a gossipy person I really do believe it like small people talk about others big people talk about ideas so um but there's some stories you can't tell without telling the whole story and there are so many amazing stories that could be told people being at their best people being at their worst yeah the whole the whole mocha gossip is there something you could speak to the chaos of the time oh 100% like well okay so we at AMC got uh connected to somebody it was thrown an event in Nampa Idaho and we all piled into this and uh Matt Humes uh Subaru wagon and we jammed out and we left Kirkland and we headed over to Idaho only to find out that there was nothing really put in place it was absolute disrepair and chaos they're they didn't have a reign they didn't have this it was such a bullshit adventure but we were like well you know there's hardly anywhere to fight is it's tough to find these opportunities so okay well how about this whoever is here to fight and is willing all right well since there's no venue there's no this whatever well got gloves we got mouthpieces well let's go to the park so I'll just look at paid yeah and so folks were kind of like I don't know about that the guy I was gonna fight was he finally figured they finally he finally gets information who I actually am and I was undefeated at the time and I think I had fought super brawl 13 or anyone that tournament and so he's like yeah I had no clue I'm so glad we didn't fight you had murdered me this is what a setup and eventually Matt had to had a strong arm the guy and get our money that we were supposed to all get and drive back and because he his whole position was well there ain't no fucking way we drove all the way out here for free this is on you you fucked this up not my problem but what is my problem is the lack of cash in my account so fix it you know or me fighting my first organized fight against an AMC guy on 11 days notice through a connection to an old wrestling coach I had and I just gathered up with where all my old martial arts my old martial arts instructor that I'd worked with and we grappled in his apartment we did tie pads in the park I ran a couple miles every day and then all right boom show it up one my fight by front choke in two minutes and then Matt goes okay well hey you did really great we'd like it to come back and fight again in the summer what do you think okay back off the university and then I think well that fight didn't go exactly how I wanted to so I got to find a way to get more experience I would literally fight people in the university like rec center on the old wrestling mats as they didn't know I had a wrestling team I would find anyone doing martial arts anyone talking about getting industry fights anyone whatever and just basically go oh you ever watch UFC yeah yeah that stuff's cool what do you what do you think oh man super Hindu man is badass rad so would you would you want to fight I mean it was way easier picking fights and then it was you know getting a girlfriend yeah I'll just you know path police resistance I think it might be useful for us to get some advice from you yeah all right because you've accomplished for the journey of a martial artist first if you accomplished some of the greatest athletes there is in the sport if somebody who's starting out now or like early on in their journey what advice would you give on how to become a martial artist catch rest there on fighter well I mean really what it comes down to is do it because you love it do it for that reason and that reason alone most people that get into this and attempt to make any sort of professional enroads with it you are not going to be the world champion you probably will never even fight for a belt in you're probably not going to net make money at this so don't do it for those reasons do it for the reason of the passion do it for the reason to be the absolute best that you can be whatever that ends up being you might at best only be mediocre but you won't even be mediocre if you don't do it like you really mean it so the passion look what where's the kernel of the passion would you say is it in the learning process itself the improvement I think it really depends on the person right I mean there's some people that really love the the the fact of they feel like they're growing right so both power you know you're growing growing stronger growing better you know the idea of eliminating weakness so to which I'll quickly define weakness as as like things that weaken you not like being physically weak sure you can call that weakness but maybe you're not meant to be a super strong guy but choosing to be weak is really a different story other than just like we're all deficient in some way or another so that's neither here nor there it's a matter of what you decide to do with it and that's an important strength and weakness at least the way I look at it like strength is choosing regardless of the difficulty to make improvements to strengthen even choosing to acknowledge that you you do lack and accept it and then make a decision what to do with it yeah but there's also there's a bunch of stuff that just like you said it's what you're drawn to there's an honesty to just grappling that it seems more real than anything else you can do sure well that's the that's where the passion of love can come yeah I mean it's being in an environment hopefully that is as true as possible uh it would be would be a stout a starter so it's hard to be a bullshit person when you're literally trying to tear each other's arms off yeah you know as she really sort of see who somebody is uh I also feel like you really really really get to see somebody who there a couple instances where you really see who people are uh on the mats and in the bedroom so uh even the aspect of self-betterment uh growth along a path I mean hell that's part of the the the the device of capture for martial arts as a business give you a belt put a stripe on your belt it's it's it's these iterations cost 20 bucks so but this is a benefit to that too I really enjoyed the progression of belts sure it's it um you know a bit of his OCD or whatever but you're enjoying the recognition your your growth when you feel when you're made to feel when I think genuinely you do earn it yeah I agree I agree I agree I actually make complete sense to me it's just it's anything that is is has a goodness and its purity can also have uh detriment and its perversion so uh and there's a value to competition I got in some shit in the past for saying is I I've gotten the most value in giving everything uh I have to try to win and and lose so like I've gotten all I remember most of the matches I've lost and I think that's what I've gotten the most from the sport is losing think about it I mean if you really think about it um what what makes you want to actually in detail go over what happened oh it's the time when you didn't get what you wanted yeah it's a time when you gave it everything you had and you came up short or failed miserably okay so if you're embarrassed in some way right and so that's usually the only time people again calamity is the impetus for them to actually turn around and go who the fuck am I what am I doing and why am I doing it yeah instead of naturally going hmm okay well I won why what was it the cause and so I think part of my success is that when I win I'm brutal when I lose I'm brutal and there is no in between so I remember losing uh the rematch against no guerra and I still feel like it was a bullshit call like I feel like I won that fight but my my opinion is that and this even came up so one of the coaches in the back was like oh you did great you know don't feel bad you know blah blah blah blah and I go no fuck that I didn't finish him I allowed the referees to make a judge a decision that I think is incorrect and bad but that came because I didn't take him out you know fuck that no no he won he's gonna get more money he's gonna get more recognition blah blah blah blah blah I accept all this and I don't and it's not okay and I need to if I when I get a chance to fight him again I got to figure out how to wait like take this guy out I don't want to say forever I'm not trying to put him six feet on the ground well when I fight yes I am but yeah but that but the the point being I need to find a way to my this is definitive you don't get to say shit about it because I'm the only one who's can stand right now that's the way it's got to be anything less than that is not good enough and even if I get to that then I got to figure out okay it's not a given how did I get to this point how did I make that happen was it simply bent because of his own mistakes or was it because of my my my successful action so it's always self-critical always constantly you love movies I read this somewhere yeah you mentioned Blade Runner is a favorite number one of all time the the final cut that's my go-to so you say Blade Runner is the greatest movie of all time it's one of the greatest movies of all time let's watch what's in the top my my top five Blade Runner final cut this is the original Blade Runner and I used to own on tape the original the original and I had the directors cut on DVD why Blade Runner by the way and the kid I just thought it was so cool it was something about really spoke to me the whole cyberpunk landscapes and this guy chasing down rogue androids replicants and is it is it just the entire cyberpunk universe I have a this robots as well no it's it's I mean the cyberpunk universe is part of it on the on the surface I have a I've always tended towards dark subject matter like things that are of the dark so to speak are things that I've always been gravitated towards I think maybe part of it is that the things that are darker are more accepting and more upfront with death and perhaps I think that maybe that is what was uh yeah somehow more honest perhaps and there's also the aspect of uh rebelliousness usually like there was uh I was never one to want to just do what somebody told me to do you know um I'm not sitting around trying to always be such a radical individual that I can't take orders no in fact I'm more than willing to take orders from somebody that I feel is competent and has merit and reason behind what they're doing and it makes like okay yeah yeah I'm 100% for not only will I kind of take orders I will help you achieve whatever it is if I think it's worthwhile um even at my own expense but uh to get to that point is a rarity like it's not not a given and so you can even imagine like being a grade school teacher and this kid doesn't respect you and he doesn't really think you're that smart they don't really appreciate that but um so cyberpunk is number one what else is that cyberpunk is kind of number one it's a it's an environment I love but at the same time Conan the barbarian by John Millie says one of my favorite films of all time uh and you know that's such a pure film in a way like the motivations are pure they're very easy to follow but not lacking in depth you know it's not it's not just explosions and and teal and orange it's uh it's it's more on the human condition and I love it and it's shot incredibly well it's got a credible soundtrack yeah I fucking love it but with Blade Runner also in a deeper sense you know again the human condition you know you start seeing like what what is what is being what is being human you know how does this relate to or if you can make it and you can tell it what to do at what point is it like you should or you shouldn't you know why do you get to determine what's alive and what's not what's a life that should be allowed to live and what isn't and what would be the strain of being Roy Batty and seeing all these incredible moments that with his passing will no longer exist especially if he hasn't had a chance to put that flame into another torch so to speak if he hasn't written them down if he hasn't passed them down to somebody else it had gone like tears in the rain like tears in the rain that scene is incredible uh that I mean but it's funny because those two universes are very different according to the barbarian and side of a punk is there that makes me curious about what else my being what's the top uh well let me think and it's a pretty do you like like the godfather is it of universe no no I mean I'm sure the godfather I've never actually watched the whole godfather no but also like uh was it casino goodfellas goodfellas a good movie but no that's not on my top it's it's a good flick uh but it doesn't really do it for me uh I if people really want to get into this a little more I did make a hundred a list of a hundred a hundred of my favorite movies on my facebook fan page nice uh but uh do you remember like oh yeah like blazing saddles is on there rich of the lost arc uh uh vahala rising by Nicholas from winding ref and uh maniac by uh William Lustig it's a 1980 gnarly video nasty horror movie about a serial killer uh who murders women and scalps them uh and it's gnarly as hell and very brutal and very bleak and very uh um I mean it's the kind of thing that like a lot of people would have a real hard time watching but uh one again I like things that are dark but two I thought the performances were fantastic in this film and they really got out but I think what the underlying thing was and it was you know there was a guy who was basically just like run a muck by the overbearing mother uh union archetype and it she was she imparted her insanity into him and he but yet there is this aspect you could see of him of him wanting to try and actually be able to be in the world and have love and have uh uh feminine companionship to go with with his masculine aspect but he had no way of understanding how to really make that happen and he had a complete negative connotation to the feminine so his struggle with and there's a little part in the in the movie where he somehow comes across this model or something and they actually he starts to feel like maybe he might be able to actually have a relationship with somebody and it goes somewhere but uh yeah uh even the Elijah Wood remake I felt was really well done and captured most of the essence of what the movie was about but I still feel like the original by way I'm lusted uh is the best what's the greatest uh love movie of all time and his love movie of all time so like something more loves and I mean I suppose love underlies most of these movies and especially so like the dog I mean hell to catch a meekase films are all about family of all things as bonkers as those movies are they the general theme is family almost entirely and all of his films yeah there's there's very I mean even you can argue play run yeah there is it's every love film of all time uh that's interesting I mean is ex caliber a film about love uh what's his caliber about king Arthur his caliber is about uh Arthur and becoming king of the Britons and his love of his his country and his love of Gwen of year but eventually yeah it becomes more of about the the necessity for the king to love to to hold hold ex caliber to stay to realize that while if you're the king you can love your wife and you can love your best friend and they may fuck each other behind your back and as they fall in love too but at the end of the day your responsibility your your love has to be to the to the to the country and everyone else first and not your own personal uh wants which you know well it made a much more interesting story when you have uh Carmine Berrana and and are or there are oh oh what does that one it's it's a German opera but uh you know into horses and slowmo and sword fights and an epic death scene between uh Arthur and his his son okay now I definitely have to watch it and I haven't watched it in birish it's uh it is John Bournemann's second film in Hollywood his first one being uh Point Blank with Lee Marvin which is also on top one of the upper echelon movies on my list uh derived from a book by called The Outfit by uh what is his name uh I forget but Darwin Cook the comic's illustrator he did Donald Westlake wrote so Darwin Cook does does an amazing comic book send up of Darwin Cook's novels and they are fucking incredible so anyways but uh the Point Blank with Lee Marvin uh you know it's a man driven by purpose revenge but also by like really pure motivations he wants his money he was he was betrayed he he wants his his cash because this is what he agreed to do the thing for and this is which also is part of the reason why I like no country for old men so much which I felt was a great great movie even better book but uh I remember talking to my friend and I go you know Anton Chigger is the most pure human being in that whole book well that guy's the villain I go is he evil like he's the one he lies to no one he does everything he says he will do he always follows his word and on the rare occasion he he allows fate to make a decision as he figures like well whatever all led us to here we'll we'll we'll lead us one way or the other and if we're at this crossroads what how is there any better a worse way than to do it over a coin flip and so that whole scene where the guy is going well what am I putting up and he goes everything you've been putting it up every day of your life and that's true everything we do is a decision is a calling as a choice and it toward and then above me out that they they reduced the last interaction between Chigger and uh what's his face's life and he finally finds her and she's like you don't have to do this I mean she's and he's like yes yes I do this is the way it is you can think that your life could have turned out any sort of ways you could have done this you kind of in that but the reality isn't this is the way your life is it's the way it was always going to be you know the fact that I'm here is the end of it and that's that yeah it's it's fun if you're honest this will dark movies reveal that the villains are the the purist of humans and uh can teach us the most like profound lessons and that's the certainly example of it what do you think the big ridiculous last philosophical question what do you think is the the meaning of this whole thing we got going of life and existence on earth from your individual perspective but the entirety of the human species life uh the universe and everything yeah don't we could just leave it at that exactly where I was going I love it Josh I love you very much you've been a huge inspiration I have a friend who she said do you know Lex Friedman have you gone on Lex this con I go yes I know I know Lex Friedman is I've sadly been way too long in contact without making it happen for too long and uh and yes I will 100% I even cut a shirt at the beginning of the pandemic to make my own little mask at one point due to the the Lex process yeah and uh I love it I can't really hear you like but I'm demonstrating just let's see it through but uh now this has been a blast and next time next time let's drink some of the the war bring a whiskey I will bring some warmaster uh I wasn't sure if you were uh if you unbibed at all in spirits 100% it felt a little weird to do it early on in the morning especially because I'm flying out though does it I mean I've had some wonderful morning whiskey at times it it uh now that you've mentioned it it doesn't at all so next time let's make sure what Joe organ calls the uh adult beverages let's uh make sure we indulge I have zero reservations for doing such a thing I'm into it Josh thanks for talking to me that my pleasure thanks for listening to this conversation with Josh Barnett I thank you to our sponsors monk pack low-carb snacks element electrolyte drink eight sleep self-calling mattress and rev transcription and captioning service click the sponsor links to get a discount at the support the spot guess and now let me leave you with some words from sun zoo in the art of war the supreme art of war is this subdue the enemy without fighting thank you for listening and hope to see you next time black