 The following is a conversation with Dan Gacotov, VP of Engineering at Rev.ai, which is by many metrics the best speech-to-text AI engine in the world. Rev in general is a company that does captioning and transcription of audio by humans and by AI. I've been using their services for a couple of years now and planning to use Rev to add both captions and transcripts to some of the previous and future episodes of this podcast. To make it easier for people to read through the conversation or reference various parts of the episode, since that's something that quite a few people requested. I'll probably do a separate video on that with links on the podcast website so people can provide suggestions and improvements there. Quick mention of our sponsors. I thought it greens only one nutrition drink. Blinkist app that summarizes books, Business Wars podcast, and cash app. So the choice is health, wisdom, or money. Choose wise of my friends and if you wish, click the sponsor links below to get a discount and to support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that I reached out to Dan and the Rev team for conversation because I've been using and genuinely loving their service and really curious about how it works. I previously talked to the head of Adobe research for the same reason. For me, there's a bunch of products, usually software that comes along and just makes my life way easier. Examples are Adobe Premiere for video editing, as it top our ex for cleaning up audio, out of hotkey and windows for automated keyboard or mouse tasks, E-Mex is an ID for everything including the universe itself. I can keep on going but you get the idea. I just like talking to people who create things I'm a big fan of. That said, after doing this conversation, the folks at Rev.ai offered to sponsor this podcast in the coming months. This conversation is not sponsored by the guest. It probably goes without saying but I should say it anyway that you cannot buy your way onto this podcast. I don't know why you would want to. I wanted to make a specific point that no sponsor will ever influence what I do on this podcast or to the best of my ability to influence what I think. I wasn't really thinking about this. For example, when I interview Jack Dorsey who is the CEO of Square that happens to be sponsor in this podcast but I should really make it explicit. I will never take money for bringing a guest on. Every guest on this podcast is someone I genuinely am curious to talk to or just genuinely loves something they've created. As I sometimes get criticized for, I'm just a fan of people and that's what I talk to. As I also talk about way too much, money is really never a consideration. In general, no amount of money can buy my integrity. That's true for this podcast and that's true for anything else I do. If you enjoyed this thing, subscribe on YouTube, review it on Apple Podcast, follow on Spotify, support on Patreon, connect with me on Twitter, Alex Friedman. As usual, I'll do a few minutes of ads now and no ads in the middle. I try to make these interesting but I give you time stamps so if you skip, please still check out the sponsors by clicking the links in the description. It is the best way to support this podcast. This show is sponsored by who's quickly becoming my favorite sponsor Athletic Greens. The all-in-one daily drink to support better health and peak performance, I just in fact actually finished drinking it. It replaced the multivitamin for me and went far beyond that with 75 vitamins and minerals. I do intermittent fasting of 16 to 24 hours every day and always break my fast with Athletic Greens. I can't say enough good things, can't stop braving about these guys. It helps me not worry whether I'm getting the nutrients I need. One of the many reasons I'm a fan is that they keep iterating on the formula, keep improving it, like all good engineers and scientists always should be. Life is not about reaching perfection, it's about constantly striving for it and making sure each iteration is a positive delta. The other thing I've taken for a long time outside of Athletic Greens is fish oil. So I'm especially excited now that they're selling fish oil and are offering listeners of this very podcast. Free one month supply of wild caught omega-3 fish oil. When you go to athleticgreens.com slash Lex to claim the special offer. By the way, if the link doesn't seem to work for you for whatever reason, sometimes it doesn't if you have an ad blocker enabled. So try to turn off your ad blocker for this one particular case, but they're also trying to fix it so they're on top of it. Click the Athletic Greens.com slash Lex link in the description to get the fish oil and the all-in-one supplement I rely on for the nutritional foundation of my physical and mental performance. This episode is supported by Blinkist. My favorite ad for learning new things. Blinkist takes the key ideas from thousands of non-fiction books and condenses them down into just 15 minutes that you can read or listen to. I'm a big believer in reading at least an hour every day. As part of that, I use Blinkist to try out a book. I may otherwise never have a chance to read. And in general, it's a great way to broaden your view of the idea landscape out there. And find books that you may want to read more deeply. With Blinkist, you get unlimited access to read or listen to a massive library of condensed non-fiction books. I also use Blinkist's short cast. That's a lot of essays to quickly catch up on a podcast episode I've missed. Right now, Blinkist has a special offer just for the listeners of this podcast. Let me take a sip of this drink first. If you're listening to this, I dare you to try to guess which drink I'm drinking. Go to blinkist.com slash Lex to start your free seven day trial and get 25% off a blinkist premium membership. That's blinkist spelled B L I N K I S T blinkist.com slash Lex to get 25% off and a seven day free trial blinkist.com slash Lex. This episode is also brought to you by Business Wars podcast. Tech entrepreneurs are in all-out race to cash in on our collective addiction to social media. That sentence was way harder pronounced than I thought when I first started saying it. And the newest season of Wondery's Business Wars TikTok versus Instagram, they tracked the war between two social media giants. I've spoken about possibly entering this space by helping build a new social network. This is something I struggle with quite a bit because it feels like standing on the edge of a cliff hoping to fly. I want to keep my mind and hard open fragile, but it seems that the world can too easily destroy such a mind. It's so I wonder if I'm able to face such challenges. Perhaps the choice isn't mine to make. Perhaps it's already been made. Anyway, this podcast season looks just one heated competition in the space where the game in my view is not one that makes for a better world. Listen to the latest season of Business Wars TikTok versus Instagram, Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or listen ad-free by joining Wondery Plus in the Wondery app. I just just in general highly recommend Wondery. There's a lot of good podcasts on there. Finally, the show is presented by CashApp, the number one finance app in the App Store. When you get it, use code Lex Podcast. CashApp, let's you send money to friends by Bitcoin and invest in the stock market with as little as $1. I'm thinking of doing some conversations with folks who work in and around the cryptocurrency space. Similar to artificial intelligence, there are a lot of charlatans in this space, but there's a lot of free thinkers as well, technical geniuses that are worth exploring ideas with and depth and with care. And I think it's pretty clear that cryptocurrencies here to stay. Bitcoin just hit $32,000. Anyway, if you get CashApp from the App Store or Google Play and use code Lex Podcast, you get $10. And CashApp will also donate to $1.00 the first, an organization that is helping to advance robotics and STEM education for young people around the world. And now, here's my conversation with Dan Kokorov. You mentioned science fiction on the phone. So let's go with the ridiculous first. What's the greatest sci-fi novel of all time in your view? And maybe what ideas do you find philosophically fascinating about it? The greatest sci-fi novel of all time is Dune. And the second greatest is the children of Dune. And the third is the God Emperor of Dune. I'm a huge fan of the whole series. I mean, it's just an incredible world that he created. And I don't know if you read the book or not. No, I've not. It's one of my biggest regrets. It's been especially because in your movies coming out, everyone's super excited about it. It's ridiculous to say, and sorry, I didn't interrupt, is that I used to play the video game. It used to be Dune. I guess you would call that real-time strategy. Right, right. I think I remember that game. Yeah, it's kind of awesome. 90s or something. I think I played it actually when I was in Russia. I definitely remember it. I was not in Russia anymore. I think at the time that I used to live in Russia, I think video games were about the suspicion of pong. I think pong was pretty much the greatest game I ever got to play in Russia, which was still a privilege in that age. So you didn't get color? You didn't get... So I loved Russia in 1991. I did. Okay. So it was one of the few I could kiss because my mom was a programmer. So I would go to her work. I would take the metro. I got her work and play on the equivalent of a 286 PC. With floppy disks. Yes. Okay. Back to Dune. Back to Dune. By the way, the new movie, I'm pretty interested in, but it's skeptical. I'm a little skeptical. I'm a little skeptical. I saw the trailer. I don't know. So there's a David Lynch movie, Dune, as you may know. I'm a huge David Lynch fan, by the way. So the movie is somewhat controversial, but it's a little confusing, but it captures the mood of the book better than I would say, like most any adaptation. And Dune is so much about mood in the world, right? Back to the philosophical point. So in the fourth book, God Emperor of Dune, there's a setting where Lito, one of the characters, he's become this weird sort of God Emperor. He's turned into a gigantic worm. I mean, you have to read the book to understand what that means. The worms are involved. The worms are involved. You probably sell the worms in the trailer, right? And in the video. So you kind of like merges with this worm and becomes a tyrant of the world and you're like, oppresses to people for a long time, right? But he has a purpose. And the purpose is to kind of break through kind of a stagnation period and civilization, right? But people are gotten too comfortable, right? And so you kind of oppresses them so that they explode and like go on to colonize new worlds and kind of renew the forward momentum of humanity, right? And so to me, that's kind of like fascinating. I do need a little bit of pressure and suffering, right? To kind of like make progress, not get too comfortable. Okay, maybe that's a bit of a tool philosophy to take away, but that seems to be the case. Unfortunately, obviously, I'm a huge fan of suffering. So one of the reasons we're talking today is that a bunch of people requested that I do transcripts for this podcast and do captioning. I used to make all kinds of YouTube videos and I would go on upwork, I think, and I would hire folks into transcription. And it was always a pain in the ass for me being honest. And then I don't know how I discovered Rev, but when I did, it was this feeling of like, holy shit, somebody figured out how to do it just really easily. I'm such a fan of just when people take a problem and they just make it easy. You know, like just, there's so many, it's like there's so many things in life that you might not even be aware of that are painful. Then Rev, you just like give the audio, give the video, you can actually give a YouTube link. And then it comes back like a day later or two days later, whatever the hell it is with the captions. And all in a standard format, it was, I don't know, it was it was it was truly a joy. So I thought I had, you know, just for the hell of it, talk to you that one other product and just made my soul feel good. One other product I've used like that is for people who might be familiar is called isotope, RX is for audio editing. And like, and that's another one where it was like, you just drop it, I dropped into the audio and it just cleans everything up really nicely. All the stupid like the mouth sounds and sometimes there's background like sounds due to the malfunction of the equipment, it can clean that stuff up. It can it has a general voice denoising, it has like automation capabilities where you can do batch processing and you can put a bunch of effects. I mean, it just, I don't know, that everything else sucked for like voice based cleanup that I've ever used. I've used audition, Adobe audition. I've used all kinds of other things with plugins. You have to kind of figure it all out. You do manually. Here's just it just worked. So that's another one in this whole pipeline that just brought joy to my to my heart. Anyway, all that to say is, Rev put a smile to my face. So Kimi, you maybe take a step back and say, what is Rev and how does the work and rev or rev calm? Rev rev calm. Same thing, I guess. We do have Rev data AI now as well, which we can talk about later. Like do you have the actual domain or is it just the actual domain, but we also use it kind of as a sub brand. So we use Rev data AI to denote our ASR services, right? And Rev that comes kind of our more human and to the end user services. So it's like wordpress.com and wordpress.org. You actually have separate brands that like, I don't know if you're familiar with what those are. Yeah, yeah. They provide almost like a separate branch of a little bit. I think with that, it's like wordpress.org is kind of their open source, right? And wordpress.com is sort of their host that commercial offering. Yes. With us, the difference in is a little bit different, but maybe a similar idea. Okay, so what is Rev? Before I launch into what is Rev, I was going to say, you know, like you're talking about like Rev was music two years. Yeah, your your field was music to my ears. Yeah. To us, the founders of Rev because Rev was kind of founded to improve on the model of Upwork. That was kind of the original part of their original impetus. Like RCO, Jason was an early employee of Upwork. So he was very familiar with their work to company, Upwork to company. And so he was very familiar with that model and he wanted to make the whole experience better because he knew like when you go at that time, Upwork was primarily programmers. So the main thing, they offered us if you want to hire, you know, someone to help you go to a little site, right? You could go on Upwork, you could like browse through a list of freelancers, pick a programmer, have you know, have a contract with them and have them do some work. But it was kind of a difficult experience because for the for you, you would kind of have to browse through all these people, right? And you have to decide, okay, like, well, it's this guy good as or somebody else better. And naturally, you know, you're going to Upwork because you're not an expert, right? If you're an expert, you probably wouldn't be like getting a programmer from Upwork. So how can you really tell? So there's a kind of like a lot of potential regret, right? What if I choose the bad person, they like to be late on the work, it's going to be painful experience. And for the freelancer, it was also painful because, you know, half time they spent not on actually doing the work, but kind of figuring out how can I make my profile most attractive to the buyer, right? They're not an expert on that either. So like our idea was, let's remove the barrier, right? Like, let's make it simple. We'll pick a few verticals that are fairly standardizable. Now we actually started with translation. And then we added audio transcription a bit later. And we'll just make it a website you go, give us your files, we'll give you back the results. You know, as soon as possible, you know, originally maybe it was 48 hours, then we made it shorter and shorter and shorter. Yeah, there's a rush processing too. There's a rush processing now. And we'll hide all the details from you, right? Yeah. And like that's kind of exactly what you're experiencing, right? You don't need to worry about the details of how the sausage is made. That's really cool. So you picked like a vertical, by vertically, you mean, basically a service category. Why translation is rather thinking of potentially going into other verticals in the future? Or is this like the focus now is translation transcription like language? The focus now is language or speech services generally speech to text language services. You can kind of group them however you want. But we originally, the categorization was work from home. So on a work that was done by people on a computer, you know, we weren't trying to get into, you know, task rabbit type of things. And something that could be relatively standard, not a lot of options. So we could kind of present the simplified interface, right? So programming wasn't like a good fit because each programming project is kind of unique, right? We're looking for something that transcription is, you know, you have five hours of audio, it's five hours of audio, right? Translation is somewhat similar in that, you know, you can have a five-page document, you know, and then you just can price it by that. And then you pick the language you want, and that's mostly all that is to it. So those were a few criteria. We started with translation because we saw the need and we picked kind of a specialty of translation where we would translate things like boistertif, because, um, so it's gracious documents, things like that. And so they were fairly even more well-defined. So you can use it to kind of tell if we did a good job. So you can literally charge per type of document. Was that was was that the so what what is it now? Is it per word or something like that? Like how do you like how do you measure the effort involved in a particular thing? So now it looks like a for audio transcription, right? It's a for audio immunity. Well that that yes. For translation, we don't really actually focus it on anymore. But you know, if back when it was still a main business of rabbit was per page, right, or per word depending on the kind of a. You can also do translation now on the audio, right? Like subtitles. So it would be both transcription and translation. That's right. I wanted to test the system to see how good it is, to see like how how well is Russian supported? Thanks, though. Yeah. And it'd be interesting to try it out. I mean, one of the now it's only in like the one direction, right? So you start with English, and then you can have subtitles in Russian. Not really. Not really the other way. Got it, because it's I'm deeply curious about this. I'm when COVID opens up a little bit when the economy, when the world opens up a little bit. You want to build your brand in Russia? No, I don't. First of all, I'm allergic to the word brand. I'm definitely not building any brands in Russia. But I'm going to Paris to talk to the translators of Dusty Eski and Tolstoy. There's this famous couple that does translation. And you know, more and more thinking of how is it possible to have a conversation within Russian speaker? Because I have just some number of famous Russian speakers that interested in talking to. And my Russian is not strong enough to be witty and funny. I'm already a nitty in English. I'm an extra level of like awkward idiot in Russian, but I can understand it. Right. And I also like wonder how can I create a compelling English Russian experience for an English speaker? Like if I, there's a guy named Gregorley Perramon, who's a mathematician, who obviously didn't speak English. So I would probably incorporate like a Russian translator into the picture. And then you'll be like a, not to use a weird term, but like a three, like a three three person thing where it's like a dance of where like I understand it one way. They don't understand the other way, but I'll be asking questions in English. I don't know. I don't know what's right way complicated. It's complicated, but I feel like it's worth the effort for certain kinds of people, one of whom I'm confident, Vladimir Putin, I'm for sure talking to. I really want to make it happen because I think I could do a good job with it. But the right, you know, understanding the fundamentals of translation is something I'm really interested in. So that's what I'm starting with. The actual translators of like Russian literature because they understand the nuance and the beauty of the language. I'll go back and forth, but I also want to see like in speech, how can we do it in real time? So that's like a little bit of a baby project that I hope to push forward. But anyway, it's a challenging thing. So just to share my dad, actually, does translation. Not professional. He writes poetry. That was kind of always his, not a hobby, but he's, he had a job like a date job, but his passion was always writing poetry. And then we get to America and it like you started also translating. First he was translating English poetry to Russia, and now he also legos. The other way, you kind of gained some small fame in that world anyways because recently the spout like Lewis had enough you know, so American poet, she was awarded the Nobel Prize for literature. And so my dad had translated one of her books of poetry in Russian. He was like one of the few, so you kind of like they asked him and given interview to Radius Vaboda, if you know that is and you kind of talked about some of the intricacies of translating poetry. So that's like an extra level of difficulty, right? Because translating poetry is even more challenging than translating, just, you know, interviews. Do you remember any experiences and challenges to having to do the translation that that's the got to like something he's talked about? I mean a lot of it I think is work choice, right? It's the way Russian is structured. It's first all quite different than the way English is structured, right? There is inflections in Russian and gender as in they don't exist in English. One of the reasons actually why machine translation is quite difficult for English to Russian and Russian to English because there's such different languages. But then English has like a huge number of words, many more than Russian actually I think, so it's often difficult to find the right word to convey the same emotional meaning. Yeah, Russian language they play with words much more. So you're mentioning that RAV was kind of born out of trying to take a vertical on the upwork and then standardize it. So we're just trying to make the the freelancer marketplace idea better, right? Better for both customers and better for the freelancers themselves. Is there something else to the story of RAV finding RAV like what did it take to bring it to actually to life? Was there any pain points? Plenty of plenty of pain points. I mean as often the case it's with scaling it up, right? And in this case the scaling is kind of scaling the the marketplace, so to speak. RAV is essentially a two-sided marketplace, right? Because the customers and then there's the RAVs. If there's not enough RAVs, RAV is a word called our freelancers. So if there's not enough RAVs, then customers have a bad experience, right? It takes longer to get your work done, things like that. If there's too many, then RAVs have a bad experience because they might log on to see what work is available and there's not very much work, right? So kind of keeping that balance is a quite challenging problem. And that's less like a problem we've been working on for many years. We're still like refining our methods, right? If you can kind of talk to this gig economy idea, I did a bunch of different psychology experiments on Mechanical Turk, for example. I've asked to do different kinds of very tricky computer vision annotation on Mechanical Turk is connecting people in a more systematized way. I would say, you know, between tasks and what would you call that worker? Is what Mechanical Turk calls it? What do you think about this world of gig economies? Of there being a service that connects customers to workers in a way that's like massively distributed, like potentially scaling to, it could be scaled to like tens of thousands of people, right? Is there something interesting about that world you could speak to? Yeah, well, we don't think of it as kind of gig economy. Like to some degree, I don't like to work gig that much because to some degree, it diminishes the work's being done, right? It sounds kind of like almost amateurish. Well, maybe in like music industry like gig is just a standard term, but in work, it kind of sounds like, oh, it's frivolous. To us, it's improving the nature of working from home on your own time and on your own terms, right? And kind of taking away geographical limitations and time limitations, right? So, you know, many of our freelancers are maybe work from home moms, right? And, you know, they don't want the traditional nine to five job, but they want to make some income and rough kind of like allows them to do that and decide like exactly how much to work and when to work. Or by the same token, maybe someone wants to live the mountain top, you know, life, right? You know, cabin in the woods, but they still don't make so money. And like, generally, that wouldn't be compatible before, before this new world, it kind of had to choose. But like with rev, like, you feel like you don't have to choose. Can you speak to like, what's the demographics, like distribution, like where do rivers live? Is it from all over the world? Like, what is it? Do you have a sense of, uh, uh, what's all over the world? Uh, most of them are in the US. That's the majority. Um, yeah, because most of our work is audio transcription. And so you have to speak pretty good English. Uh, so the majority of them are from the US. So we have people in some other of the English speaking countries. And as far as like us, it's really all over the place. Um, you know, for some of the years now, we've been doing these little meetings where the management team will go to some place and we'll try to meet rivers and, you know, pretty much wherever we go, it's pretty easy to find, you know, a large number of rivers, you know, the most recent one we did is in Utah. But, but anyway, really, are they from all walks of life at these young folks, older folks? Yeah, all walks of life, really, like I said, you know, one category is, you know, the work from home, um, students, you know, who want to make some extra income. There are some people who may be, you know, maybe they're have some social anxiety so they don't want to be in the office, right? And this is one way for them to make a living. So it's, it's really pretty, pretty wide variety. But like on the flip side, for example, one wherever we were talking to was a person who had a fairly high powered career before and was kind of like taking a break. And just wanted to almost doing this just to explore and learn about, you know, the gave economy core and code, right? So it really is a pretty wide variety of folks. Yeah, it's kind of interesting through the captioning process for me to learn about the, the reveres because, um, like some are clearly like weirdly knowledgeable about technical concepts. Like you can tell by how good they are at like capitalizing stuff, like the technical terms, like a machine learning or deep learning. Right. Like I've used rev to annotate a two caption, um, the deep learning lectures or machine learning lectures I did at MIT and it's funny, like a large number of them were like, I don't know if they looked it up or were already knowledgeable, but they do a really good job. Like, not they invest time into these things. They will like do research, they will google things, you know, that's kind of make sure they get it right. But to some of them, it's like, it's actually part of the enjoyment of the work. Like they'll tell us, you know, I'll do this because I get paid to watch a documentary on something. And I learn something while I'm transcribing, right? Pretty cool. Yeah. So was that captioning transcription process look like for the rever? Can you maybe speak to that to give people a sense? Like how much is automated, how much is manual? Was the actual interface look like all that kind of stuff? Yeah, so we, you know, we've invested a pretty good amount of time to give like our reveres the best tools possible. Yeah, so typical day forever, they might log into their workspace. They'll see a list of audios that need to be transcribed. And we try to give them tools to pick specifically the ones they want to do, you know, so maybe some people like to do longer audios or shorter audios. People have their preferences. Some people like to do audios in a particular subject or from particular country. So we try to give people the tools to control things like that. And then when they pick what they want to do, we'll launch a specialized editor and that we've built to make transcription as efficient as possible. They'll start with a speech reg draft. So, you know, we have our machine learning model for automated speech recognition. They'll start with that. And then our tools are optimized to help them correct that. So it's basically a process of correction. Yeah, it depends on, you know, I would say the audio. If the audio itself is pretty good, like probably like our podcast right now would be quite good. So, DSR would do a fairly good job. But if you imagine someone recorded a lecture, you know, in the back of a auditorium, right? Where like the speakers are really far away. And there's maybe a lot of crosstalk and things like that. Then maybe DSR wouldn't do a good job. So the person might say like, you know, what I'm just going to do it from scratch. Yeah, that kind of really depends. What would you say is the speed that you can possibly get? Like, what's the fastest? Can you get, is it possible to get real time or no? As you're like listening, can you write as fast as real time would be pretty difficult. It's actually a pretty, it's not an easy job, you know, that. We actually encourage everyone at the company to try to be a transcriber for their descriptions for a day. And it's way harder than you might think it is, right? Because people talk fast and people have accents and all this kind of stuff. So real time is pretty difficult. Is it possible? Like, there's somebody we're probably going to use Rev to caption this. They're listening to this right now. What's what's what do you think is the fastest you can possibly get on this right now? I think on a good audio, maybe two to three X, I would say. Real time. Meaning it takes two to three times longer than the actual audio of the of the podcast. This is so meta. I could just imagine the reverse working on this right now. You're like, you're way wrong. You're way wrong. This takes way longer. But yeah, definitely without me. I could do real time. Yeah. Okay. So you mentioned ASR. Can you speak to what is ASR? Automatic speech recognition. How much? Like, what is the gap between perfect human performance and perfect or pretty damn good ASR? Yeah. So ASR automatic speech recognition. It's a classic machine learning problem, right? To take speech like we're talking and transform it into a sequence of words essentially. Audio of people talking audio towards. And you know, there's a variety of different approaches and techniques which we could talk about later if you want. So, you know, we think we have pretty much the world's best ASR for this kind of speech, right? So there's different kinds of domains, right, for ASR. Like, one domain might be voice assistance, right? So Siri. Very different than what we're doing, right? Because Siri, there's fairly limited vocabulary, you know, you might ask Siri to play a song or you know, word repeats or whatever. And it's very good at doing that. Very different from when we're start talking in a very unstructured way. And Siri will also generally adapt to your voice and stuff like this. So for this kind of audio, we think we have the best. And our accuracy, right now it's I think it's maybe 14% word error rate on our test suite that we generally use to measure. So word error rate is like one way to measure accuracy for ASR, right? So what's 14% word rate? So 14% means across this test suite of a variety of different audios, it would be it would get in some way 14% of the words wrong. 14% of the words wrong. So the way you kind of calculated is you might add up insertions, deletions and substitutions, right? So insertions is like extra words, deletions are words that we said, but weren't in the transcript, right? Substitutions is you said Apple, but I said, but ASR thought it was able something like this. Human accuracy, most people think realistically it's like 3% to percent word error rate would be like the max achievable. So there's still quite a gap, right? Would you say that YouTube when I upload videos often generates automatic captions, are you sort of from a company perspective, from a tech perspective, are you trying to beat YouTube? Google, it's a hell of a Google, I mean, I don't know how seriously they take this task, but I imagine it's quite serious. And they, you know, Google is probably up there in terms of their teams on ASR or just NLP, natural English processing different technologies. So do you think you can beat Google? On this kind of stuff, yeah, we think so. Google just woke up on my phone. This is hilarious. Okay. Now Google is listening, sending it back to headquarters for these rough people. But that's the goal. Yeah, I mean, we measure ourselves against like Google, Amazon, Microsoft, you know, some of the some smaller competitors. And we use like our internal tests with it, we try to compose it of a pretty representative set of ideas. Maybe it's some podcasts, some videos, some interviews, some lectures, things like that, right? And we beat them in our own testing. And actually, we have offers automated, like you can actually just do automated captioning. So like, I guess it's like way cheaper, whatever it is, whatever the rates are. Yeah. Yeah. So it's up by the way, it used to be a dollar per minute for captioning and transcription. Things like a dollar 15 or something like that. $225. $225. $225, no. Yeah. It's pretty cool. That was the other thing that was surprising to me, it was actually like the cheapest thing you could one of the, I mean, I don't remember being cheaper. You could on up or get cheaper, but it was clear to me that this, that's going to be really shitting. Yeah. So like you're also competing on price. I think there were services that you can get like similar to rev kind of feel to it, but it wasn't as automated. Like the drag and drop, the entirety of the interface, it's like the thing we're talking about. I'm such a huge fan of like frictionless like Amazon's single buy button, whatever. Yeah. That one click. The one click. That's genius right there. Like that is so important for services. Yeah. That simplicity. And I mean, Rev is almost there. I mean, there's like some trying to think. So I, I think of I stopped using this pipeline, but Rev offers it and I like it, but it was causing me some issues on my side, which is you can connect it to like Dropbox. And it generates the files and Dropbox. So like it closes the loop to where I don't have to go to Rev at all. And I can download it. Sorry, I don't have to go to Rev at all and to download the files. It could just like automatically copy them. You're putting a Dropbox on, you know, a day later or maybe a few hours later. Yeah. It shows up. Just shows up. Yeah. Yeah. I was trying to do programmatically too. Is there an API interface? You can, I was trying to through like through Python to download stuff automatically, but then I realized this is the programmer in me. Like dude, you don't need to automate everything like in life. Like flawlessly because I wasn't doing enough captions to justify it to myself the time investment into automating everything perfectly. Yeah, I would say if you're doing so many interviews that your biggest roadblock is looking on the road, but now that we're talking about Elon Musk levels of business. But for sure, we have like a variety of ways to make it easy. You know, there's the integration you mentioned, I think a store company called Sapier, which kind of can connect Dropbox to Rev and vice versa. We have an API. If you want to really like customize it, you know, if you want to create the Lex Friedman, you know, CMS or whatever. But this whole thing, okay, cool. So can you speak to the ASR a little bit more like, what does it take like approach wise machine learning wise? How hard is this problem? How do you get to the 3% air rate? Like what's your vision of all of this? Yeah, well, the 3% air rate is definitely, that's the grand vision. We'll see what it takes to get there. But we believe in ASR, the biggest thing is the data. Like it is true of like a lot of machine learning problems today. The more data you have and the higher quality the data, the better label the data. That does here get good results and we had Rev have kind of like the best data. Like we have, like you're literally, your, your, your literally is annotating the data. Our business model is being paid to annotate data. So it's kind of like a pretty magical flywheel. And so we've kind of like ridden this flywheel to, to this point. And we think we're still kind of in the early stages of figuring out all the parts of the flywheel to use, you know, because we have the final transcripts and we have the, the audios and we train on that. But we in principle also have all the edits that the reveres make, right? I mean, interesting. How can you use that as a, we wait, that's something for us to figure out in the future. But you know, we feel like we're only in the early stages, right? So the day is there, that'd be interesting. Like almost like a recurrent neural net for fixing, for fixing transcripts. I don't, I was remember we did segmentation annotation for, for driving data. So segmenting the scene like visual data. And you can get all, so those drawing people are drawing polygons that are on different objects and so on. And it feels like it always felt like there was a lot of information in the clicking, the sequence of clicking that people do, the kind of fixing of the polygons that they do. Now, there's a few papers written about how to draw polygons like with recurrent neural nets to try to learn from the human clicking. But it was just like experimental, you know, it was one of those like CDPR type papers that people do like a really tiny data set. It didn't feel like people really try to do it seriously. And I wonder, I wonder if there's information in the fixing that's that provides deeper set of signal than just like the raw data. The intuition is for sure there must be right? It must be. And in all kinds of signals, how long you took to, you know, make that added and stuff like that. And it's going to be like up to us. That's why like with the next couple of years, it's like super exciting for us, right? So that's what like the focus is now. You mentioned rev.ai. That's where you want to. Yeah. So rev.ai is kind of our way of bringing this ASR to the rest of the world. So when we started, we were human only. Then we kind of created this TEMI service. I think you might have used it, which was kind of ASR for the consumer. So if you don't want to pay a dollar 25, but you want to pay now, it's 25 centimeters, I think. And you gather the transcript, the machine generated transcript, you get an editor and you can kind of fix it up yourself, right? Then we started using TSR for human transcriptionists. And then the kind of Ravai is the final step of the journey, which is, you know, we have this amazing engine. What can people build with it, right? What kind of new applications could be enabled if you have speed track that's that accurate? Do you have ideas for this or is it just providing it as a service and seeing what people come up with? It's providing it as a service and seeing what people come up with and kind of learning from what people do with it. Anyway, I have ideas of our own as well, of course, but it's a little bit like, you know, when AWS provided the building blocks, right? And they saw what people built with it and they try to make it easier to build those things, right? And we kind of hope to do the same thing. Although AWS kind of does a shady job of like I'm continually surprised that we can't go Turk, for example, how shitty the interface is. We're talking about like, rev making me feel good. Like when I first discovered mechanical Turk, the initial idea of it was like, it made me feel like we're off does, but then the interface is like, come on. Yeah, it's horrible. Why why is it so painful? Does nobody at Amazon want to like seriously invest in it? It felt like it could make so much money if you took this effort seriously. And it feels like they have a committee of like two people just sitting back like a meeting, they meet once a month, like, what are we going to do with mechanical Turk? It's like two websites make me feel like this, that and Craig list dot org, whatever the hell it is. It feels like it's designed in the 90s. Well, Craigslist basically hasn't been updated pretty much since the year. Do you seriously think there's a team like how big is the team working on mechanical Turk? I don't know. There's some team, right? I feel like there isn't. I'm skeptical. Yeah. Well, if it's possible, they benefit from, you know, the other teams like moving things forward. Right. The small way possible. But I know, I mean, we do we we use mechanical Turk for a couple of things as well. And it's painful. But yeah, it works. I think most people, the thing is, most people don't really use the UI, right? Like so, like we, for example, we use through the API. Right. So yeah. But even the API documentation and so on, like, they're super outdated. Like, yeah, it's, I don't, I don't even know what to, I mean, the same like same criticism, as long as we're ranting, my same criticism goes to the APIs of most of these companies like Google, for example, the API for the different services. It's just the documentation is so shitty. Like it's not so shitty. I should, I should actually be, I should exhibit some gratitude. Okay, let's practice some gratitude. The, the, you know, the documentation is pretty good. Like, most of the things that the API makes available is pretty good. It's just that in the sense that it's accurate, sometimes outdated, but like the degree of explanations with examples is only covering, I would say, like 50% of what's possible. And it just feels a little bit like there's a lot of natural questions that people would want to ask that doesn't, doesn't get covered. And it feels like it's almost there. Like it's such a magical thing. Like the Maps API, YouTube API, I, there's, I got to imagine it's like, you know, there's probably some team at Google, right, responsible for writing this documentation. That's probably not the engineers, right? And probably this team is not, you know, where you want to be. Well, it's a, it's a weird thing. I sometimes think about this for somebody who wants to also build the company, I think about this a lot. You know, YouTube, the, you know, the service is one of the most magical, like I'm so grateful that YouTube exists. And yet they seem to be quite clueless on so many things, like that everybody is screaming them at. Like it feels like whatever the mechanism that you use to listen to your quote unquote customers, which is like the creators, is not very good. Like there's literally people that are like screaming white, like their new YouTube studio, for example, there's like features that were like begged for for really long time, like being able to upload multiple videos at the same time. That was missing for a really, really long time. Now, like there's probably things that I don't know, which is maybe for that kind of huge infrastructure, it's actually very difficult to build some of these features. But the fact that that wasn't communicated and it felt like you're not being heard, like I remember this experience for me, and it's not a pleasant experience. Yeah. And it feels like the company doesn't give a damn about you. And that's something to think about. I'm not sure what that is that might have to do with just like small groups working on these small features and these specific features. And there's no overarching like dictator type of human that says like why the hell are we neglecting Steve Jobs type of characters? Like there's people that we need to we need to speak to the people that want to love our product and they don't. At some point you just get so fixated on the numbers. And it's like, well, the numbers are pretty great. That's right. People are watching, you know, doesn't seem to be a problem. And you not like the person that like build this thing, right? So you really care about it. You know, you're just there. You came in as a product manager, right? You got hired some time later. Your mandate is like increase this to number like, you know, 10% right? And you just that's brilliantly put. Like if you this is the okay, if there's a lesson in this is don't reduce your company into a metric of like how much like you said, how much how much people watching the videos and so on. And and and I convinced yourself that everything is working just because the numbers are going up. Yeah. There's something you have to have a vision. You have to you have to want people to love your stuff because love is ultimately the beginning of like a successful long term company. Is they always should love your product? You have to be like a creator and have that like creator is love for your own thing. Right? Like, and you're paid by, you know, these these comments, right? And probably like Apple, I think did this generally like really well. They're well known for kind of keeping teams small even when they were big, right? And you know, he was an engineer like there's that book Creative Selection. I don't know if you read it by Apple engineer named Ken Kocienda. It's kind of a great book actually because unlike most of these business books where it's, you know, here's how Steve Jabra and the companies is more like here's how life was like for me, you know, an engineer here, the projects I worked on and here what it was like to pitch Steve Jobs, you know, on like, you know, I think it was in charge of like the keyboard and the auto correction, right? And at Apple, like Steve Jobs reviewed everything and so he was like, this is what it was like to show my demos to Steve Jobs and you know, to change them because like Steve Jobs didn't like how, you know, the shape of the little key was off because the rounding of the corner was like not quite right or something like this but he was famously that's the clear for this kind of stuff. But because the teams were small you really owned this stuff, right? So you were really carried. Yeah, Elon Musk does that similar kind of thing with Tesla, which is really interesting. There's another lesson in leadership in that is to be obsessed with the details and like he talks to like the lowest level engineers. Okay, so we're talking about ASR and so this is basically what we're saying we're going to take this like ultra seriously and then what's the mission to try to keep pushing towards the 3%? Yeah, and kind of try to try to build this platform where all of your, you know, all of your meetings, you know, as easily accessible as your notes, right? Like so, like imagine all the meetings the company might have, right? Now that I'm like no longer a programmer, right? Now a quote unquote manager, that's less like my day as a meetings, right? Yeah, and you know pretty often I want to like see what was said, right? Who said it? You know, what's the context? But it's generally not really something that can easily retrieve, right? I can imagine if all of those meetings were indexed, archived, you know, you could go back, you could share a clip like really easily, right? So that might change completely, like everything that's said converted to text might change completely the dynamics of what we do in this world, especially now with remote work, right? Exactly. Exactly. It was zoom and so on. That's fascinating to think about. I mean, for me, I care about podcasts, right? And one of the things that was, you know, I'm torn, I know a lot of the engineers that Spotify. So I love them very much because they dream big in terms of like they want to empower creators. So one of my hopes was was Spotify that they would use the technology like wherever something like that to start converting everything into, uh, into text to make it indexable. Like one of the things that that sucks with podcasts is like, it's hard to find stuff. Like the model is basically subscription. Like you find, uh, it's similar, you use, it's similar to what YouTube used to be like, which is you basically find a creator that you enjoy and you subscribe to them and like you just, yeah, uh, you just kind of follow what they're doing, but the search and discovery wasn't a big part of YouTube. Like in the early days, but in that's what currently with podcasts, like is the search and discovery is, uh, like non-existent. You're basically searching for like the dumbest possible thing, which is like keywords in the titles of episodes. Yeah. Even aside from searching, it's kind of like all the time. So I listened to like a number of podcasts and, um, you know, there's something said and I want to like go back to that later because I was trying to, I'm trying to remember what do you say? Like maybe like recommend it some cool product that I want to try out and like it's basically impossible. Maybe like some people have pretty good show notes. So maybe you'll get lucky and you can find it, right? But I mean, if everyone had transcripts and it was all searchable, it was a game changer. Maybe it's so much better. I mean, that's one of the things that I wanted to, I mean, one of the reasons we're talking today is I wanted to take this quite seriously. The rough thing. I just been lazy. So, uh, because I'm very fortunate that a lot of people support this podcast that there's enough money now to do, uh, transcription, so on. And it seemed clear to me, especially like CEOs and sort of, uh, like PhDs, like people write to me who are like graduate students at computer science or graduate students or whatever the heck field. It's clear that their mind, like they enjoy podcasts when they're doing laundry or whatever, but they want to revisit the conversation in a much more rigorous way. And they really want to transcript. Like it's clear that they want to like analyze conversations. Like so many people wrote to me about a transcript for your Shabakh conversation. I had just a bunch of conversations. And then on the Elon Musk side, like reporters want like, they want to write a blog post about your conversation. So they want to be able to pull stuff. And it's like, there are essentially doing on your conversation transcription privately. They're doing it for, yeah, for themselves. And then starting to pick, but so much easier when you can actually do it as a reporter, just look at the transcript. Yeah. And you can like embed a little thing, you know, like into your article right here is what's sad. You can go listen to like this clip from the section. I'm actually trying to try and to figure out I'll probably on the website create like a place where the transcript goes like as a web page so that people can reference it. Like reporters can reference it and so on. I mean, most of the reporters probably want to write clickbait articles that are complete falsifying. Which I'm fine with. It's the way of journalism. I don't care. Like I've had this conversation with a friend of mine, a mixed martial artist, the Ryan Hall. And we talked about, you know, as I've been reading the rise and fall, the threat, right? Can a bunch of books on Hitler. And we brought up Hitler and he made some kind of comment where like we should be able to forgive Hitler. And, you know, like we were talking about forgiveness. And then we're bringing that up as like the worst case possible things like even, you know, for people who are Holocaust survivors, one of the ways to let go of the suffering they've been through is to is to forgive. And he brought up like Hitler as somebody that would potentially be the hardest thing to possibly forgive. But it might be a worthwhile pursuit psychologically. So on blah, blah, blah. It doesn't matter. It was very eloquent, very powerful words. I think people should go back and listen to it. It's powerful. And then all these journalists, all these articles are written about like MMA, you have C fight. No, like one though they didn't they were somewhat accurate. They didn't say like a lot of Hitler. They said things that if Hitler came back to life, we should forgive him. Like they kind of it's kind of accurate ish. But it the headline make it sound a lot worse than than it was. But I'm fine with it. That's the way that that's the way the world I want to I want to almost make it easier for those journalists and make it easier for people who actually care about the conversation to go and look and see. Right. They can see it for themselves. For themselves. They have the context. There's something about podcasts like the audio that makes it difficult to to go to jump to a spot and to look for that for that particular information. I think some of it you know I'm interested in creating like myself experimenting with stuff. So like taking Revan creating a transcript and then see people can go to it. I do dream that like I'm not in the loop anymore that like you know Spotify does it right. Yeah. Automatically for everybody because ultimately that one click purchase needs to be there like. I mean like you kind of want support from the entire ecosystem is like from the tool makers and the podcast creators. Even clients, right. I mean imagine if like most podcasts apps you know if it was a standard right here's I include a transcript into a podcast right. Like it's just an RSS feed ultimately. And actually just yesterday I saw this company called Buzz Sprout I think they're called. So they're trying to do this. They proposed us to pack an extension to their RSS format to reference podcast reference transcripts in a standard way. Yeah. And they're talking about like there's one client dimension that will support it. But imagine like more client support it right. So any podcast you could go and see the transcripts right and you're like normal podcast app. Yeah. I mean somebody so I have somebody who works with advertising with advertising Matt is an awesome guy. He mentioned Buzz Sprout to me but he says it's really annoying because they want exclusive they want to host the podcast. Right. This is the problem with Spotify too. This is where I'd like to say like F Spotify. There's a magic to RSS with podcasts. It can be made available to everyone. And then there's all there's this ecosystem of different podcast players that emerge and they compete freely. And that's a beautiful thing. That's why I go and exclusive like Joe Rogan one exclusive. I'm not sure if you're familiar with him. It just just Spotify is a huge fan of Joe Rogan. I've been kind of nervous about the whole thing. But let's see let's I hope this Spotify steps up. They've added video which is very surprising that they were so so exclusive meaning you can subscribe to RSS feed anymore. It's only in Spotify for now. You can until December 1st and December 1st it's all everything disappears and it's Spotify only. I you know and Spotify gave him a hundred million dollars for that. So it's an interesting deal. But I you know I did some soul searching and I'm glad he's doing it. But if Spotify came to me with a hundred million dollars I wouldn't do it. I wouldn't do well I have a very different relationship with money. I hate money but I just think I believe in the pirate radio aspect of podcasting the figure. And that there's something about the open source spirit the open source spirit. It just doesn't seem right. It doesn't feel right. That said you know because so many people care about Joe Rogan's program they're going to hold Spotify's feed to the fire. Like one of the cool things with what Joe told me is the reason he likes working with Spotify is that they they're like right or die together right. So they they want him to succeed. So that's why they're not actually telling him what to do. This is about what people think. They they don't tell they don't give him any notes and anything. They want him to succeed. And that's the cool thing about exclusivity with a platform is like you're kind of wanting each other to succeed and that process can actually be very fruitful. Like YouTube it goes back to my criticism. YouTube generally no matter how big the creator and maybe for PewDiePie something like that they want you to succeed. But for the most part from all the big creators that spoke with Veritas aim all those folks you know they get some basic assistance but it's not like YouTube doesn't care if you succeed or not they have so many creators like a hundred other data that don't care. So and especially with with somebody like Joe Rogan who YouTube sees Joe Rogan not as a person who might revolutionize the nature of news and idea space and nuanced conversations they seem as a potential person who who has racist guests on or like you know they seem as like a headache potentially. So you know a lot of people talk talk about this it's a hard place to be for YouTube actually is figuring out with the search and discovery process of how do you filter out conspiracy theories and which conspiracy theories represent dangerous untruths and which conspiracy theories are like vanilla untruths and then even when you start having meetings and discussions about what is true or not it starts getting weird. Yeah it's difficult these days right. I worry more about the other side right of too much you know too much censorship well maybe censorship is the right word I mean censorship is usually government censorship but still yeah putting yourself in a position of arbiter for these kinds of things it's very difficult and people think it's so easy right like it's like well you know like no Nazis right what a simple principle but you know yes I mean no one likes Nazis yeah but it's like many shades of gray yeah like very soon after that. Yeah and and then you know of course everybody you know there's some people that call our current president a Nazi and then there's like you start getting a Sam Harris I don't know if you know that is wasted I in my opinion his conversation with Jack Dorsey and I'll also I spoke with Jack before in this podcast and we'll talk again but Sam brought up Sam Harris does not like Donald Trump. I do listen to his podcast. I'm familiar with his views on the matter and he he has Jack Dorsey's like how can you not ban Donald Trump from Twitter so you know there's a set you have that conversation you have a conversation where some number some significant number of people think that the current president of the United States should not be on your platform and it's like okay so if that's even on the table as a conversation then everything's on the table for conversation and yeah it's it's tough I'm not sure where I land on it I'm with you I think that censorship is bad but I also think the ultimate I just also think you know if you're the kind of person that's going to be convinced you know by some YouTube video you know that I don't know our government's been taken over by aliens it's unlikely that like you know you'll be returned to sanity simply because you know that video is not available on on YouTube right yeah I'm with the I tend to believe in the intelligence of people and we should we should trust them but I also do think it's a responsibility of platforms to encourage more love in the world more kindness to each other and I don't always think that they're great at doing that particular thing so that that there's a nice balance there and I think philosophically I think about that a lot where's the balance between free speech and like encouraging people even though they have the freedom of speech to not be an asshole yeah right that's not a constitutional like so you have the right for for free speech but like just don't be an asshole like you can't really put that in the constitution the Supreme Court can't be like just don't be a dick but I feel like platforms have a role to be like just be nicer maybe do the carrot like encourage people to be nicer as opposed to the stake of censorship but I think it's an interesting machine learning problem just be nicer machine yeah machine learning for niceness it is I mean that's responsible yeah I mean it is it is a thing um for sure Jack Dorsey kind of talks about as a vision for Twitter is how do we increase the health of conversations I don't know how seriously they're actually trying to do that though which is one of the reasons that and in part considering entering that space a little bit difficult for them right because you know it's kind of like well known that you know people are kind of driven by you know rage and you know outrage maybe is a better word right outrage drives engagement and well these companies are judged by engagement right says in the short term but this goes to the metrics thing that we're talking about earlier I do believe I have a fundamental belief that if you have a metric of long-term happiness of your users like not short term engagement but long-term happiness and growth and both like intellectual emotional health of your users you're going to make a lot more money you're going to have long to like you should be able to optimize for that you don't need to necessarily optimize for engagement yeah and that'll be good for society too yeah no I mean I generally agree with you but it requires a patient person with you know trust from Wall Street to to to be able to carry out such a strategy this is the this is what I believe the Steve Jobs character an Elon Musk character is like you basically have to be so good at your job right you got to pass for anything then you can hold the board and everybody all the investors hostage by saying like either we do it my way or I leave and everyone is too afraid of you to leave right because they believe in your vision so that but that requires being really good really good at what you do requires things to jobs in Elon Musk and this kind of a reason why like the third name doesn't come immediately to mind right like there's maybe a handful of other people but it's not that many it's not many I mean people say like why like people say that I'm like a fan of Elon Musk I'm not I'm a fan of anybody who's like Steve Jobs and Elon Musk and there's just not many of those folks it's a guy that made us believe that like we can get to Mars you know in 10 years right I mean that's kind of awesome and it's kind of making it happen which is like it's great it's not a gun like that kind of like spirit right like from a lot of our society right yeah but like we can get to the moon in 10 years and like we did it right yeah especially in this time of so much kind of existential dread that people are going through because of COVID like having rockets that just keep going out there now with humans I don't know that it's just like you said I mean it gives you a reason to wake up in the morning and and dream of forest engineers too it's inspiring as hell man I what let me ask you this the worst possible question which is so you're like at the core your programmer your um an engineer but now you made the unfortunate choice or maybe that's the way life goes of basically moving away from the low level work and becoming a manager being coming in executive having meetings I what's what's that transition been like it's been interesting it's been a journey maybe a couple of things to say about that I mean I got into this right because as a kid I just remember this like incredible amazement at being able to write a program right and something comes to life that kind of didn't exist before yeah I don't think you have that in like many other fields like you have that with some other kinds of engineering but you maybe a little bit more limited with what you can do like right but but the computer you can literally imagine any kind of program right so it's a little bit godlike what you do like when you create it and so I mean that's why I got into it do you remember like first program you wrote or maybe the first program that like made you fall in love with computer science I don't know what was the first program it's probably like trying to write one of those games and basic you know like emulate the snake game or whatever I don't remember to be honest but I enjoyed like that's why I always loved about you know being a program is just a creation process and it's a little bit different when you're not the one doing the creating and you know another aspect to it I would say is you know when you're a programmer when you're an individual contributor it's kind of very easy to know when you're doing a good job when you're not doing a good job when you're being productive when you're not being productive right you can kind of see like you trying to make something and it's like slowly coming together right and when you're a manager you know it's more diffuse right like well you hope you know you're motivating your team and making them more productive and inspire and then right but it's not like you get some kind of like dopamine signal because you like completed excellence of code you know today so kind of like you missed that dopamine rush a little bit when you first become but then you know slowly you kind of see yes your teams are doing amazing work right and you can take pride in that you can get like what is it like a ripple effect of a dope or somebody else is a dopamine yeah yeah I live our father people's dopamine so is there pain points and challenges yet to overcome from becoming from going to a programmer to becoming a programmer of humans programmer of humans so humans are difficult to understand you know it's like one of those things like trying to understand other people's motivations and what really drives them it's difficult maybe like never really know right do you find that people are different yeah like I one of the things like I had a group at MIT that you know I found that like some people I could like scream at and criticize like hard and that made them do like much better work and really push them to the limit and there's some people that I had to non-stop compliment because like they're so already self-critical like everything they do that I have to be constantly like like I cannot criticize them at all because they're already criticizing themselves and you have to kind of encourage and like celebrate their little victories and it's kind of fascinating like how that the complete difference in people definitely people are respond to different motivations and different modes of feedback and you kind of have to figure it out it's like a pretty good book which some reason out the name escapes me about management first break all the rules first break all the rules first break all the rules it's a book that we generally like ask a lot of like first time managers to read the ref and like one of the kind of philosophies is managed by exception right which is you know don't like have some standard template like you know here's how I you know tell this person to do this or the other thing here's how to get feedback like manage back exception right every person so a little bit different you have to try to understand what drives them and tailor it to them since you mentioned books I don't know if you can answer this question by people love it when I ask it which is are there books technical fiction or philosophical that you enjoyed or have an impact in your life if you would recommend you already mentioned Dune like all the all of the Dune all of the Dune the second one was probably the weakest but anyway so yeah all of the Dune is good I mean yeah can you just slow a little tangent on that is how many Dune books out there like do you recommend people start with the first one if you if that was yeah you kind of have to read them all I mean it is a complete story right so you start with the first one you got to read all of them just like a tree like that like a creation of like the universe you should go in sequence you should go in sequence yeah it's kind of a chronological storyline there's six books in all then there's like many kind of books that were written by Frank Herbert's son but those are not as good so you don't have to bother with those shots fired shots fired okay but the main sequences is good so what are some other books maybe there's a few so I don't know that like I would say there's a book that kind of I turn my life around or anything like that but here's a couple that I really love so one is Brave New World by Aldous Huxley and it's kind of incredible how pressing he was about like what this what a Brave New World might be like right you know I kind of see a genetic sorting in his book right where there's like this alpha's and epsilon's and how from like the earliest time of society like they're sorted like you can kind of see it in a slightly similar way today where well one of the problems with society is people are kind of genetically sorting a little bit right like there's much less like most marriages right are between people of similar kind of intellectual level or socioeconomic status more so these days in the past and you kind of see some effects of it and stratifying society and kind of he he illustrated what but that could be like in the extreme different versions of it on social media as well it's not just like marriages and so on like it's genetic sorting in terms of what Dawkins called memes as ideas right being put into these bins of these little echo chambers and so on yeah and so that's the book that's think a worthwhile read for everyone in 1984 is good of course as well like if you're talking about you know dystopian novels of the future yes it's slightly different view the future right but I kind of like identify with Brave New World a bit more yeah you know speaking of not a book but my favorite kind of dystopian science fiction is a movie called brazil which I don't know if you've heard of I've heard of and I know I need to watch it but yeah because it's in is is it in English or no it's an English movie and it's a sort of like dystopian movie of authoritarian and confidence right and it's like like nothing really works very well you know the system is creaky you know but no one is kind of like willing to challenge it you know just things kind of ample along it kind of strikes me as like a very plausible future of like you know what authoritarian's it might look like it's not like this you know super efficient evil dictatorship of 1984 it's just kind of like this badly functioning you know but it's status quo so it just goes on yeah that's one funny thing that stands out to me is in whether it's authoritarian dystopian stuff or just basic like you know if you look at the movie contagion it seems in the movies government is almost always exceptionally competent like it's like used as a storytelling tool of like extreme competence like you know you use it whether it's good or evil but it's competent it's very interesting to think about where it much more realistically is its incompetence and that incompetence itself has consequences that are difficult to to predict like bureaucracy as a very boring way of being evil of just you know if you look at the the show HBO show Chernobyl it's a really good story of how bureaucracy you know leads to catastrophic events but not through any kind of evil and you want particular place but more just like the it's just the system kind of system distorting information as it travels up the chain that people unwilling to take responsibility for things and just kind of like this laziness mm-hmm resulting in evil there's a comedic version of this I don't know if you've seen this movie called the death of Stalin yeah I like that I wish it wasn't so there's a movie called in glorious bastards about you know Hitler and wall you know so on for some reason those movies pissed me off I know a lot of people love them but like I just feel like there's not enough good movies even about Hitler there's good movies about the Holocaust but even Hitler there's a movie called Don Fall the people should watch I think it's the last few days of Hitler that's a good movie turn into a meme mm-hmm it's good but on Stalin I feel like I'm maybe wrong on this but at least in the English speaking world there's not good movies about the evil of Stalin that's true let's try to see that actually so I agree with the gun and glorious bastard I didn't love the movie because I felt like kind of the the stylizing of it right the whole like Tarantino kind of Tarantinoism yeah if you will kind of detract it from it it made it seem like on series a little bit but death of Stalin I felt differently maybe it's because of comedy to begin with this is not kind of expecting you know seriousness but it kind of depicted the absurdity of the whole situation in a way right I mean it was funny so maybe it does make light of it but it some of the grills probably like this right like a bunch of kind of people they're like oh shit right like you're right but like the thing is it was so close to like what probably was reality it was caricaturing reality to where I think an observer might think that this is not like they might think it's a comedy in one in reality this is that's the absurdity of how people act with dictators I mean that's I guess it was too close to reality for me yeah the kind of banality of like what were eventually like fairly evil acts right but like yeah they're just a bunch of people trying to survive and I mean because I think there's a good I haven't watched yet the good movie and the movie on Churchill with Gary Oldman I think there's Gary Oldman might be making that up I think he won like he was nominated for an Oscar something so I like I love these movies about these humans and Stalin like Chernobyl made me realize the HBO show that there's not enough movies about Russia that capture that spirit I'm sure it might be in Russian there is but the fact that some British dude that like did comment I feel like he did like hang over some shit like that I don't know if you're familiar for the person created Chernobyl but he was just like some guy that doesn't know anything about Russia and he just went in and just studied it like did a good job of creating a and then got it so accurate like poetically and the fact that you need to get accurate he got accurate just the spirit of it down to like the bowls that pets use just the whole feel of it it's not that's good yeah that's how the theorist yeah it's incredible it's made me made me wish that somebody did a good like 1930s like starvation a Stalin like like leading up to World War II and in World War II itself like Stalin got and so on like I feel like that story needs to be told millions of people died and it's to me it's so much more fascinating that Hitler because Hitler is like a caricature of evil almost that it's so especially with the Holocaust it's so difficult to imagine that something like that is possible ever again Stalin to me represents something that is possible like the so interesting like the bureaucracy of it is so fascinating that it potentially might be happening in the world now like they were not aware of like North Korea and another one that like there should be a good film on and like the possible things that could be happening in China with overreaching government I don't know there there's a lot of possibilities there I suppose yeah I wonder how much you know I guess the archives should be maybe more open nowadays right I mean for a long time they're just we didn't know right or anyways no one in the West knew for sure well there's I don't know if you know there's a guy named Stephen Kotkin he's a historian of Stalin that I spoke to on this podcast I'll speak to him again the guy knows his shit on Stalin he like read everything it's so fascinating to talk to somebody like he knows Stalin better than the Stalin himself it's crazy like you have I think he's a Princeton he is basically his whole life is Stalin starting Stalin yeah it's great and in that context he also talks about writes about Putin a little bit I've also read at this point I think everybody biography of Putin English English biography of Putin I need to read some Russians obviously I'm mentally preparing for possible conversation with Putin so what what is your first question to Putin when you have him on your on the podcast I it's interesting you bring that up the first of all wouldn't tell you but can't go away now but I actually haven't even thought about that so my current approach and I do this with interviews often as but obviously that's a special one but I try not to think about questions until last minute I'm trying to sort of get into the mindset and so that's why I'm soaking in a lot of stuff not thinking about questions just learning about the man but in terms of like human to human it's like I would say it's I don't know if you're a fan of mob movies but like the mafia which I am a good fellow and so on he's much closer like mob morality which is like mob morality maybe I could see that but I like your approach anyways of this the extreme empathy right it's a little bit like you know Hannibal right like if you have watched the show Hannibal right they had that guy um we know Hannibal of course like yeah sounds a lot but there's two issues as well the focus on this guy will Durant who's a character like extreme empath right so in the way he like catches all these killers so he pretty much uh if you can empathize with them right like you can understand whether doing things they're doing right and so pretty excruciating thing right like because you're pretty much like spending half your time in the head of evil people right like uh but I mean I definitely try to do that with uh with other so you you should do that moderation but uh I I think it's it's a pretty safe place safe place to be like one of the cool things with this podcast and I don't know you didn't sign up to hear me listen to this bullshit but uh that was interesting I uh in um what's his name Chris Latina who's a Google uh he's not Google anymore sci fi he's legit he's one of the most legit engineers I talk with I talk with them again on this podcast and one of the he gives me private advice a lot and you said for this podcast I should like interview like I should widen the range of people because that gives you much more freedom to do stuff like so his idea which I think I agree with with Chris is that you go to the extremes you just like cover every extreme base and then it gives you freedom to then go to the more nuanced conversations it's kind of I think there's a safe place for that there's certainly a hunger for that nuanced conversation I think amongst people where like on social media you get canceled for anything slightly tense that there's a hunger to go full right you go so far to the opposite side it's like to mystify that a little bit right yeah that there is a person behind all of these things yeah and that's the cool thing about podcasting like three four hour conversations that that it's very different than a clickbait journalism say the opposite that there's a hunger for that there's a willingness for that yeah especially now I mean how many people do you even see face-to-face anymore right like this you know it's like not that many people like in my day-to-day aside from my own family like I said across it sad but it's also beautiful like I've gotten the chance to like like our conversation now there's somebody I guarantee you there's somebody in Russia listening to this now like jogging there's somebody who is just smoke some weeds at back on a couch and just like enjoying like I guarantee you that we'll write in the comments right now that yes I'm in St. Petersburg I'm in Moscow whatever and and we're in their head and they have a friendship with us and I'm the same way I'm a huge fan of podcasting it's a beautiful thing I mean it's a it's a weird one-way human connection like yeah before I went on Joe Rogan and still I'm just a huge fan of his so it was like surreal we had it I've been a friend with Joe Rogan for 10 years but one way yeah from this way from the from the St. Petersburg way yeah the St. Petersburg way and it's a real friendship I mean now it's like two-way but it's still surreal it's yeah and that's a magic of podcasting I'm not sure what to make of it that voice it's not even the video part it's the audio that's magical that I don't know what to do with it but it's people listen to three four hours yeah we evolved over you know millions of years right to be very fine tuned things like that right yeah well expressions as well of course right but you know back back in the day on the you know on the savannah you have to be very tuned to you know whether you had a good relationship with the with the rest of your tribe or very bad relationship right because you know if you had a very bad relationship you're probably gonna be left behind and eaten by the lions yeah but it's weird that the tribe is different now like you could have a connect one-way connection with Joe Rogan as opposed to the tribe of your physical vicinity but that's all but that's why like you know it works with the podcasting but it's the opposite of what happens on Twitter right because all those nuances are removed right you're not connecting with the person yeah because you don't hear the voice you're connecting with like an abstraction right it's like some some stream of tweets right and it's very easy to assign to them any kind of like evil intent you know or dehumanize them which you it's much harder to do when it's a real voice right because like you realize it's a real person behind the voice let me try this out on you I sometimes ask about the meaning of life do you uh your your father now uh engineer you're building up a company do you ever zoom out and think like what the hell is this whole thing for like why why are we descended to vapes even on this planet what's what's the meaning of it all that's a pretty big question I think I don't allow myself to think about it too often or maybe like life doesn't allow me to think about it too often um but in some ways I guess the meaning of life is kind of uh contributing to this kind of weird thing we call humanity right like it's in a way in thinking of humanity as like living and evolving organism right that like we all contributing us way away but just by existing by having our own unique set of desires and drives right um and maybe that means like creating something uh great and it's bringing up kids who you know uh are unique and and different and seeing like you know they can join what they do um but I mean that to me that's pretty much it I mean if you're not a religious person right which I guess I'm not um that's that's the meaning of life it's in the living and then uh in creation and the creation yeah there's something magical about that engine of creation like you said programming I would say I mean it's even just actually what you said with even just programs I don't care if it's like some JavaScript thing and uh but not on the website it's like magical that you brought that to life I don't know what that is in there but that seems that's probably some version of recreate of uh like reproduction and sex whatever that's in evolution but like creating that HTML button has echoes of that feeling and it's magical uh right I mean if you're religious person maybe you could even say right like we were were created in God's image right I mean I guess part of that is the drive to create something ourselves right I mean that's that's that's part of it uh yeah that HTML button is the creation in God's yeah hopefully it'll be something a little more uh dynamic maybe bigger sometimes yeah maybe some uh some JavaScript some react uh and so on but no I mean I think that's what differentiates us from you know the apes so to speak yeah we did a pretty good job then it was uh honored to talk to you thank you so much for being part of creating one of my favorite services and products this is actually a little bit of an experiment allow me to sort of uh fanboy or some of the things I love um so thanks for wasting your time with me today it was awesome thanks for having me on and giving me a chance to try this out awesome thanks for listening to this conversation with Danco Kodov and thank you to our sponsors athletic greens only one nutrition drink blinkest app that summarizes books business wars podcast and cash app so the choice is health wisdom or money choose wisely my friends and if you wish click the sponsor links below to get this down and to support this podcast and now let me leave you some words from Ludwig Woodkenstein the limits of my language means the limits of my world thank you for listening and hope to see you next time enterprise