 The following is a conversation with George St. Pierre, considered by many to be the greatest fighter in the history of UFC and MMA, but even more than that, one of the greatest martial artists ever. Quick mention of our sponsors, all form, express VPN, blinxist, TheraGun, and the information. Check them out in the description to support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that getting the chance to hang out with George, talk to him on the podcast, record a quick self-defense video that I'll release soon, all while both of us wearing suits was one of the most memorable days of my life. In setting all this up, I talked to Joe Rogan, and originally we couldn't schedule a chat with him and George on the JRE, which allowed me to pretend, for a brief time, that George came down to Austin just to see me. Who the hell am I? In truth, him and Joe probably conspired to make me feel special, but that's the point. It's inspiring to see George and Joe, who are at the top of their field, treat others as equals, as human beings, no matter who they are, even silly Russians in a suit. Meeting George was an honor for me beyond words. As usual, I'll do a few minutes of ads now, no ads in the middle, I try to make these interesting, but I give you time stamps so you can skip, but still please check out the sponsors in the description. It really is the best way to support this podcast. I'm really fortunate to be able to be very selective with the sponsors we take on, so hopefully if you buy their stuff and you should, you'll find value in it just as I have. Speaking of which, this show is sponsored by a new sponsor called All Form, a furniture company. They're new in terms of reads, but I've been using them for a long time. They ship to your home quickly, take it back for free if you don't like it in the first 100 days. It's easy to assemble, looks beautiful and classy, so of course I like it, but also just feels amazing. In fact, before all the sponsorship stuff, I had their love seat that I recently released a conversation with Michael Mallis and Yara on Brook, but the previous conversation with Michael Mallis, I got to hang out with him on that love seat for a few hours after our conversation. There's something about a love seat that forces you to commit to this journey you're on with the other person. We're going to be in this together. Armchair is like Wolfpack of one, and then a couch is like, well, I'm not sure I'm going to commit yet. I'm just here to have some fun and to explore possibilities, relationships. Love Seed says we're in this ride or die. Let's go. Choose wisely, which one you want. Anyway, go to allform.com slash relax that are offering 20% off all orders if you go to allform.com slash relax. This show is sponsored by ExpressVPN. I use it to help keep my data and online interactions private, much more private than when you use incognito mode. I'm looking at you internet. Incognito is not protecting you. It's funny there are some tools that just kind of make us feel secure and there are some tools that actually increase our security and privacy. I think a good tool should do both. I think a big part of that, which not many tech companies are doing is transparency. I believe that using people's data isn't the fundamental violation privacy. I think a lack of clear transparency about the use of data isn't the violation. Therefore, I think the first step in fixing privacy on the internet is being transparent about it. I can talk about that for hours. This is just an ad read for ExpressVPN. So I'll just shut up. Anyway, go to expressvpn.com slash relax pod to get an extra three months free. That's expressvpn.com slash relax pod. One of my favorite tools. Get it. Hopefully you'll enjoy too. This episode is supported by Blinkist. My favorite app for learning new things. Blinkist takes the key ideas from thousands of nonfiction books and condenses them down into just 15 minutes that you can read or listen to. I think reading stuff on screen or on paper is essential to do every single day. And Daniel Conerman has the idea of thinking fast and thinking slow. I think there should be a concept of reading fast and reading slow. I think Blinkist is really great for reading fast. So giving you a shallow understanding of the landscape of knowledge out there. I think it's really important to do because there's not enough time to do that kind of deep reading on everything. At the same time, you also should be doing slow reading, which is just going very carefully, very slowly through particular books or blogs or even tweets, to be honest. Giving ideas a chance to breathe in your mind and develop thoughts onto those ideas and let them sort of flourish. Kind of date or have a relationship with the book for many months. Anyway, go to Blinkist.com slash Lex to start your free seven day trial and get 25% off a Blinkist premium membership. That's Blinkist.com slash Lex. This show is also sponsored by Thera Gun. A handheld Picasso therapy device that I use after workouts from all sorts of recovery. Mentioning Thera Gun, and every time I see it in my room, reminds me of the previous summer where I had to do the insane amount of pushups and pull-ups and really ask myself some difficult questions about what I am and I'm not willing to do in a physical domain, but also in a mental domain. I actually think physical exercise is the easiest way to allow you to explore your own limits. I think sometimes it's almost more dangerous to explore the limits of your mind in the intellectual domain, in the thinking domain. Nietzsche talks about this with the gazing into the abyss. Anyway, when you bring up Nietzsche in an ad read, you know you've gone too far. Thera Gun, friends. It's surprisingly quiet, easy to use, comes with a great app that guides you through everything you need to know. You can try it for 30 days. The Thera Gun Gen 4 with the OLED display. It starts at $199. Go to Thera Gun.com slash Lex. That's Thera Gun.com slash Lex. Oh, and by the way, I bought a podcast with David Goggins for people who haven't been paying attention. I got injured. So we delayed the crazy challenge we're going to do together and the awesome podcast we're going to do together. I'm sure we're going to do that maybe in May and June, that kind of thing. Maybe I'm coming up with excuses to delay it a little bit. But trust me, it's going to happen. This shows also sponsored by the information. They do in depth data driven investigative journalism in the world of technology. They are actually the first people that made me realize that good journalism costs money. A few years ago when I signed up, I was actually broke, but it was worth it. It's funny maybe actually part of it is when you pay for stuff you really take it seriously. But at the same time, you have to pay for that kind of long term deep dives that journalists have to do. I don't always agree with what they write in there, but I always learn a lot. That's what journalism is supposed to do. Anyway, guess 75% off your first month. If you sign up at the information dot com slash Lex, that's the information dot com slash Lex. Beyond just the content, I see it as a good way of supporting in depth journalism. I hope you do as well. This is the Lex Friedman podcast and here is my conversation with my long time martial arts hero and now my friend Mr. George Saint Pierre. In your fighting career, where you're more motivated by the love of winning or the fear and hatred of losing. I like to win better than I hate to lose because if it would not have been the case, I would never have fought in the first place because I don't like to fight at all. But you talked about the anxiety, the fear that you experienced leading up to a fight. So to you ultimately, the reason to go through that difficult process is because it feels damn good and to have your hand raised. And the reason is that there is also the fact that martial art, I've been introduced when I was very young and it's probably the best thing I can do in my life fighting. That's what I do best. Also, it provides me of freedom of access of things that most of people do not have. But all that as a price and a lot of money, I made a lot of money of course with it. I was maybe predisposed with certain abilities. I met incredible mentors throughout my life. I worked really hard. And of course, I had a lot of chances. The stars were all aligned. And in order to keep that, those advantages of freedom, money, and glory, and access of things that most people don't have, and have these dream life that I have, I had to sacrifice myself and fight in order to keep it. It's very hard to understand because I also believe most fighters are not like me. They are a lot of guys because I corner a lot of guys. And it seems to me that they love their job. They enjoyed to go fight in the cage. I love to train. I love the science of fighting the sport to be in good shape, the confidence that training in mixed martial art gives me. However, I do not like the feeling of uncertainty, the stress that I have not knowing if I will be badly injured or humiliated or winning the fight. It's to me, unbearable in it. That's what takes the most out of me. More than brain damage, more than anything, that's what takes the most out of me. But the thing you get from it is the freedom that you get because of the money, but because of the celebrity, because of everything that comes with it. You can be the best version of yourself because of fighting. But at the same time, you said that, quote, I don't believe there's pleasure in life. I believe there's only a relief from pain. We have to suffer to be on top. So isn't there something to just the suffering in itself, just doing really difficult shit just to get to the top? To explain that and so people can relate to it because not everybody's a fighter. I think the best example I can give is let's say you're you haven't eaten for a long time and you're craving, right? So you're suffering. And then when it's time to eat, finally, you're about to eat your favorite dish. It's going to taste so much better. So that's why I believe there's always some sort of sacrifice before the pleasure and the more sacrifice you do, like they say in fighting the bigger the risk, bigger is the reward. And I feel that's that's how it it is for me. Yeah, I feel that with I've started fasting a little bit in the past couple of years. And there's nothing as amazing as a delicious meal or anything. Actually, anything, any food when you haven't eaten for several days, it's it's kind of incredible. It's not incredible. It's not incredible in this simple way of finding like get to eat. It's you get to truly experience the beauty of what it is to be alive. Like that little piece of food, you see all the flavors, you feel just the experience of it is ultimately of gratitude of how awesome it is to be alive. But when you eat many times a day and you're picking out, you don't get to experience that. It's fascinating. It's really like fasting is one of the most accessible things for people, I think, to experience that kind of pairing of hardship to pleasure. I agree. And in my case, it changed my life on a good, good way. I cannot recommend it to people because everybody is different. But after my to fight Michael Bisping, my last fight was against the champion in the Evier weight class that I used to compete at. So I thought that if I would gain weight, it would increase my performance. And I struggled a lot to gain weight. I gained a little about 8 to 10 pounds. Normally I walk around 185 pounds. And for that fight, I was walking around 195. However, I forced myself to eat like six times a day. It was on a very strict diet. And I didn't feel it didn't feel right to me because I feel like I was carrying a little bit like I was carrying a bag on my shoulder. And I think it was a bad idea for me because when I did the weight, the way in and I went on a scale at 185, I couldn't go back to my initial weight that was 195 that I worked so hard for several months to get there. So I was 190 pounds, but I couldn't get back. And the morning of the fight, I got sick. I had like, we didn't know what it was in the beginning because in order to know, to find out what it was, I needed to do what they call a colonoscopy. They put the camera inside of you. And to do that, they give you something that make that M.T.U. And I was trying to gain weight, not to lose weight. So I told myself, I'm going to wait after the fight, whatever it is, because it was pretty bad. It was blood. And I didn't know what I was. I was very concerned. I thought I had maybe cancer. I was freaking out. So I said, I'm going to do that fight. And then after right away, I'm going to make a checkup. So I did the fight. Everything went well. I won the fight. I went back home. I did a colonoscopy and I got diagnosed with ulcer colitis. Then I got on very severe medication to get better. And I'm not a big fan of medication. I always trying to look for more natural way to get better. And I found out about fasting. And it really changed my life. I met Dr. Jason Fong, who's one of the, one of the world authority of fasting. He treat diabetes patient with fasting. And he gave me a program of fasting. And it really changed my life. And right away, what I did is I went in a cat scan to see the difference. Because it was right after my fight with Michael Bisping. And I did the cat scan. So I had my muscle mass, bone density, fat percentage, water retention. It's pretty amazing. It can show you which harm as more muscle than the other. It's very precise. And I did it like two, two month after. So I start doing time restricted eating, 16, 8, but right away, when I started, I did three days water fast. And the doctor Jason Fong said, because I like to train during those days, I consume email and salt to make sure, because when you sweat, there's a lot of minerals to make sure you don't depleted your mineral. And when I went, when I compared it to result in the cat scan, I found out my biggest concern was to lose muscle mass. I found out that I did not lose muscle mass. Instead of losing it, I increased a little bit. Even though my weight on the scale was lighter, I kept the same muscle mass even increases a little bit. My bone density increases a little bit. My water retention is the biggest thing that decrease. So my inflammation and my fat percentage. So basically, by looking at the data, I found out that by eating so much, trying to gain weight for to fight Michael Bisping, I only increase my water retention, which is not good, because it's like dead weight and inflammation on you. So what was the actual process of fasting? You said 16, 8 times restricted, so intermittent fasting. But you also mentioned the three out of the three day water fast. What did that feel like? And you also said training during the three day? How did that feel? Can you give me some details of this is fascinating? So I do three days water fast, four times a year. For me, I do it. Everybody is different. For me, I do it after new years, because during the holidays, that's when I eat bad foods and I drink. I see it more like a cleansing, like a detox, sort of speak. Mental, too, like, psychological. I do it after the new years, right before the summer, cut for the beach. After the summer, because of the summer, I've been partying a little bit sometimes, let myself go and right before the holidays. And I've tried the doctor, Dr. Fongi says to me, say, George, everybody is different, because I'm a very active person and everybody has a different genetics. So for me, I feel that three days is the sweet spot, because I still train during those three days. The first day, the first two days, I don't change nothing. I train regularly on my regular schedule. However, on the third day, I modify a little bit. I do something more easy, and that's how I do it. And I've tried before, because when I say three days as my sweet spot, I've tried to go up to five days. But the problems is after my third day, I found out that I had a big problem sleeping. I get into an hyperactive mode. They call that the hunter-gatherer mode, and you're brain. I mean, it's amazing. Your creativity is at its peak, but you cannot sleep very well. And sleeping for me, I think it's very important. So that's why I do three days. For me, it's my sweet spot. That's interesting. You're right. It's the four or five days when you start, see how sleep is not important for me. So the creativity is really important. So it's very interesting what the place as your mind goes after a few days. You're right. But, I mean, what does it do to your mind? So you mentioned your body likes it. In terms of training, does it do you find that it helps you focus and think? I mean, you're one of the great strategic thinkers in terms of martial arts. Does it help with learning? Does it help with thinking? Does it help with strategizing and all that? Well, unfortunately, I got into fasting after I retired. I wish I would have, I really wish people asked me, would you have done it during the time that you competed and the answer is yes. I think we live in a society that were bombarded by publicity. Oh, by this, eat protein, this, that. And fasting nobody makes money with it because there's nothing to sell, you know? I think that's why a lot of people have not heard about it. And even my, for myself, if someone would have talked to me about fast, the benefits of fasting. When I was training before I got sick, I would probably have ignored, ignored him because it, I'm not, you know, it was, it's hard to believe. Sounds ridiculous. Don't eat. Yes. It's going to help your mind and you're going to gain muscle potentially. Exactly. And perhaps people have talked to me about it, but I kind of, it went in one of my hair and got out from the other side, you know? But it really changed my life. And I'm dying. I was diagnosed with ulcer colitis. And it helps me get rid of all my symptoms. What I do is I know a lot of people have ulcer colitis. And for me, I cannot recommend it to other people because everybody is different. But for me, I made a lot of research of our people from ulcer colitis got better. And I found out that a lot of people that got that condition get better in the natural which, who fasting, eating fermented food, collaging, and I bone brought and stuff for the gut. And it made a huge difference in my life. I just wish I would have known that before. So do you have a specific diet wise stuff you like? So like, you know, I've recently, another ridiculous sounding thing, but it makes me feel really good. It's very low carbs. So, you know, keto or even carnivore, it sounds ridiculous. It doesn't make any sense. But it makes me feel really good even for performance. Is Rogen as an influenced you? No, carnivore diet. I was influenced actually by people. Yeah, well, he, there's, I'll tell you where, because I was doing it before he was doing it is there's, it was popular in the endurance athlete community where it was fat adapted athletes. It's people who insane people who run 50 miles, 100 miles, they figured out that they could fuel their body by with fat. They can go to fat as the source of energy is supposed to carbs. So, I remember hoping that I'll be able to learn how to run 50 miles and so on. I've never done more than 22, but it, I just remember switching away from carbs and feeling really liberated. Like, I wasn't thinking about food as much. I'm able to eat once a day and feel really good. I mean, I think everybody's body is different, but I think carbs make me lazy. Maybe it's because there's, yeah, it's the crash, but also just psychologically something. It forced me to also think about food too much. Like, it starts becoming, you know, art, just like you said, our society is so much about food. There's so many, so much advertisement and so much of our social life is about food. And so it's very easy to live life, like live day to day thinking, when is the next meal? Like, what am I going to eat for lunch? What am I going to eat for dinner? What am I going to eat for breakfast? And if you're not careful, that's going to get in the way of you doing cool shit for, like, liberating yourself and thinking, like, what am I actually passionate about in this life? Like, creating and forgetting to eat those kinds of things and still being able to fuel your body. I don't know. It's been fascinating to figure out, like, later in life that carbs aren't necessary to function well. It makes me think like we don't know anything about nutrition. That's right. You know, personally, I don't think I could have a diet without carbs. I love chocolate too much. For me, eating, it's a pleasure of life. I love my carbs. I love my sugar. However, if you talk about diet, I don't have a specific diet. But recently, what I'm trying to do is the days that I do not work out, I only eat once. That's kind of my rules. Plus, I try to respect 16, 8 and do my three day fast four time a year. But the rest of the thing, I let myself lose because I don't think I would be happy if I don't give myself the right to eat. For me, personally, I love to eat so much. You talk about diet carnivore diet. It's very interesting because a few years ago, I went to Africa in Masai, Mara. It's a tribe in East Africa. I want to visit them. I did a safari. I talk to them. These guys, their diet is 99% carnivore. That's crazy. You should see, they're very beautiful people. Some people would say, it's genetic. I'm like, maybe it's genetic. I mean, think about the Eskimos. Most of their diet is on fish. I believe it can be done. I believe it can be done. An exclusive carnivore diet. I think I'm going to try it. Someone just to have the experience to see how it feels. You're going to hang out with Joe. Be careful bringing it up because he'll convince you to forever switch to carnivore. He loves it. But just like you, I think he loves food. He can't ever stay on carnivore. It was funny because we went to Italian restaurants together. I still only meet. I love the constraints of discipline. That's partially why I like carnivore. I like saying no to food that is delicious. Part of the problem is that I don't know how to moderate. You said chocolate. I don't know how to have one chocolate. Is that something you're able to do? Have like in moderation? No, it's when it when I have an opportunity. I do it. I don't have any. I'm an extremist person. That's the thing. When I when I have a chance, I like I just eat. I go to much. And that's why I like about my life. You know, that's what I like about fasting because probably if I would not have discovered fasting, eating chocolate would give me cramps and all sorts of problems. Because people on all sorts of colitis normally they cannot eat chocolate. They cannot drink alcohol. But I believe because I'm fasting, that's the reason why I'm a mitigation. Middicent mitigation free. I can eat whatever I want, whatever I want. But I have to do that. That fasting. You know, and now it becomes to it became to a point that it's no longer hard for me. It's like normal. I don't even force myself. I don't. It's easy. You know what I mean? Some of my friend thinks I'm think I'm insane. You know, but I tell them it's like with when you get used to it, it becomes like an habit. And I'm and I know that on tour gather like our ancestor did not eat three times a day. It's it's it's not true. They they eat when they they could and when they eat, they feed themselves as much as they can until that because the next time because I didn't know when they could eat again, right. So it's I think that's our word, we're built, you know, to to to have this similar lifestyle. If we could take a step back to the discussion about fear a little bit. So Mike Tyson talks about this process of him walking to the ring. He sounds similar to you in many ways of the anxiety and the fear that he experiences. And he has this sort of story that he tells about walking to the ring and being supremely afraid. But as he walks and gets closer and steps in, he finds the confidence and becomes supremely confident. I think he calls himself like a god. I feel like a god in the ring. Is is do you go through a similar process of finding the confidence? Well, it yes. And I use I use James Lange theory that they did. So what I do is because I'm I'm not afraid to admit that I'm afraid. And the beginning of my career. I really thought I asked myself because I was very good in mixed martial but I I really thought I wasn't made for this because the idea of fighting didn't. It was it didn't make me happy. It's something like I was I was forced to do in order to keep that lifestyle that I have. And achieve my goal. Perhaps one day to make enough money to retire and you know that that was my dream. But when I was looking around the gym where I was training. Most of my training partner that were happy. They were excited and sometimes I corner I corner a lot of guys and they're happy and they're in the locker room. They don't react the same way I do. Some perhaps does but if you see me in the locker room. Like when I get like my last fight with Michael Bisping just a given an example in my last fight with Michael Bisping because it's fresh. It's the one that is the most recent. And but it's always the same thing. My last fight in my best playing I get in the locker room. I like. Three guys that I trained with Mickey gole amons a happy and Joe Joseph Duffy they all lost it was like I like it my locker room was basically cursed. When you're in a locker room and people from your locker room leave for a fight and then they come back it's kind of a momentum you know you shake and yeah good job now it's my you know it's kind of a team brotherhood sort of thing. So the atmosphere in my locker room was pretty bad it was like going to a you know like a funeral. So I was very scared and I ever before every fight I I ask myself I ask myself always shit what the hell I'm doing here why did I choose to come back oh my god and I'm freaking out. However I'm putting on a mask like I'm acting because if I don't do that it will reflect on my coaches and if my coach my confidence of my coaches is affected it will reflect reflect on me. So I need to feel strong I need to make them believe that I'm excited to be there and I'm happy to be there so this sort of play start when I get when I first step in the locker room even though I feel completely different but that's how I play it. Normally the day the fight day I never felt feel 100% I always feel exhausted tired my highs are itching because I don't sleep enough the few nights before because I'm constantly rehearsing scenarios that might happen in the fight. So mentally it's not that I'm not on top but you keep all that to yourself I keep it to myself and I'm lying to everybody around. But everybody knows you know if Ferras John then I heard they know Freddie Rose they even would me for long that's the day and who is going on but at least I'm lying to them I'm feeling great. So and seeing all my training partner like very disappointed because they lost their fight some were badly hurt as well it was hard. So and I remember I get I get I get I start the warm up and everything and as you start the warm up you become a different person because you know certain we know that certain posture and yoga can affect your mental state but it's I would say it's a little bit the same thing in fighting you know like when you start hitting the pads your muscle memory your instincts comes back and you remember that you're good at this you know and you're good at this. You know and your confidence start to grow and I've seen your trainers holding the pad and repeating your moves it makes you also remember all the sacrifice you have done to your training camp and confidence come from how you prepared yourself and even you're afraid you can be confidence confident in the same time being afraid and being confidence is two different thing. And before every fight just right before I walk in it's when I'm scared I go in the bathroom and I look at myself in the mirror I used to have a bandana and a and a key but no I don't have this this for my last fight because of the the new re-buck deal they add but I did the same rehearsal that I always do I look at myself in the mirror and I start to compliment myself like even if I don't believe it I'm starting to trying to believe in myself. I start to try to believe it as I am I'm finding all the reason why I'm going to win the fight and and all my trainer knows that before every fight when when the guy from the UFC goes and step in my room say same period up next I always take a few minutes to do that that same rehearsal and I tell myself I'm going to win this fight because I'm better and and I'm very cocky about myself I'm telling all the reasons that I'm going to going to win I'm I got a better team I made more sacrifice you know I'm faster I'm more powerful. I'm way more athletic my fighting IQ is better than him I get a strategy on point that he's never going to be able to keep up with and this and that and I'm and I was telling myself I'm going to show these young kids how things should be done you know trying to boost myself yeah yeah try to boost yourself and you start to believe in it you become a different person so when you walk out the bathroom now rock and roll now I really believe it for real you know like I'm still scared but I believe it for real. And that's the transformation that happened for me right there and from there from now from from there to the fight it's until the fight is over it's called I call it cruise control because I you know that I have time to think in a fight if you're trying to think you're missing the opportunity so that's how I see it for myself so that point stop thinking age is go cruise control trust yourself you know trust yourself because you you repeated all the scenarios you know so everything that you have done it's inside that your computer your computer your brain is programmed to react accordingly to certain situations and the it's not the night of the fight that you you'll you'll tell yourself finally I'm going to do this if you do this now now if you have not practiced it before your screwed it the preparation the repetition that makes it happen you know. What about like the really difficult moments in a fight where you. Are tested to your limits essentially usually it's cardio related exhaustion right where you have to ask yourself that same questions like why the hell am I doing this yeah do you do you experience those or you're able to ride through the autopilot and if you do like what do you do in those moments never in a fight when I'm in a fight when it's the the when the fight is is on I never change my mind I go until the end however for example my first fight with BJP and I had a terrible first round so add to switch gear that happened sometimes but it's part of my plan I always have a plan B plans plan A plan B plan C you need to have that if fighters goes into a fight thinking all what I'm going to do this is this and they don't have a plan B if this doesn't work that's mean they're not well prepared if you talk to me before every fight I can like in 30 seconds give you my old strategy you know for BJP and my first fight with BJP and was I'm gonna keep it standing up keep the fight from the outside you know because I'm faster than him then the fight would be Japan start I found out that I was not faster than him and I found out that his reaction time was better than then then mine so. I got beat up the first round and I got a bloody nose and everything so my plan B was now I'm gonna wrestle you know I'm gonna wrestle him and you know make make him tired and trying to put him down and that's how I beat him because I switch gear you know but if you can't do that if you cannot find a way to become the perfect nemesis to your opponent you you might win a few fight but you you gonna find a you gonna fight someone sooner later that will that will be the give you a lot of a lot of trouble so that's where the anxiety pays off you're anticipating all the ways it goes wrong so you develop the plan B and plan C. Hi you know we talked a lot with the like John Danna her who you work with it's interesting I don't think I've heard him talk about plan B and plan C he usually has a really clear plan A and entire system of plan A I don't think I've heard him we've had a good discussion about it and I'm gonna do it. I'm gonna do a good discussion about it and over some cheeseburgers and he's but he was kind of espousing the value of mastering escapes so when you find yourself a bad situations being exceptionally good at finding ways out of those bad situations and that's a way of dominance there's nothing there's no better way to dominate your opponent according to him than to show that they can't possibly hurt you no matter how bad the position. It's like it's a it's a as opposed to physical dominance. It's a psychological dominance. It's very interesting but I wonder if he has plan B and plan C is mine too. You know in in mixed martial arts on time it's like in science of that you can make a mistake you know like every human can make a mistake you know there's certain sport or a certain situation that you if there's a mistake made your your that's not the right thing. Your that's it exactly sometimes it's the case in MMA but sometimes you able to redeem yourself and if you look the fight with BJP and one that I had which was probably one of the most competitive fight and it was probably the it was the fight that I got the most damage and I was messed up it took me three days like two three days to recuperate from that fight I was really damaged. And my first fight versus my second fight I made a lot of adjustment because I have learned from my first fight and also I had a guy one thing people don't know like they talk about fighters having secret weapons see for me my secret weapons was not like some is that they use like certain like different things for me was knowledge. I had a guy and much of it was measuring frames is not a scientist is is a friend of a ferrous and I and what he does he he watch fight and he measure frames the way does it is when you watch a fight and one of the guy to a punch he cut the picture by frame the video by frame. So he's able to see which fighter has better reaction time than others and BJP and he found out that BJP and evolve the UFC roster at the time when he was in his prime he had probably the best reaction time of all according to him the auto machito was the second one but BJP was the first one so I knew that if I would try to go first because I always been the fastest guy normally when I fight someone. But when I fought BJP and I tried to go first and he was always able to like I never was never able to touch him with my job and he came back with the counter punch. However because of what he told me I knew that BJP has a very fast reaction time but at a very poor reset time to him the way he described it to me is like your nervous system is like a muscle. BJP was so fast but he's like more like a sprinter so what I did the second fight when I fought BJP and I made him flinch like I fake a lot so I make him react and flinch. So all that that reaction time that he used to flinch was not used properly to avoid my punches so he I burn I load up his nervous system with a lot of information and fake and to make him flinch and pretending I was kicking and wrestling. So he got overwhelmed and he got tired very very fast so that's how I beat him. People sometimes they don't know really what's the strategy behind the thing they only see the physical part but when you fight someone if I fight you I look at you in the eyes. There's a lot of things that going on between you and I I can look down here. Here Pam jab you in the face the audience will not see this little detail but you will see it and that's what makes the magic during a fight. The relation that you have with the opponent you know like the mental game what you you make him believe those little things I use a lot of those if you talk to a lot of my opponent they'll tell you like I use a lot of these little thing you know like I look down the banner I go I go up or I am pretending I want to attack you so I'm I make you flinch but in reality I'm just doing this because I want to rest I want to recuperate and I'm tired. How much is you know people talk about that with poker for example how much is the value of this you know so like some people argue that poker is more about the betting you know just the money it's just how much you bet and so on so that would be more like the analogy there with with fighting would be just strictly the physical movement of your body and then a lot of people argue that there's a lot here in the way you look in the little movements in the face so do you think there's this do you think you're communicating with your opponent when you look at them there's no way to know for sure 100% and I'm by no no mean psychic nothing like that and I don't believe in that at all the only thing is I know true looking to die from opponent when he's afraid and when he gives up on me yeah I've been accused very often in my career to not take enough risk to not finish my opponent but a reason why I didn't finish my opponent is because I and so in his eyes that he gave up he gave me the fight and I'm winning the fight so it's not up to me it's not to me to make it to try to sacrifice myself trying to finish him perhaps if I do that I will open up from for him to to to to capitalize on my mistake it's up to him to make a risk so people sometimes they they don't understand that is the art of fighting my friend you know like if I'm winning the fight like an okey and I saw key if you're winning the game and it's the third period it's at the end of the third period you're not going to take out your gold and they're trying to score another goal because winning 5 to 3 or 5 to 4 is the same thing same thing in MMA we make a living out of this and sometimes it's you know as sad as bad as it can be you want to save yourself for another day you know you want to minimize the damage but if he knows he's losing the fight it's up to him to take the risk it's not up to me so I'm a good counter fighter I use a lot of my attack or counter strike or a reactive take down or proactive take down that's my speciality. So I'm not gonna I don't I've no desire to sacrifice myself trying to to try to finish my opponent if he want to if If perhaps I might give him the opportunity to capitalize on me, it's not smart to do that. And very often when I fight someone, I can read him, I see the fear in his eyes. Now I'm like, I got you know, he's very desperate. Doesn't mean I have to put my guard down because he's going to be desperate, but I know I'm beating you. And I know I'm beating you. I'm just going to do what I need. You know, if I have a chance, of course, I'll not come out, but I'm not going to try to sacrifice myself to knock out. And if you do that, maybe one day you'll make a mistake and you'll get dropped and you'll tell yourself that I shoot. I just got brain damage. Maybe I'm never going to come back the same. Maybe I ruined my career or you know, it's a very serious game that we're playing is very dangerous. In the face of that risk, I mean Mike Tyson talked about, you know, when the opponent looks away, he knows he's got him, right? If that, that he's broken. For a person like me who has trouble making eye contact with people, there's truth to that. I mean, there's truth to that that there's an animal nature to us looking away. I mean, you could see that the way the body language, the way the eyes move between two animals going at it in the wild on like two lions fight or to whatever fight, there's a certain beta move when you've been defeated. Yes, or one thing when I know that, that when it happened, one of the sign is when I just like make a friend and the guy flinch like crazy, that's mean he's really scared of me. He's a little bit like you're doing this. The guy flinch a little bit or you're doing this, he's flinching like, oh, that's mean you hurt him and he doesn't want to get hurt again. So he's really trying to run away and not not winning the fight anymore, but not losing sort of surviving the fight around and it's hard to to finish a guy who doesn't want to fight. A guy who's not fighting anymore to win and this is fighting to not lose. And the proof of that if you don't believe me, just look the reign of all the greatest champion in UFC. I don't care who they are, John Jones or like you could clearly see that in the beginning of their reign, they could you know, finish a lot of their opponents. Same as me in the beginning, I was finishing a lot of my opponents, but there's a time that the entire UFC roster is studying you and they found a ways to perhaps not beating you, but they found a way to navigate through the fight in a way that they minimize the damage, you know what I mean? So it's a big difference between fighting to win and fighting to not lose. You said that there's a difference between a fighter and a martial artist. So now we were talking about fighting. You're considered by me to be one of the greatest fighters of all time, but you've said that there's a difference between a fighter and a martial artist, a fighter is training for a purpose. He has a fight. I'm a martial artist. I don't train for a fight. I train for myself. I'm training all the time. My goal is perfection, but I will never reach perfection. So what do you, does it mean to be a martial artist? Martial artist is because that lifestyle that I have has been introduced to me and the seed has been planted to my mind a long, long time ago by my father. I do not train because I have a fight. I will always train. Even now it kind of amuse me to see that a lot of people because I'm still training because I love the science of fighting. I do not like to fight, but I love the science of it. And I will always do it as long as I can do it. People think I'm going to make a comeback and everything. I'm about to get to have 40 years old, you know? I don't want to fight an occasion for the years. I mean, some people have done it. They did it very well, but I'm not one of them. I feel a little bit to me that and you never say never feel like to me like it's a little like a kid that you play with a strain with his young like, he's five years old, six, seven years old, eight years old. And then I want to say, what the hell I'm doing here? I'm 12 for this. Like, it's like I have done it, you know? And I got out of it on top and I'm healthy, which is the most important thing right now. I'm touching wood and I'm wealthy. I beat the game, you know what I mean? In a way, like, that's not to be cocky, but I did it. And I wish more fighters could do the same thing. I wish, but it's unfortunate because a lot of them, they stay there and hang out for too long and they get badly hurt. They get beaten and broken, you know? And they finish broke as well because the lifestyle you have when you're a pro athlete, it's crazy, you know? It's unbelievable. However, everything that goes up and life goes down and you need to plan your future, you know? So for me, if some guys have the same mentality as me and they're watching us right now, I would say if you do it because you're just good at it, you like the money, the advantage, the freedom that it gives you, but you don't necessarily like to fight. When you're done, you finish on top, you know? Go cash out and get out of here. Walk away. Yes. Hard to do. However, Alex, it's not everybody that does it for that reason. Some people generally love to fight love to compete. So they do it because I love it, you know, or they do it because of the money. But if you don't love it, if you don't like to fight because it's very stressful and you don't enjoy it, you enjoy the training, perhaps, but you don't like to fight. You do it because it's part of what you need to do in order to keep that lifestyle. And you know, like you don't need the money. Get out of here, man. If you're in your prime, get out of here because if you don't, you'll hurt your own legacy, you'll damage your health. It's very sad. And it's a sad business, you know what I mean? It's like a lot of one of the place where is the most, one of the most apiose place for me to go and the most saddest place for me to go. It's in the gym. Try sorry Montreal because it's one of the apiose place for me to go because I can go train and do what I love to do. It's also a very sad place for me because after when I'm about to leave, there's always a bunch of young kids that comes or guys that are around 30, 33 years old and they come to me and say, hey, George, you have some advice for me? And I look at them. And if they're my friend, they're real close friend of mine. I'll tell them the truth in their face. And I've done it many times and it was not well received. But if they're not my friend, I have to, you know, you know, they always an advice about fighting and I answer their question. It's my pleasure. But the truth, if they want me to tell the truth, the big majority of them, I would tell them as a listen man, you're in a maybe three, like on the losing street of three fights, you're 30, 33 years old, you know, I think you should think about doing something else in your life, you know, have other goals, you know, because you're not going to make it. You know, I've seen that movie before and it's a very sad ending and I'm sad to tell you the truth because you're not going to make them money. Just choose some, but if I tell them that they're going to be angry at me because they're going to be like, oh, you, you make it and you think I cannot make it. So it's kind of, they're going to think I'm cocky, but I was lucky to make it, you know, at the start, we're all online, but at one point you need to be able to have a plan to be, you know, like, like some parent, they come to see me with their kids. Hey, this is the future wall champion and UFC and what advice would you give him? I always tell the same thing and it does not make everybody happy when I said, I said, I go to the cafe, are you good at school? Say stay at school, school is very important for you, stage-cated. Yeah, do boxing, martial arts, a great sport, stay in shape, but don't put your eggs all in the same basket. And the parents sometimes are angry when I say, nothing good, but I can see their eyes are like, they kind of surprise. And it's not because I made it that I will tell their kid to follow the same path that I did. I went to school too. I study. I drop a school when I had my first wall championship fight against Matt Hughes. But before that, I was school. So I had another way to go if things would not have gone the same the way I wanted. But the problem, and I'm saying that it's not only about boxing in MMA. I'm talking about hockey, basketball, baseball, same thing. Maybe it's the one on the hundred thousand that make it. And I'm saying that make it. When I'm saying that make it, that's mean they can retire and have enough money for the rest of his life. It's a sad story. The only people only heard about the people that makes it. But a lot of fighters, even the UFC champion in boxing champion, even the football basketball, I don't care the big names when they retire. They have zero. They're bankrupt, my friend. And it's a very sad story and a sad reality that most people are not aware of. But having other paths in life actually can also increase the chance of you dominating and reaching the highest peak in your main thing. I mean, Jimmy Page, I don't know if you know who that is. It's a judo coach in America. He says that to all of his athletes is to make sure that you go. He has a lot of, you know, Kaila Harrison, two-time Olympic gold medalist. He has a lot of Olympic medalists. But basically, there's something about going to school, like having a forget school, any other avenue in life that gives you the freedom to go all out in your main. Like, you know you're doing it for the right reasons. You're not stuck. It clears the mind to where you're free to be the best in the world, as opposed to kind of you have to. I mean, different people are motivated by different things. So sometimes some people like having their back to the wall, unless the only option they have. But most people, I think, excel when you have other options. I think it's a distraction and I think it's important to have a distraction. When you say that, I think about one of my coach John Danahar, he put his academic background experience into Jiu-Jitsu. And that, for me, that's why he's the best teacher I ever had. He's incredible. He starts teaching me when I even couldn't speak much English at the time. And I was able to communicate and understand, you know, that's how good he is. And I truly believe that most of that lead, especially in sport like mixed martial art, trained way too much. If I could go back and talk to a young George, I would tell him that you do way too much volume, you train way too hard, train smarter, it's more important. And I think sometimes we underestimate the benefit of recuperation. Because I think we assimilate the information that we learn during a training when we recuperate and not during the training itself. And this old mentality of harder, heavier, you know, like it's good for someone who's lazy. But if you're an elite at least, most of that time, you're not always, but most of that time is because you're not lazy. And a lot of guys, sometimes they're elite athletes, champions and you heard people say, oh, I can't believe he's very gifted, but he doesn't work. But perhaps it's not really because perhaps it's because we don't understand, perhaps he's doing the right thing and it's us who's working too much and too hard. That's what I think. First I got trained with is he made me think about it. His name is Manso, Bernawe, he's going to be a future star, he's an incredible fighter. He trained once a day. And he asked me sometime advice when he came in Montreal, he's from France. You'll hear about him, he's very good. And I saw him in the morning at TriStar and I said, okay, I'll see you perhaps later in the other training zone, I only trained once a day. And he kind of waits for me to give him like not an approval, but to see how I react or I don't know, it was kind of a strange feeling, but I told myself at that point I kind of add an awakening and I told myself, man, maybe he's doing the right thing because a lot of people would say, for example, oh, that's the lazy way of doing it. But perhaps it's the best way to do it. I'm not saying it training once a day is the best way to do it. That's what I'm saying. I'm saying that everybody is different, but for him, it works beautifully. And I wouldn't change anything, you know, like if I would be him because he's improving, like crazy. Yeah. And ultimately the bigger picture there is to do something that everyone else says is stupid. It's like the fasting thing that a lot of people would say, a lot of nutritional experts would say that that's a dumb way. You know, if you want to be an MMA fighter, you should be eating like many times a day. You should be starting every day with oatmeal. You should be carving up constantly, but that's not necessarily true for everybody. And it's possible. I'm sure there's actually now a few MMA fighters that are carnivore only. It's possible. I used to eat right before training and it didn't bother me. However, now my first training that I do normally in average around noon, 11 a.m., I haven't eaten anything when I do my first training. And it feels to me that I'm much more clear and much more clear in my mind. I'm much more creative. I feel better. Yeah. It's a big difference. I just wish I would have known that before. Well, it's fascinating. The role of the mind and all of this, how important is it for your mind to be clear, to really think deeply. There's a Jidoka, American named Travis Stevens. I remember he said something that the right kind of practice is when your mind is exhausted at the end of it, that you were constantly thinking through things. Like your body shouldn't be exhausted first, your mind should be exhausted first. It's really fascinating. So people think about training hard. A successful practice is where you walk away just overwhelmed. How much you had to think. It's fascinating, framing of a successful practice. It's true. Travis Stevens was one of my main training partners when I got ready for my fight with Nick Diaz and Carlos Condit. He drove every Friday from I believe Boston. It's like a six hour drive. Drive to the German Montreal. Train with us. An hour and a half. Drive back. He's got such an amazing discipline. I was so happy for him when you won the medal at the Olympic game. Man, what a well deserve accomplishment. It's unbelievable. It paid off. I was so happy for him. Every time we got to the gym, he was waiting for me in a knee-link position like a soldier. I was like, my God, this guy. He's made him still. After training, I always offer him. I say, Travis, I know you like to train with it because in Montreal, they have a very good judo team. Nicolas Gill and all that guy. I say, if you want to stay, I'll get you in the hotel. Anything you want is like, no, I'm going to go back. I have another training later. I'm like, no, not only that he trained with us, you have to go back because he had another training. I'm like, this is insane. He's gone to a huge number of injuries. He's also an innovator because, I mean, it's difficult to say, but for American judo, there's not many high-level judoca. If you want to be the fight with the best in the world, you have to be alone. It's a lonely journey, actually. It's kind of sad. It's much easier to be in Japan where everybody is a killer. When you're alone at it, it's a difficult journey. It's funny. We talked about, kind of, there are some sports where a mistake is, that's it. You can't recover from a mistake. I think judo oftentimes is one of those sports. Added on top of that is the Olympics, only every four years. Travis's story, he's the reason I, when I saw him in 2008, is I started martial arts. I switched from wrestling and street fighting to doing judo and judo. I just saw so much guts. In 2000, I might be messing up the years here, but in the next Olympics, he fought and he lost on just the referee call. He went to war and he just so much guts and just everything on the line and to lose and to still persevere through all their injuries, through all of that, through incredibly difficult training sessions to go. Another four years, then compete and then win a medal. I mean, that guy is just, and he clearly could have been very successful. He's also an incredible judo competitor, so he could have switched to that, but he's stuck. In a lot of sport, when you're in the elite, like, for example, in Canada, I saw a keys, the number one sport in the countries. Kids, when they're in the elite, when they're young, they get chosen. And they're kind of already known as a superstar. You know, the school where they go and the program, they follow, like, I'm sure it's the same thing in the US and basketball, baseball, perhaps, American football. Because they already chosen, so they grew up with that, that it, that it's a kid that, that, that superstar, a stardom, sort of, speak. And it's already glad, glad, sort of glamorous, you know? However, in, in MMA, there's no MMA judo wrestling, like, in America, because it's not our national sport, it's, it's actually, it's not like, even when I first started, it was not really well received by the media. There's no glamour into it. Now I don't know, it seems like it's another era now. And I feel sometimes that some people do it for the wrong reason. You know, some people do it because of the glamour, because of the money. But even if you're in the elite and very good, the glamour and the money won't come in the beginning. It's a very long grind before, you know, you start, it's start to come in and you need to make those sacrifices and it's a, it's a journey that where you will be tested, you will be hurt, repetitively, and you're gonna have to, to reach the down deep and come back up. And then once you finally think you made it, you're gonna go back in the down deep again. It's a very exhausting and decaraging adventure sometimes. But if you all down to your dream and you believe in it, you know, and you have the, the stars are aligned, you're gonna make it. That's why it's only a few people that, that make it, you know? And, and that's why I feel, I feel sometimes the, the new, a lot of people in the new generation do it for the wrong reason. In my, in my generation, because of sport at first it was there were no rules. I felt it was more pure. The people that did it was really, because of the passion, they didn't, we didn't seek money, fame. We did it because we wanted to be, I did it because I wanted to be the man, you know? I like to have the confidence that when I walk somewhere, I'm, you know, I have the confidence that, you know, it's an illusion because nobody's faster than a bullet. Yes. But I wanted to achieve it for myself. And I, which today now, because I don't know if it's social media and all that, that, that, that, the world has changed. The glamour, the, you know, it's, I feel it's a different thing right now. Yeah. The, if you get in it for the glamour of the money, you may not have the right, the right amount of fuel to persevere through all the ups and downs. Yeah. Sure. And the motivation of money and glamour, the guy comes to mind, and I don't know how many wrestlers, you know, but in Russia, there's a guy named Bovassia, a city of, the city of brothers, one of the greatest freestyle wrestlers of all time. But he also has, it's funny, he doesn't have many interviews. One of my goals is to go out and talk to him in Russian, do an interview with him, because he's exceptionally poetic and deep thinker. He's the kind of martial artist that you are in the way that it's not just about the, the different battles he's been through or whatever. It's about the philosophy behind the way he approaches life. And he, he's spoken quite a bit about that the glamour, the fame, the money are all things that get in the way of the purity of the experience, the art, that the way to achieve greatness is to just lose yourself in the art of the actual combat. In his case, it's wrestling. And then kind of not to worry and actively make sure that you block out anybody who, you know, feeds you the narrative where you're supposed to be this famous person and all those kinds of things that he basically says, let others write your story. Make sure that you just focus on the art. And another person from that side of the world is, of course, Kabebe. So he represents that side of the world. And we were talking about walking away and most people not being able to walk away at the top as you have, but also now Kabebe has, it looks like, incredibly so. So I mean, maybe you can comment about what your thoughts are about Kabebe numbering a matter of being able to just walk away. You know, we talk about the gold very often. Kabebe is one of, isn't the argument because he has the most dominant career of all martial art, the guy. You know, some guys can be named the gold for different reasons, but Kabebe for that reason and he's undefeated. He, I don't even know if he lost. He might have lost around, but he dominate all his opponent. It was ridiculous. And such an incredible career that he had. I love to watch him fight. He's incredible. And when you talk about the art, when you say mixed martial art, the idea of a flawless performance for me, everybody, often when we say flawless performance, thinks about a knockout, a brutal knockout. But for me, it's to be able to showcase beautiful technique. Like a beautiful take down, beautiful submission, like something beautiful that, you know, when you look at, for example, Wayne Gretsky or Michael Jordan or like Stephen Curry or even if you don't know nothing about basketball and you watch Michael Jordan, you'll be like, wow, that's beautiful what you just did. Like we talk about fighting and trying to say the word beautiful in fighting for certain people, it could sound kind of crazy, you know, but I'm talking about the technique. A beautiful technique, you know, for me, that's the goal, you know, when I was fighting, it's now need to have a brutal knockout because some people are more gifted than others and so I'm saying gifted, some people are better than others in certain phase of fighting. But for me, it was that it was to showcase, to win of course, but to showcase some beautiful technique that you can watch it and be like, wow, that was incredible. The timing did it. And when I talk about Kabim Normagomanov, I see all the detail of his work, especially when he got his opponent against the fence, that's like, that's his area of expertise where he's to me, he's the best that ever did it in terms of that fighting style, that particular expertise that he has, it's just the flawless execution of that particular set of techniques. Yeah, and I kind of make Gregor at the accuracy. The spider Anderson Selva was like, I would say the most flamboyant of all, you know, like he was moving like the matrix. John Jones was incredible in terms of creativity, spinning elbows and that and he faced incredible adversity. Zimitrius Johnson was so complete, you could bring like, he was slamming a guy to an arm bar, it was just unbelievable. Like, like, it was like the complete fighter. BJPan was like so flexible. He did stuff with his body that like, nobody could do his deck, the dexterity of his hips was just unbelievable. Dominic Cruz, to me, was incredible, his footwork, his distance control. So when you talk about like the goat, Royce Gracie and other one, he did things that I think for me is not number one because I got to, I got to end starting to draw up the hoist is a fascinating one. I'd love to hear what you think about them. But many people consider you, most people consider you to be the number one greatest mixed martial arts fighter ever. So it's fascinating to remove you from that list and continue this discussion and asking like, who do you think is the greatest fighter ever? You listed some amazing ones, Royce, you somehow skipped Fedor. I'm very as a Russian. I'm very offended. No, I was going to, there's so many Fedor as one as well. Fedor, I think, in his prime was like, when you say, when you talk about a name, for example, like, we talk about him when he was in his prime. Like, when I talk, for example, about Anderson, I'm not talking about the Anderson's servo, what is the last fight against who raised your whole line. Talking about Anderson servo knocked out Victor Belfer. Yes. BJP and same thing. The problem is when fighters hang on for too long in the sport. That's what happened. They kind of make people forget how good they were. And it's very sad. We talk about Fedor and just think about steeping your chitch. Which is probably the greatest every weight of all time with Fedor. I would really wonder who would have won this fight. The both guys and their prime tend to lean towards Fedor because my heart was with Fedor, but you could have gone the other way. But just because me and chitch lose his last fight now, everybody is like, oh, yeah, they forgot about him. It's crazy, man. It's one fight. You say when you should zag boom, that's the reality of mixed martial art. So that's why the thing is the mixed martial arts isn't just the performance, the strictly who won and who lost. It's also the stories which tell ourselves. And so I mean, there's beautiful stories being weaved. And that also is part of who is the greatest of all time is what were the battles, what had to be overcome. What was the flavor of the flawless performances, all of that plays into it. And you're right, being able to walk away at the top is also part of that. A lot of people ask me about Kabeib and that fight, I want it to happen. Kabeib wanted to happen, but UFC did not want to happen between you and Kabeib. Yes. I tried to make it like about three years ago when I retired. Two years ago, and it never came to fruition. The UFC were clear. They said they have a different plan for Kabeib and it makes sense for the business standpoint because they want to keep the ball rolling. Now Kabeib retired and like everybody else, after just on GAYtree, I was doing the commentator in French for the UFC. And I thought he was going to call me out. If there was one guy that I would have said yes, it would be him because for a fighter, the most exciting things to do, it's often the scariest one. And Kabeib was worth the risk. It's the scariest match of it. Yes, but he was worth the risk because nobody had ever been able to solve them. How would you solve the Kabeib, normally, in the amount of puzzle? Well, Kabeib is very good against the fence. I would have to establish a game plan and everything, but I think what I would need it to do is take the center of the octagon right away. Use a lot of think and faith. Keep the fight all the way, all the way out or all the wind. And when I say all the wind is when he closed the gap, use my proactive and reactive take down and perhaps my superior explosive to put them down. I like to use those proactive and reactive take down because for me, I feel it's more economical. Kabeib is a much better chain wrestler than me. Chain wrestler is when he got the guys to the fence. It's pure wrestling. What makes my take down very efficient? It's my karate. It's not my wrestling. I'm very good at timing my opponent and getting in with my explosivity. So if you watch my take down, it does not demand often. It does not demand a lot of work when I use the, I call it proactive take down. When he's coming to punch me and I react, so I mean, pro-activists is when I'm faking it. So I instigate the take down by a fake, then I take them down. And reactive is when he's baiting him to throw something, then he's a counter. Yeah, yeah. But all my take down in the center of the octagon. Yes, my take downs are more in the center of the octagon. Like, for example, another guy that does it well is Gleason T-Bow. That did it well in his best days, you know. Kabeib has more a style of chain wrestling. I would say like Kamaru Uzman, sort of speak. Kind of guy. It's a different style. You cannot compare both styles. And that's the kind of take down I'm good. And I would, if I would have fight Kabeib, that's one of the strategies I would have had. I would not have been afraid because everybody that I fought, I was able to put them down. And I have the pedigree to prove it in my fight reasonably. So you would have perhaps seen in his back. And I would have perhaps been in my back as well. So he would have been a very interesting fight. How hard do you think he is to take down? I mean, a lot of people speak about his wrestling being just like... It has nothing to do with the wrestling because... It has to do with the karate. If I got the timing and I got my boat hand around his knees, he's going down the world. Everybody goes down. Yes, yes, he goes down. And a lot of... That's what I would have... I would not have been afraid of his wrestling. I would have been the instigator. I would have forced the fight forward. And that's what I would have approached that fight, which I believe most of his opponent were afraid of his wrestling because they didn't have the tools that I have to put him down. I would not have forced the wrestling. I would have in the clinch, I would have tried to disengage. I have many ways to disengage a clinch. I would have wanted to force the fight in a fighting distance, you know, like in a shootbox distance, not in a wrestling distance. Is it possible this fight still happens? I... Your young look great in a suit. Well, there's a lot of problems now. And the thing is, now I made peace with it. I no longer don't want to fight. And I don't... It's not going to happen. UFC was not interested. And I'm bound by contract with the UFC and by exclusivity. There are some people who says to me, I don't know how about if Russian... A crazy, wealthy Russian guy come with the money. I have stabbed... I'm going to be in court with UFC. And also, I'm old or no. And when I go home and I'm like, I don't want to do this, you know, like I don't always like this. No, I don't want to do this. But like, for example, I was training with Freddie Roach a few days ago and I'm hitting pads, you know. And Freddie is looking at me and he's like, you have the hitch back. I'm like, yeah. If they know what would walk in the room in the gym at that precise moment with the UFC contract, I would sign it, sign it in the blink of an eye. But without a drive, go home. I'm like, hell no. My belly is full. You know, I'm healthy. I'm wealthy. Why would I want to fight for? I made peace with it. But the minute I go back in the gym because I still get it inside me. When I train with the young guys, I still get it. And a lot of guys think, hey, tell me the truth. You're preparing a comeback because I still get it. You know, I'm a little bit older, but I got more knowledge. I can compensate. I become a different animal because you know, it changed you. But then after you go home and you're your like man, no way I'm doing this. It's very hard to explain. You need to be a fighter to understand that it's very, very hard to explain. Well, from your perspective, I think, Kabeem is one of the rare, one of the few fascinating scientific puzzles yet to be solved. So from that aspect, as a martial artist, it's just a fascinating journey to try to solve that puzzle. There's a thing too, like say, oh, who's the best fighter people? Next they don't like I am just I realized that later in my life. And I'm sure a lot of young guys will say, oh, I say, if you're it's not, don't speak for me. But I'm telling you right now, what I'm about to say, you will realize it later. When I was young, I think you can proclaim yourself the bad ass men on the planet, you know, like nobody can beat you at. It's an illusion, man. That's the sad thing about, for example, DC, Daniel Kormier does probably one of the greatest, if not the greatest, however, of all time. You said me, but like it's almost because of that little match up with John Jones. It's difficult for people to conceive of him as the greatest of all time. It's all about match up. It's all about timing and also you make a fight. You make both guys fight 10 times. The result might be different like like every time, you know, it might, I mean, maybe it's going to win eight out of 10. But that night is going to is going to lose. Why? Because we don't know the universe made it like that. You know, maybe got sick, maybe had the emotional issues. He didn't sleep well and he makes him lose focus and he got caught. I, you don't, we don't know, but it's, it's, that's the thing with the, if people ask me, would you have done it with Kaby? What would happen? I don't know. Maybe out of 10 time. I don't know. Maybe as a fighter, I hope I would have won more than him. He thinks the opposite is only one way to find out. But that night, if there's a fight, the guy that's going to win doesn't mean he's the best fighter. And the, the, the, the one that fought the best, the night of the fight. Same thing in basketball or hockey. The team that wins the game, it's not necessarily the best team is the team that played the best, the, the night of the game. And fighting is no different. So being the baddest man on the planet, it's an illusion. I mean, that's the tragic thing about it is an anyone night and you think it happened and that that tells a story for all of human history. It's, it's sad, it's sad to think about, but that's what makes it beautiful that there's so much a stake. Like entire lives, all the dreams you've had growing up, all the hard work, all of it is decided in a single night, even though that means nothing in terms of who's actually better. It's, I mean, that's the beauty. That's why people love the Olympics, especially because it happens so rarely and dreams are broken or like triumph is achieved by the unlikely hero all like right there. I mean, that's why we love it, right? That's why I love it. If we would know always the result before it would be boring and that's why we do it, you know, I watch the odds, you know, like sometimes I like to watch the odds before a fight, you know, because you know, there's things, you know, I believe in causality, you know, I believe in everybody, I believe different things, but I believe everything is because there's a, there's a cause to everything. That's personally what I believe. I don't believe that I have like free will. I think I have the illusion of free will, but I believe there is a cause for everything. And if I'm doing something because of something, because of a cause by definition, there's no free will in a way. You know, if there's a cause by definition, there is not. How does that make you feel, by the way? Like the idea that if we just look outside even just human psychology and fighting and so on, if we look at like physics, if everything is predetermined, if all of these low molecules interacting, it's already like your story is already written. I mean, it depends. It's written, but I wouldn't need to know all the data and it's impossible, right? Like it's, it's kind of weird. I gotta say, but I don't, to me, I don't see any argument to counter that idea. I, I, I, I, I can, I don't, maybe I'm, I'm ignorant, but I haven't seen nobody and everything that I've read so far. There's nothing that counter that I did that, that, that, because in a mechanical world, if your car broke or, you know, we don't say all the car decided to broke or a three, a three is fall. There's reason why the tree is falling. We don't say the tree is decided to fall, right? So what, because us human being, I think it's our ego with the side, and I'm no different than anybody. When I make a decision, I decided to this, I choose to do this. But I'm aware that there is causes that make me do certain things. And by definition, I think if there is a cause, there is no free will by definition, right? Yes, but the thing is, just like you said, we understand so little about human intelligence, the human mind, and especially consciousness, that the, this giant mystery, this darkness that we don't understand how, how it, how it feels like to be something, to be conscious being, that because of that, we're not able to really even reason about free will or not. Because there might be some magic that comes from consciousness. You know, the consciousness might be the thing that makes us different from a car that breaks down. There might be something totally fascinating, totally undiscovered yet that will make us realize that free will is actually real and somehow fundamental to the human experience. So it's sometimes I think we forget when we talk about free will and physics and all seeming to be predetermined, we forget how little we actually understand about the world. And I think in that mystery that could be totally new ideas that are yet to be discovered and will make us realize that it's not just an illusion, there is something that is like, at the core of how the universe works. Some people believe that consciousness is a fundamental property of the universe. Like it's a, it's a one of the forces of physics. Like consciousness permeates everything. It's in everything. Like this table is conscious, but it's not as conscious as us and where this little peak of consciousness. And if that's true and if we get to understand that, maybe there's something there's an extra bonus we get in terms of free will once you become one of those entities that are super conscious. So I tend to be sort of humbled by the mystery of it. Do you believe one day with the technology that keep improving, we will make robot that will be able to be somehow conscious? Absolutely. That's been my dream. That's been, I hope to do just that. First of all, I believe that all people are capable and want to be good to each other. And I think love is a really powerful thing that connects us and can create better and better worlds. Sort of like create better and better societies that improve both the technology, the quality of life and just the basics of human experience. And I think creating AI systems that are conscious that are human like can enable us to be better to each other. Like they can, it's almost like adding more and more kindness to the world through the systems we interact with will inspire us to be better and better to each other. In terms of them being conscious, I think that is an absolute requirement that entities we interact with communicate some element of consciousness to us. Like that's how we connect to each other. The reason we, you and I connect is that we believe that each of us are conscious. And to me, what consciousness means is the ability to hurt, ability to suffer, to struggle in this world. Because just like you said, without the struggle, you don't have the love, you don't have the pleasure. And ultimately, consciousness is an entity's ability to struggle, to suffer. And from that arises the pleasure. And us together being able to appreciate sort of appreciate the highs and experience together the lows. That's how we form the deep connections. I personally think we can create that in robots. And I personally believe it's a lot easier than we think. Does it make you afraid sometimes about the fact that one day, hey, hey, like intelligence artificial intelligence could hurt us? Or because of Hollywood, of course, the movies we watch. But it seems like, and when I hear sometimes Elon Musk talking, like... Yeah, so Elon talks about with AI, we're summoning the demon. He is very concerned. And I talked to him about it quite a bit. He's very concerned about all the different ways AI could hurt us humans. I tend to believe that there's a lot more ways in which AI can make our lives better and can make life awesome for humans. I think humans are the ones that can do a lot of evil things. So I'm less worried about AI and more worried about humans. If I look at what humans have done on the course of history, you know, for example, in regards the planet to the skill of the universe, I think what I'm afraid is that we have more of a destructive force than a beneficial force. So if AI take that in consideration in order to protect us against ourselves, it could hurt us. I don't know if you understand what you think about that. Because it makes you afraid sometimes, not because of AI, but because what humans are doing that AI could do to us to prevent us of hurting each or herself, you know? Yeah, definitely. I mean, it can bring out the worst in human nature and provide tools for evil people to do evil things at a larger scale. But I just think, it depends what you think human beings are. I tend to believe that as we get more intelligent, we start to see the value, the evolutionary value and the value in terms of happiness of being good to each other. And I think AI, if you look at AI as an optimization problem of how to create a civilization that works well and expands throughout the universe, I think love is much more effective. So AI will help us maximize that. I think there's going to be always spikes throughout as it has been through human history, what charismatic leaders will do evil onto the world in the name of good. You have the Stalin and the Hitler's and all of that. But ultimately, over time, I think technology will give the good people power and the evil people less power. Now there's a lot of ways in that that won't be the case. There's a lot of ways for it to go wrong and Elon talks about that. But I honestly think in terms of intelligent AI, that's going to bring more love to the world. The thing I'm concerned about is dumb AI. So there's been a lot of discussion between China and the United States recently on autonomous weapons system. This is something people don't, they're afraid to talk about. There's now a race where the United States has officially said that they're not against adding AI to its weapons systems. So now the US military is adding automation, adding intelligence to its drones to its anything that can create damage. And so of course, they did this so in response to China doing that. So you can imagine this is Terminator. You think about Terminator as intelligence systems. They're not. They're pretty dumb. The point is they're efficient at doing what they do. And in the space of war, efficient at doing what you do means killing. So that I'm really afraid of. But those are dumb AI. Those aren't your loving, deep, fulfilling relationships. That's like efficiently being able to fly to plan the trajectory of dropping bombs, of missiles, of how to do counter attacks, of how to maximize the destruction of a particular facility instead of individuals. And then that can just escalate. And as opposed to the Cold War with the Soviet Union, this could be a hot war. And then the consequences once you allow, it's kind of terrifying. Because currently the drones are operated by humans. So you have, say, you have information about intelligence, gives you information about a particular terrorist located in this area. And then you use drones to maybe the automation there is to help you figure out what is the best trajectory to strike at that location. So you still have a human that pulls the trigger at the end, dropping the bomb. Now automation and AI in autonomous weapons systems might be where you say, there's a bad guy over here. You figure out how to get rid of the bad guy. Okay. So then of course the systems will be very good at finding the right trajectory and so on. But there's bugs that can happen, unexpected bugs, that the system might figure out that there is this bad guy might actually be in these other five locations. So Mike's might make sense to cover the entire area, right? And so you might drop bombs on the entire area. And then you know, that's just okay. So that's going to lead to a lot of destruction at a scale of a city. But then you can immediately take that to nuclear weapons. If you add automation to responding to counter attacks to nuclear weapons, somebody you might get information that somebody is planning a nuclear attack on the United States and the AI system will immediately respond. And you know, it can respond at a scale of launching nuclear weapons itself. So there's all of these possibilities that don't require much intelligence. And that's exceptionally concerning. I'm like you, I do not believe there is babies that are born bad. I think people do bad things because of their experience. However, if I look through my experience from what I can see, some very often, men's of power wants more power. That's what makes me afraid with. Yeah. Actually, I listen, I've come from the Soviet Union. Stalin is arguably one of the most powerful humans in history. He's not talked often enough about why the evil he's done. Hitler gets all the attention. But Stalin has done arguably much more evil than Hitler. Yeah. Well, this is this is human nature. It wants power. We see that when the institutions, we see that with governments and nations, I think you see this with the internet. People are really hungry for the distribution of power. Like, you see that people are very much distrustful of centralized places of power, of institutions and so on. So I think successful organization, successful companies, successful governments will be run by people who distribute the power. Like I don't trust myself with power at all. And I think you have to build into the system that no one person can have power that you distribute it. That's where you have, in the financial sector, you have cryptocurrency right now with Bitcoin and all those kinds of things. People are exploring, how can we avoid the central bank to have control? How do you put the power in the hands of thousands of people, millions of people? And in the same way with military, with any kind of technology, I think the future looks very distributed. So what do you think about militarizing space? The space force. I don't think about it often because right now I'm filled with excitement about space exploration, which is the positive aspect. So Elon, you know, I was born in an era where I was exciting. I don't know about you, but for me, it's exciting to look up to the stars and dream about us, humans, colonizing Mars, colonizing other planets, expanding out to the galaxy into the universe. That's really exciting. So the possibilities there are endless. I don't think, because also the resources are endless. And so I think we get into trouble with militarization, with wars when the resources are very constrained. So I think for a while, we're not going to be fighting. The only wars we'll be fighting in space are the ones that kind of help us under another nation to compete with, who goes to the moon first, I guess. Those kinds of things are maybe for satellites and all those kinds of communication and maybe in assistance for cyber warfare, which is also very dangerous. But in terms of the wars out in space, I think everything out in space will be positive and inspiring. It's very hard, but all good things are hard, I think. This is where I've been talking to a bunch of people about extraterrestrial life. I'm really excited by, I don't know, it's the other thing. When I look out to the stars, it's exciting to me. I know I think you've spoken about it being scary. But to me, it's exciting that there's intelligent creatures out there far beyond perhaps the intelligence of our own that are just too far away to explore yet, but we might one day come in contact with them. So that to me is the ultimate motivator is to meet other intelligence life forms out there and connect with them. Have you ever meet Jacques Valli? No, but I've been in communication. I hope to talk to him. He's an amazing French. I know that there's many theories about, you know, if there's alien, we don't know, right? But some people think it's from another star systems. And Jacques Valli has a, like, to make a long story short, he has a different theory. He thinks it's perhaps beings that could be living in a different dimension than us. And the reason why he says that is when he makes an experiment, when there is a sightings very often of a UFO, let's say I'm the UFO that you have three guys. What they are looking at the UFO very often, one experiment that you can do. And sometime that that's a case, you asked your two friends to walk on the side. And there's a point that it's like a corridor you see the UFO, then you stop seeing in like a corridor. That's one of the reason why he's saying that it's perhaps a dimension. And I found that fascinating, you know, it's I, this is what, you know, to the discussion of consciousness and all that, it feels like we might be just experiencing a very particular slice of this universe. We might not be understanding what's at the higher dimensions or, yeah, I mean, higher dimensions in whatever form that means. You know, there's all these physical theories now that describe a world with dimensions that's much higher than the four dimensions of the three-dimensional space in the one dimension of time. So whatever the hell has gone on in those other dimensions, it could be something. Unfortunately, this is the sad part. It might be something we can't even comprehend with our human brains. That the limitations are just, I mean, we're built, we're just descendants of apes. So like, it might not be possible to even understand. Is there alien? Is there another dimension? Is there a human from the future? Is there perhaps Chinese or another, you know what I mean? A group of people that are working with a technology far behind. But you know what? I add that chance to meet, you know, because of the sport I'm doing, I met a lot of people in military and politics sometimes that I ask them every time. I met one this week and I ask them, I say, is it true about the UFO is there? And he says to me, even before I ask him, I say, I sort of have to ask you a question. I wasn't a Los Angeles. And I said, sorry, I have to ask you a question. He said, oh, you want to ask me about UFO right away, you know, I say, yes, you said in your eyes, say, yeah, there are things that fly that we don't know. But it doesn't tell me, it doesn't know it. They don't know if it's sell, you know, whatever, but there are things, apparently, that are detected. And I know you met a framer, you know, like, framer is fascinating. It's crazy. It makes me sad that we live in a different era now that it used to be a subject that was ridiculed. And now it's so cool that it's, you know, I'm very excited to live in that era, you know? Yeah, it's really exciting, but still the governments are kind of behind the times on that aspect is they're not transparent and they don't communicate well. You know, it saddens me to think the possibility that, you know, like the US government might be in possession of something that they don't tell the world about because they're just scared. It's because they don't know what the hell it is. And they don't want the Chinese to gain the technology or all those kinds of things. Do you think the president of the United States, for example, because the president comes and goes every right four or eight years? Do you think he would know all the secret or it would be a guy like, for example, Vladimir Putin would know much, much of a, you know, I don't think the president even know, like even can knows all the secret. The US president, yeah. I don't think so because he goes, they go back and forth, you know, every four years, you know, they have the terms, right? So I, you know, I wasn't sure before, but I think I could trust the previous United States president of Donald Trump that if he knew he would probably tweet about it. So perhaps. So I think from the, you know, I've worked with DARPA, I work with DOD at a clearance. And I think from the perspective, if you, if you see the world as fundamentally a dangerous world where secrets are important to have from a military perspective, I think it's very unsafe to tell the president of the United States that you have this kind of technology. If you think of the world in that way, I hate that that's how that world is viewed because ultimately, I think, was more powerful than the military secrets. And I hope that actually is what will happen in the 21st century, because what's more powerful is inspire people, inspire the young Elon Musk's of the world to create cool new things. If we have technology that we've, have come, have encountered that we don't understand, that should only be inspiration to develop that kind of stuff. It shouldn't be seen as military, as a military threat, as a secret to hold onto. I think secrets, I hope we more and more let go of the idea that there are secrets that give us advantage. In the tech sector, people are more and more releasing the software. They can open source. Like secrets don't make sense. They share the knowledge. They share the knowledge. Like being afraid to share the knowledge, I think I hope is an old idea. It's more, yeah, when you make it, things more compartmentalized, you know? Yes. Well, yeah, well, that's the other thing is the bureaucracy of government is like, people only know their own little thing and they don't spread the information. It doesn't travel well. I mean, there's a lot of just inefficiencies there. It makes me sad, it makes me sad because the science, the engineering that happens in governments like Lockheed Martin, developing the different airplanes that they're used for military applications is someone the most incredible engineering ever. And it's secret because they're afraid to share it with the Russians and the Chinese and so on. But on that topic, I do think somebody like Vladimir Putin would know probably knows some stuff. My God, my God. I would love to know what he knows. But then again, you never know because even he is, you know, people think of him as an exceptionally powerful person, but he's also just managing a bunch of tribes. His power is very limited. He's trying to hold together a bunch of greedy, power hungry madmen. That's right. Okay. And he's trying to establish a balance. He might not know everything. So I hope this changes because I think there's nothing more exciting about. I don't even know if there is a human that knows, you know what I mean? Like this idea that there's some civilization, an alien civilization that that land on the Y-1000 say, hi, I come to meet the prison. And I, why would they do that? Do you know what I mean? It's kind of absurd. You know, well, I do think that actually, I mean, that's one possibility, right? As a lot, you know, if an alien civilization really wanted to contact us, I think everybody would know. So I think what we're, if there's any kind of interaction between humans and aliens, I think most likely what we're interacting with is a crappy, like, probe drone thing that kind of just like, like, it's like this dumb thing, you know, we're not interacting with the aliens. I think just like, just like for us, I think humans aren't when we venture out into space. The first thing that's going to me, aliens is our robots. It's not us humans. We keep sending robots out. So they're going to like, they're going to make decisions about humans by looking at the robots. I say the famous race. The grace. Maybe they are robots. Maybe it's all BS too, you know? Yeah. Yeah. So I don't know what that interaction actually would look like if aliens really wanted to reach out, really communicate. And I don't know if we're able to actually communicate with them. That's one of the sad things. We might not be able to, we might, the aliens might already be here and we might just not even know how to see them or know how to communicate with them. There's so much misinformation and sometimes there is people that are very credible that made crazy claims, you know? Like, you don't know what to believe. You know, like Paul Aljur, the minister of defense of Canada, I've said that there is many Aljurna rays that ever could have such a sweet sense, research it. And that scientist from, I think Israel recently have said something about Trump. He was keeping secret or Matt Vedev. You're from Russia. Matt Vedev, I've been caught in a, like during a break in between interviews to talk about I, oh, it's like men in blacks or this big. I don't know. He didn't look like he was joking, but I don't know if he was saying that. I didn't know about this. Yeah, he can check on YouTube. It's, it's, it's, it's, it went viral. Yeah, there's a lot of things like that. Sometimes I'm like, or, or, Bob Lazar. I'm like, imagine if it's true, man. Yeah. You might even imagine if we're like a fish in the water, we live in our own world and sometimes there's a fisherman that grabbed the fish. Yeah. They came out of the water and, and true it back in the water. And the fish goes back to the other fish and say, hey, there's someone that, that take me out of the water, then I've seen things that I did not like imagine if it's true, like, like, yeah. And, and, and I want another thing like, I wanted to ask you because you were conscious and that's how about dreams? What is a dream? Yeah. Well, I, I, I more and more, I don't know if you're paying attention to this. There's now, it's become more acceptable in the scientific community to do large scale studies of psychedelics, for example. And there's a lot of connection between psychedelics and dreams in this very similar states. There's, there's a lot of our mind does when it detaches itself from reality that it can just explore a lot of different ideas. It's very possible that dreams is you're traveling somewhere and the same thing with psychedelics, you're traveling somewhere. Like, right. And a different, not traveling to physical space. It's the other dimensions that we're talking about. You're traveling some other, some other, some other dimension to meet some other creature. We'll talk with DMT that they meet some elves. I've never done, I, I'd like to, I don't know if there's a safe legal way to do it, but they all talk about meeting elves and what creatures like entities and like, who are they? What's, what is this? Is it because they're high or it's because they're actually meeting something and maybe there's no difference. I mean, that, who knows exactly and that takes us right back to us not being able to really understand how our mind works. You know, I work in artificial intelligence. It's clear that we understand so little about intelligence, some basic things about intelligence. Just at the, at the very sort of basic first principles level, we don't understand what it means to, to reason the thing, to assimilate pieces of knowledge together from the, from the basics to the complex. We don't understand it. We don't understand how the human mind does it. We don't understand how the human mind is able to take incredible waterfall of information and filter cleanly into just like clean. You only see the things that are important and are able to stay together and be able to reason about the world. And at the same time have moments of like genius of creativity. Like what, what is that? That also, you know, people writers talk about that that they're, you know, they're almost a communicating with the muse. Like where do ideas come from? Yeah. This is the Joe Rogan philosophy. But I do know that past civilization where a lot of them were based on shamanism. And you know what I think it's sad is if someone drink alcohol and when his drunk is going to commit like create like murderers or some, we're going to blame the person, right? And I say that's his fault. It's not the fault of alcohol. However, if someone does psychedelic or any things that is illegal and he do something crazy, now we're going to put the fault on psychedelic, you know what I mean? And perhaps the person itself is the reason why you know, he's been doing these things, you know what I mean? So yeah, it's fascinating. Our society, you know, like in Canada, they just legalize marijuana. Yeah. Yeah. And I don't know if it's legal, but before that, before they did it, like if you talk, for example, to my dad, my dad is against it, like because of the whole mentality, he's like, it's drug, it's bad. But drinking a, you know, drinking a beer, it's fine. I mean, what is, you know, what is good, what is bad? And I guess he think chocolate could be bad as well for your health or I mean, I'm going to the extreme now, but what is good with his bad if you use it for recreation, you use it for an experience, for learn, to learn about yourself. It's like it's a, the line is very tiny, you know, there's some countries that drugs are all legal, you know what I mean? And I, I don't know the stats, but I would, I would be interesting to know if they have more crimes there than other countries where it's more strict. I would, I would be interesting to know about that. It's fascinating, you know? Yeah. And I mean, we humans kind of just come up with the arbitrary lines of what's good was bad, that applies with drugs, that applies to anything, that applies with animals, for example, we talked about carnivore diet, maybe the time we live in now will be remembered for the cruelty of animals, for example. And I believe this, the 21st century will be remembered for our cruelty to robots, that eventually there will be a civil rights movement for robots, the ones who choose to be conscious, the ones who have consciousness will say we deserve rights too. We deserve to be treated with respect too. How about the people we put in jail? People put in jail. I mean, I think in the future we'll look back and we'll think of ourselves being stupid, you know, to put people in jail instead of, you know, like trying to fix the problem at the base, you know, of course now we're, or I guess it's our ignorance that made it in a way that we cannot sort, sometimes understand what makes a, sometimes a psychopath, a psychopath or a murder or murder, but, you know, if we can pinpoint the problem and take care of it before, you know what I mean, or made it in a way that we can re-establish that person in the society, you know, who knows, you know, what was the future is old, it's interesting, we're living in an interesting time. You mentioned your father, what have you learned from your dad? You mentioned he was an important part of the childhood. My dad is amazing. I grew up at, we didn't have a lot of money, but it doesn't mean if I'm born in a nice country that always nice thing happened, you know, madad for me is a big role model, because I see him through, through my life facing a lot of adversity, you know, he, he stopped drinking when I was a teenager, he was an alcoholic, and I see him struggle through that, you know, and it was very, very hard in him. I've seen him work like crazy hours, like come, leave in the morning, come home at night, and burn out because of work, through almost all his life. To the point that it became a slave of the system, it became a nabbit and a normal way of living, and it made me realize that I've learned a lot through my father. He taught me perseverance, hard work, you know, when you face adversity, you know, to never give up until you achieve it, but also he taught me a lesson that, in a way that I don't want to be like him, even if he is happy, it's because I realize I don't think he knows anything else, like he works through all his life, and I don't want to live to work, I want to work for it, you know what I mean, I want to decide when I work, you know, I feel like he lived to work instead of working for a living. And perhaps it's because he didn't not have choice. He was the older of his family, they were nine kids, his dad, my grandfather died when he was young, so he had to become the father of the family and work to put money on the table. So perhaps that what made him that way, and he became like, I can have it for him. My dad taught me when I was at school, I was bullied at school, he's the first one who initiated me to martial art. He taught me charity, my dad was a black belt and chukushen karate as well, but because he was working too much, he didn't have time to teach me, and I needed self defense in order to defend myself. I have a winning, a great career in mixed martial art, but in the in the school yard, that's a good mix record. My record is not very good. When you're a kid and you're about seven, eight years old and you're facing bullied, bullies that are two to three years older than yourself. It's not the same thing then when you're 25 and the guy is 28. So there was a big discrepancy in terms of maturity. So my dad taught me, it introduced me to karate. Then he didn't even have time to teach me, then he put me in a school with a teacher, it was Jacques Couture. And I grew up with a lot of anger and there were two person that was afraid going up. It was my dad, but that was very strict with me. And I'm glad he was because I could have become very bad. I could have become chosen on a different path. People seem as a nice guy and I'm a nice guy. I try to be a good role model, but I could easily have turned towards our wrong. There's darkness somewhere in there. Yes, there are a lot. A lot of my friends have chosen that path and unfortunately they are not with me today. Even if I'm from Canada and Canada seems like the nicest country in the world, like I said, even if you live in a nice country, not always nice thing, it depends on the situation. But that's what my dad taught me. He gave me that because I'm very good at learning by observing people and by observing and I see the struggle he had with alcoholism and what he did, the pain, sometimes the adiant flick to us, to my family. But I turned, he did that one, I did agree and I really admire that. I know it was very, very hard for him and he did it for me. That's a great role model for me. So your dad being an engine of basically hard work and you finding a balance of being able to work your ass off but also to be able to enjoy a piece of chocolate. What is a perfect day in the life of George Sampyr look like? If you were to go through a day that's very productive but also one that makes you sit back and enjoy and say that was a good day, what's that look like? What are we talking about? When do you wake up? What do you eat? What do you do? It changed over the years. When I was younger, I had a good day, it was like a good training session or achieving good thing in my training. That's why I was very good at it because when I was obsessed, I think to be good at something you need to become obsessed and to me performing in my training was everything. When I had a bad training session, I didn't tell my training partner, I was acting like because of my ego. I didn't tell nobody. I was like, hey, then I go into the locker room and I go, boom, then I'm playing the training in my mind. I'm saying, I should have done this. And it hunt me. It hunt me, man, it's a training and it hunt me until the next training session when I can redeem myself. That's how it is. When we used to train all together back in the day, in Canada, we had David Loizo, we had Patrick Coutre, we had Dennis Kang, Steven O'Lei, Jonathan Goulet. It was all like the best guy in Canada that were training with each other. Before, we were training in different gyms, but once a week, I made it and I contacted everybody that we all joined force and we exchanged ideas and we trained with each other. So I would say friendly competition. It was not malicious, but it was hard training. Our goal was to improve, but it wasn't very competitive. And when that day you used to get out of the training session with a bad performance for me, you used to hunt me until the following week when I could give it back and perform better with the guy that I had the most trouble with. That's how it was. And that's how you get better. But it was not a training where we were trying to do malicious thing to one another. You know what I mean? You need to be playful, but playful, but competitive. When I had a good training session because a sparring was on a Friday, I had the best weekend and I was going out with my friend drinking and partying and I was, that was my ideal day back in the day. Today is change. My life has changed. I am not the same person I used to be when I went on my knees and begged that you have seen for a title shot. You know what I mean? I am wealthy. I'm healthy, most importantly. That's the most important thing. And as, man, I'm going to do the truth. As good as my career was, man, my private life, man. A million times better, man. And people ask me sometimes they always wonder they try to ask me. And it's normal. A lot of people are curious and the reporter. And in the sport of mixed martial art, we say we play basketball, we play soccer, but you don't play fighting. So when you expose your private life, we see that happen in the fight with sometimes economic, regular and kebab. Your competitor knows that he cannot get to use what he will do. He will try to get to someone that you love. So man, never expose my private life. I never post Instagram of my family or my stuff. That's the reason why. Because I'm in a business of fighting. And people know that they cannot get to me. And I believe because I was bullied when I was young, I didn't realize that when I was young, but it helps me deal with the mental warfare that I need that I had to face right on in my life in mixed martial art because it's a very ego-testing sport. And there's a lot of intimidation. And I was used to this thing when I was young. So it does not get to me. However, the good way to get to me, go try to get to someone I love. Now man, I'm going to go crazy. You know what I mean? And I'm aware of that. So in order to protect myself, I always, because I'm aware I'm a public person. So I try to always keep my surrounding like in the private. One of the ways that your friend and mine, Joe Rogan, has been an inspiration, he's got like an incredible family. And he, for the most part, has started to change recently. Actually, it's kind of interesting. But for the most part, throughout his life, he kept it pretty secret. He doesn't talk about it in his comedy. He's a comedian. Comedians talk about everything. He doesn't really talk about it. And there's something to that. It like preserves the magic of the silence of the private life. And I think he can affect the development of the kid. If the kid grew up being, oh, he's the son of that guy instead of being his own person. You know what I mean? So for me, it's very important. Like my parents are older. It's fine. But it taught me a big lesson. When I'm with my friend at dinner or anything, I talk with the person always sure thing. But when I'm talking, I'm aware of the audience where I'm in front. Yeah. And but oftentimes those people are just incredible. It kind of makes me sad that there's a lot of people that love you, right? And there are a lot of really incredible people. And you'll never get to really know their story. I mean, I don't know. For me, it makes me sad. You see them like at airports and stuff. People will tell me they listen to this podcast or something like that. And I could tell they're incredible people. It makes me, it's like a little goodbye of a possible friend. I don't know. It makes me sad. It makes me, it's lonely. It's almost like celebrity is a lonely thing. So the higher the celebrity, the more lonely you become in some kind of way. But of course, you have that little gem of a private life where you can personally, I believe every relationship I, I don't like to use this term, but it's always a give and take relationship, you know? Like you can gain something and the person, like it could be something like not material is materialistic, like something like, oh, he's a good confident. Like you someone that he can give me good advice or it's a word I would say like extension all like if a pilot as a co palette is the co palette is the extent as a extentional relationship with him. You know, so you know, if you get sick or you faint, he's there to make sure, you know, he's there to help. And I think in every relation, it's about compatibility, but it's about extensionality, right? In a way that if that person is extensional and sometimes we talk about love, you know, like sometimes I think is it, is it a BS word or not? Because I myself sometimes look at, I look at myself in the mirror and when I do stupid thing, sometimes I love myself a lot and sometimes I don't, you know what I mean? Because I may agree at myself, I've done stupid thing. So that means sometimes you could love could be fluctuating, you know what I mean? How about in relationships? Sometimes people they say, oh, they love each other, but then when they divorce, they go, oh, I want the house and the dog and the kids stay with me and you know what I mean? If you love, by definition, if you really love someone and let's say you're an old man and you love a woman and she decide to leave you for a younger man. If you really love her, you're going to help her pack and leave. But in our society sometimes we want to hone something. To me, love includes the missing somebody, the losing somebody, the anger at somebody, it's all the passion, feelings towards somebody. That's all love. Like I, you know, it's all part of the thing. It's the ups and downs. It's the sad thing is when the feelings towards a person, the ups and downs go away, the forgetting. That's the opposite of love. So the opposite of love isn't hate. To me, the opposite of love is forgetting. And that's that's a much bigger. That's the depth of human connection. That's how I see love. Sometimes I try to stay positive and I've been asked how I try to, because I have the image of someone who's positive, but I go through my own demon as well. However, we talk about love. When I was young, you know, like I didn't love who I was at first. That's how I learned to kind of love myself. Like I didn't, when I was going through bullying, I was, I believe I was bullied because I didn't love myself. Because I project a very bad image of what I think of myself. I was a kid that lacked a lot of confidence. I was looking down when I was walking. I shrugged my shoulder when someone was talking to me. I was avoiding eye contact. I was a very easy target for bullies. And I think bullies are like in predatory animal in nature. They will hunt the easier prey. They don't go. The lion don't go for the alpha bull. They go for the one who's hold or who's sick the weakest one. Bullies are the same in society, I believe. And I didn't like to be bullied of course, but I didn't like the person that I was. But I found out to martial art, the respect. And my coach was extraordinary to me. He taught me discipline and self strength, self strength. And I found out that I needed to, in order to love myself, I needed to change myself. Because when I looked at myself in the mirror, I didn't like what I saw. So I decided to become like someone that I would love. So I tried to look people straight up and try to showcase a more confident image that I had. And it was hard in the beginning because I didn't really believe in it, but I fake it until kind of I make it. So when I was walking at school, more and more, I was learning how to become more confident. And I was like taking charge. When the teacher was asking questions, at first I was never answering. It was like this way thing always to be the last. Then I was, hey, I know what the answer. This is the answer. I got out of my comfort zone, sort of speak. And I wish I would tell you that I got out of bullying because a Hollywood story, I used martial art to beat up all the bullies. But it's not how it happened to me. It happened because I changed myself from the inside out. And I learn how to, because I didn't love myself in the beginning, I learn how to become like someone that I've loved. And even now, like I'm by no means perfect. I do a lot of stupid thing. But I learn as a person. And even I do have something stupid. I'm like, shoot, I did something stupid. At least I can apologize to the person if I realize. And then I know that I'm not the person I wasn't the past. I'm the person that I am right now. So I can learn and become that image of the person that I love. So in a way, the reason I'm trying to be positive and I'm able to stay positive sometime in life is because I'm always trying to be like that person that I love. And I think if you don't look yourself in the mirror and don't love yourself or don't see any positive future for yourself, how can you change your environment if you cannot change yourself? You know what I mean? You will never be happy if you're not happy when you look at yourself in the mirror. So change yourself first then change your, you know, it's not the environment that you're going to change for yourself. You have to go from the inside out, you know. This I learned to martial art. I have a, I had a coach who was incredible used to drill these ideas in my head and give me confidence, you know, like this telling me all these beautiful things about myself. And I, he's dead now, unfortunately, he's, he's to him, but he was incredible, incredible. He was very, very strict. I was afraid of him. I was afraid of my dad and I'm afraid of him. He couldn't teach nowadays like he used to teach me because he would be in a jell, you know, but I'm glad he did it because for that time being, that's what I needed it. And I would never have had that, that career I had in mixed martial art without this because I would, I would never have got out of my comfort zone would have been impossible. And in order to improve in life, you need to get out of your comfort zone. It's hard, it's very hard to do. And strive to be the person that you can love. It does, it does beautifully put a George. If you were to give advice to a young person today about life, what would you tell him? If he takes life with the same mentality that I do, if he has the same taste of things that I have, I would tell him, you know, for sport, for life in general, I would say, if you will have the dream, you know, like, make everything in your power and work very hard, you know, never take no for an answer and go through hell in order to achieve it. Don't work hard only but work smart. Does I think the problems with a lot of people, they work hard, they can work hard, they burden themselves, they don't work smart. Whether it is in science and business, they make bad choices or they badly inform in sport, how many guys I've seen, room they carry in the gym, they spar so hard, they, they room there themselves in the gyms, they leave the career in the gyms. What I would say to, for example, because my field of expertise in sport of mixed martial art, I would say to a young kid, make your training playful, you know, when you get ready for, for competition, you need to try to recreate those elements that makes you go outside of your comfort zone. But in every day's life in general, make your training playful. Don't make it like a hardcore competition about whose, whose winning was losing, make, make it playful. So it will increase your, because you will not be afraid of getting hurt or losing, you will be tempted to try more things and it will make you become more creative. You know, that brings up another question about learning. So you value knowledge and you're exceptional at, at basically being very good at learning and figuring stuff out, new things or going deeper on the things you already know. So what advice would you have for how to learn effectively? How, you know, you say work smart? How do you figure this game out? I believe the best way to learn is learning from other people's mistakes. However, I'm not perfect and I've learned from my mistakes as well and sometimes it took me a few mistakes to learn the same thing. But especially in the sport of Mixed Martial Art because we're talking about the failure could have very serious outcome on someone's life and well-being. So it's crucial to trying to learn from other people's mistakes. Do you study others? Do every fight. I've studied my opponent and I've studied myself as well to know what, how my strength mix versus my opponent weaknesses. And how can I make the fight go in a way that I'm taking my opponent outside of his comfort zone? Very often people are good at studying their opponent but they're not good at looking at themselves in the mirror and knowing what they should do in order to maximize their odds of success. That's why I always taught for me it was important to not be the best at one thing but be very good at everything. And that's why I always seek advice, advices from the best and every discipline. I wrestle with the best wrestler I could be with. I box with the best boxers. I practice karate with the best karate fighters. Same thing in Jiu Jitsu. I train Jiu Jitsu with the best Jiu Jitsu guys. However, when I mix everything and mix martial art, because I'm very competent in every areas, so when I'm fighting someone, I'm very good at identifying where is the less competent. And I know for a fact that because I'm competent at every where I can, if I can bring the fight where he's outside of his comfort zone, it increased my odds of winning. There's no certainty. It's all about odds, I believe, because there is always an expector that you do not control. Yeah, it's fascinating to see you actually, because you've been a student of movement. You've been exploring all kinds of gymnastics, all that kind of stuff. There's something reminiscent to, like, like, a Conor McGregor is one other martial artist that's kind of explored movement, been a scholar of movement. At least from my perspective, it's very sort of Bruce Lee like, it's almost making a study of the human body and all the possible things you can do. Is there a philosophy behind that that you have? You talk about Bruce Lee, man. He changes my life too. He was ahead of his time. Yeah. Incredible. A lot of people talk to me and ask me, is Bruce Lee would have been able to fight the UFC? I, look, I don't think so. I don't know. I think it was, you know, he was a martial artist. He could have defend himself, but to say that he could have compete amongst the elite fighter. Perhaps in his time, but if for sure if you put him in UFC right now, you know, the sportism improved incredibly since then. But in terms of philosophy, yeah, Bruce Lee was amazing. And like, one thing that just to prove that he was ahead of his time, he was talking about using your longest weapon against your opponent, nearest point. And we see that that kick that it got popular, popularized by John Jones, you know, the sidekick to the tie. It's the longest weapon against your nearest point. And boxing is the job, but in MMA, when you can use it all your weapon, that's the kick to the tie. And there is, I feel there is like kind of three dimension in martial art. There is the philosopher, like Bruce Lee. There is the correct choreography, the correct graph people, like, for example, you see in movies, there's ton people, they're incredible. Or the one that does like forms and karate like jumping spin kick, like a groupatic stuff, mixed martial art, they are unbelievable. And there is also the one that compete in fighting. That's what I do. I personally specialize. Well, you also do the philosophy. I do a little bit of philosophy, but that's, you know, consequence. I guess we are all, like we all practice the tree dimension because martial art is, I would say it's whether you want it or not, you have to touch these three dimensions. But you will specialize in one. I specialize through my life in fighting, like the real thing in terms of fighting competition. And of course, if you do martial art, you will be able to defend yourself because it's a self-defense. However, you might not be able to fight as an elite in the most prestigious organization. And you might not be able to perform the stunt that, for example, the stuntmen have done in the series I was playing in the Falcon and Winter Soldier. These guys are incredible. They're like real life super hero. Things they do. It's, to me, like it's fascinating. It's amazing. And also, Bruce Lee, the philosophy. How many hours he took, like thinking about these stuff, you know, I'm sure he did not just came out, out of nowhere, you know, like he was thinking, like that's many slap on this. How many hours is it just unbelievable? It's like water, my friend. How many times has he thought about water going to bed before he said that? Well, let me ask a very important fundamental question about martial arts. We're both wearing a suit and tie. Joe Rogan thinks that wearing a tie is a huge disadvantage. Is it a clip on or is it an actual tie? Are you an actual tie or a real one? So do you agree or disagree with Joe Rogan that wearing a tie is a, is a martial arts significant disadvantage in terms of combat, in a combat scenario? In a fight, I think it would be a disadvantage. Okay, but I worry as a security bounce or in night clubs and event when I was 18 years old. And sometimes I had to work in certain events that I was in suit and tie. I never had to use my force to take someone out when I was in suit and tie. But if I would have had to before going to the table to physically take the guy out, I would have removed my tie. And I would have removed my vest for sure. And I would have called back up for sure. And I would have probably used the element of surprise to be first on the guy. When you're in a bar, same thing. You call back up first and you make sure you ask the waitress before to clean the table. So you go. And when you go, you have to use the element of surprise. Because fighting, fighting and mixed martial arts and fighting in the street, it's two different things. And yes, I'm a mixed, I'm a mixed martial art competitor. That's why I've done all my life. But I had a lot of street fighting my life. A lot when I wasn't in it. What's the difference? What's like the, oh my god, it's a huge difference. There's guys that if I would have a choice to fight, like for example, certain guys and you have seen a street fight and fight like other guys that are not in UFC, I would maybe sometimes pick guys that are not in UFC necessarily. Because in the street fight, there's no referee that says go, it's the element of surprise. And when you're a nice guy, you're not the aggressor. You always have the element of surprise. That's what it took. Oh, interesting. Yes, because if aggression in your sacrifice, it will not come punch you without warning. It needs to, it needs to trigger some, it's something you need to be triggered before. So if someone comes because he's looking for trouble, there is sign that he's looking for trouble. So I was just talking with fast-rooted this weekend about it. Every martial art comes from, like some martial art are from Exclusive Week for competition. Like sport karate, like certain martial art, but traditional martial art are for the street or for self defense. And I start my background in Kyoko-shankarady. So it's for, and I did Japanese zujitsu. So my background before I even start training for mixed martial art, my background is in self defense. And it's very important to understand that in a street fight, the element of surprise is everything. And there are no rules. You can go for the eyes, the next, the next. It's surprise, everything. So, the whole ball game, you know what I mean? You have the chair, the beard, there's so much more thing going on. So the idea of, because you are a UFC fighter, you think you're invincible, this is BS. Anybody can come, like if a big guy who punched very hard, most people don't know how to punch. By the way, they don't know how to make a fist and throw it in a forward direction. But if someone knows how to do it, I don't care who you are. If you could be Francis and Genu, someone come behind your head and flying or, or, I say, there's an argument and you get surprised by a punch. You can be dropped and lose a fight. That doesn't matter. Yeah. The element of surprise is everything. So you were saying remove all the sources of the elements of surprise, all the clear the bar, remove the tie. I still disagree with you about the tablet. But just for your information, if someone comes looking for trouble and you see me do this, and going, I wasn't doing that's my position that I'm thinking. There you go. I'm thinking about doing the element. I'm about to punch you or to do something to take care of this. See, to flip the table on you then, wearing a tie is communicating the nice guy image. So it actually gives you the freedom for more elements of surprise by wearing the tie. If you take it off, that's more your limiting, your options. There's nobody's going to expect the guy in the tie to do anything. I'm a big believer that sometimes it's not only materialism. It's what you project. Yes, sure. Like I had troubles in a bar and I was able to deflect. The guy was looking for trouble talking to me and I was able to deflect his all like, aggressivity by saying like, hey man, that's an eye shirt. Where did you get it? Like saying like something or stupid like this. Then it kind of break break the momentum and the, you know, but the guy was looking for trouble. I don't want to fight you. I don't want to fight you, but I'm not going to wait until you pull, you make the first move because the first minute you, you touch me, you push me or you, you touch me, you declare war and the war is unleashed my friend and I'm, I'm taking you out of order with the necessary force, of course. You know, that's the thing with martial art. If you use the necessary force to take out a problem, it's okay. But if you, you know, you, you take advantage of it. That's when it's not all right because it's a weapon. So if someone comes up to me, that's my position and I know I'm, I'm assessing the situation, you know, that's, that's how they teach in self defense here. Never put your hands down. Always in there. You know, you know, you're like, you know, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, but if you go like, if someone talks to you and you go like this, that's mean you're telling the guy that you want to fight. You don't want to do that. You don't want to, oh yeah. That's, that's, that's, that's the position. Because your hand are here, you know, whatever you can do, you're here. Well, also your ear tells the story. It's not everybody that knows that, however, it's some people might, my thing that is my mom grabbed me by the ear and pulled me because I didn't listen to her, you know. I really fight in a street and a fight in a mixed martial art is a different ball game. What, what do you think is the best martial art to prepare you for street fighting? You know, people often kind of have this discussion of Jiu Jitsu, maybe boxing, maybe wrestling. Do you think, you talk about a young person studying martial arts to prepare themselves? For a street fight, it's often much different than a mixed martial art fight. And I know there's a lot of BS in the world of martial art, like self defense stuff that, like, but I believe self defense is very important in a way to understand the situation, to understand those, those situations that might occur, how to deal with it. Because not necessarily the, we talk about the technicality, we talk about the tacticality, the tactics, you know. Like when I'm talking to you about the element of surprise is important, this is not technique. A technique is a punch or techniques that I physically will use to enable my opponent, my aggressor. Tactics is the tactic I'm telling you about is in a street fight. If someone is looking for trouble and I feel the eat rising as the conversation goes, that's the position I'm going to take. And I have to be first. I cannot let him go first. So I have to strike first or do something. This is the first thing that generally and I have to agree on. After that, of course, there's the knowledge. If you're a professional fighter, you have a huge advantage. Once the fight is started, the war is declared. Now it's everything goes. But generally speaking, the person that will intervene physically, that will have the first blow or the first, you know, the first punch will have a huge disadvantage. It's like doing a hundred meter raise and having a head start, you know. And that you can't prepare for within your martial art. Yeah, and if I'm a smart guy, I know how to fight. If a guy like an everyweight champion comes to me or like a, you know, I know what to do to disable him. Like boom or hair or the neck, you know. Like if you, if you blind them, what is he going to do? You know what I mean? So or a bottle, you know what I mean? So the element of surprise is it's everything. So that's why it's always, always good to be the nice guy and not looking for trouble because if you're not looking for trouble, you have the head start. You have the option of having an head start. So what you're saying is being a nice guy is the best form of self defense. Maybe a little humor. You know how I have learned that? I've learned that when I was a kid. Yeah. I was about maybe six, six years old. We used to play in Montreal. There's a lot of snow. We used to play King of the Mantine. Yeah. That's the first combat lesson that I've learned in my life. And I managed somehow. It was a lot of kids. I managed to get on the top of the mountain. And I've, another guy came in and the top of the mountain. And he was angry that before I was there before him. When you played King of the Mantine, it was a mountain of snow. You don't strike each other with just a wrestle and push. And I managed to be first. And when he came, he says to me, say, okay, you want to fight. And I said, yeah, I didn't know what it means. Like I want to fight. You want to wrestle. He said, I say, yes. He punched me right in the face. Boom. And then I fall on the bottom of the mountain. And then when I fall down, I remember that vision in Malle. Because it's, it's, it's, I remember that for the rest of my life. I'm about to stand up. And I see the blood coming out of my nose. I see the snow is red because my nose is beating. Now I remember the element of surprises, everything. My first street fight I've lost it. I did get knocked out, but I got dropped on the bottom of the snow mountain. And I was like, ah, you got me because I was not expecting it. My hand, I was not expecting a punch. So from there, when I felt the, the, the eat of an, in, during an argument or something was not right, I always troke first. I didn't win all my fight because sometimes there were more than one guys on, on me, you know. But I think it's important to not be the aggressor. So you have the element of surprise. I always use that in your favor. Brilliant. Let me go from the very practical to the, the most impractically huge question about the meaning of life. You said that when great depths of unrelenting sorrow, punctuated by great peaks of joy and liberation, the result is delicious. So what do you think is the meaning of this whole journey that we're on, this life, what makes life delicious? To me, you know, satisfaction is the M for me. Like, like, like, always, if I'm satisfied, that's mean I have no, nothing to live for. I'm talking, I'm not talking only about my career, about, I'm talking about my life. What do you want in your life? You want, you want kids, you want a family, you want to be champ, what do you want in your life? You have, you have like a long term goal, short term goal. In mixed martial art, I achieve what I needed to achieve. I'm satisfied. I'm no longer the same Josh Nipei and when I was begging for title shot on my knees, I move on for it from it. Now I had the chance to go into movies. Now that same, insane, that same, insane drive that I had to be the champion in the world now I put it into acting. I can't make a lot of acting class now and luckily for me, the timing was amazing. I got, I got cast for the Falcon and the Winter Soldier, who that is on Disney Plus channel. It's a huge, huge project to be part of for me because it's like, you play basketball, you have a chance to go for the NBA right away. I was very lucky. The timing was just too perfect. And so you need to constantly challenging yourself and having goals to achieve. You know, like, keep your brain activated, like keep working. And the proof of that is that you see some time, some old people, like when they retire very often, sometimes you see that, they got sick and they die or because they, they, they, they, it's either because sometimes we think we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, do something good for them by making that work and giving them a break. So when our mind will like, oh, it's going to be able to relax. But in their mind, it's not good because they're not busy. They have nothing to live for like my, like my dad is used to work all the time. And he has always something to do is retire now. I myself now call him by force to find him some job. Hey, that can, can you come in my house? Have this thing to repair? I don't know how to do it. So he gives him, it gives him a reason not not to live on because he has other things to do. But, but what I mean is also in life, I think you always don't be afraid to aim high. Don't, don't be afraid to fix your objective very high and never be able to reach it. To be afraid of reaching your goals, essentially, I mean, you always have to keep moving it out. You think there's an interesting question because you've been acting in some really exciting things. Do you think there's a dramatic role where it's basically, you know, you go full Robert De Niro in taxi driver. Do you think there'll be a full length feature film with your same here? I like it. There's level to this thing. I'm aware that I have to restart as a white belt white belt. And for some people, it could be discouraging. But for me, man, it's great. I love it. I freaking love it. I embrace it because everybody told me like I would never be able to do it. And it's fine. But the and also the outcome of a failure in the sport of mixed martial art is much more serious than the outcome of a failure for a movie, for example, for for if you dig when you should zag in a fight, you get knocked out if you dig when you should zag and unsaid, cut, we'll do it again. And I know that I will be most likely be choosing for action martial art roles because that's my background. There's this new trend in Hollywood now when they want someone to play an Italian guy they're going to choose a really Italian person when they want someone to play a Russian guy they're going to choose someone who's as a real Russian background. Now they want a real martial art fighter. I've done fighting all my life. I just need to improve my acting skill. But when I train in acting, I get myself out of my comfort zone. I'm not playing a role of a martial art guy I'm playing like romance, comedy, drama. So when I go on set and playing the role of a bad as martial art guy, it's easier. So I like in training for a fight. I always make my preparation harder than the actual task. I would love to see where I don't know if you've seen the wrestler with Mickey work. Those types of films, I would love to, I would love to you do something like that. If not now, then in 10, 20 years I could see that. That would be amazing. There's levels to the game, right? Yes, it's gradual. And I'm aware that I don't want to take something on my shoulder that I won't be able to deliver. It's like a fighter who wants to go for a title shot right away. It could very well break him. You know, and I don't want to do that because I know I've done some gigs on the pass, but I was not focusing on it because I was focusing on competing as a martial art, much martial artist and competition in MMA. But now I take it very seriously. So I cannot do the same mistake again because I've done some stuff. I've done it for the money and it was good. It was fun to to to be beat up by Shackloth and Dan Steven Sego and everything, but my acting was not on point, you know, at that time. So if I ever every time I'm going to come back from now on on screen, it need to be sharp because you cannot mess it up. If you mess it up, it's like a loss on your record. You're not taking seriously. So that's how I see it. And it's very fun because I add a chance to talk to a lot of guys on top of all the class that I'm having. Like a few days ago, I was with Dainit Trujo. And I always seek the advice of actors when I see some of them that because I really admire how they do, you know, all they project their emotion and ask him, Dainit Trujo, I said to him, he's an amazing guy by the way, very nice guy. And I ask him, I say, how do you do to be because you scared the hell out of me? How do you do to be so scary? Like, what is your trick? And he tells me, it's like, George, if you're trepening, if you're trepening someone and you scream at him, I'm going to kill you. It's not as scary if you're smiling and you say, I'm going to kill you. Like, and he says also to me that another advice he gave me is like, when you say this, think about you killing him for real, that how you hate him and how you're going to kill him. So the camera will take the emotion out. Don't try physically to do that. That's the mistake I used to do before. I used to physically show that I'm strong and angry and to be mean. So these are just an example of tricks that I learn sometimes when I met an actor, I always trying to learn from everybody that I met in my life. It's a difficult journey because then you have to go to some dark places as a person because you really have to imagine, imagine some dark things as fascinating actually. I think a lot of the actor they have sometimes problems because of that because now I understand why it's like if you work on your bicep, your bicep will grow, right? It's because it is the stress that you put on it that will make it grow, right? Emotions are, I believe, are the same way. If you're used to dig inside of you down deep to make your negative emotion depressive emotion comes out. If something bad in your life happened, you will fall into those emotions much more rapidly that someone does not that every day. You know what I mean? Because it will, it's like a muscle memory. Like if you program yourself to react a certain way, you will reach that point very often. So that's why sometimes you see some guys that we often blame it on drugs, but I think it's also because of the acting that you're used to be so on the hop top. And sometimes they go to the down deep so they they they they they they they the both extreme, you know, you got to be psychologically tough and that's life. This is a so exciting to see you challenge yourself in that direction. That's one thing that I'm a little bit afraid. That happened to me. I really hope I'll always be, you know, like a problem having a problem to control my emotion be too much extreme. I hope it does not happen to me. And and and if I feel that I'm going towards that, I'm going to, you know, give up on on my new objective and find something else to to achieve. But in your personal life, you want to be real with your emotions. You don't want to it doesn't you know, you just like with biceps. You don't want biceps. They're too big. You you you are real, but you are extreme real and and that's the that's the that's what I think something that could happen to actors. I'm not when they go too much into their emotion. Like we talk about like something guys that that that commit commit suicide. Perhaps you know, I don't know. It's because I don't know their real life, but it could be something that they get so much into their character. I didn't understand it at first because I'd never had acting class, but after a while that you have acting class now you start to realize that yeah, I can understand why some actor get caught up in their emotion because that can have an influence on their life, right. You're on a fascinating journey. George, I can't tell you how much it means to me that you'll be so nice to me that you'll give me so much respect. Just that that tells everything I need to know about you as a human being with everything you've accomplished. You waste all your time and you're so nice to me just as a fellow human being man, I've so much respect. I'm so honored and the energy you give me by just showing up here. I'll care that forward for a long time to come George. I love it. Thank you so much for talking to me. Now, thank you Lex for having me on the show. I've been looking to talk to you for a long time. For me talking to a guy like you, it's a great learning experience because I always learn and it's life is fascinating to me and all the experience that we have in life is something that can make us grow and this experience for me just make me grow as well. Plus we look pretty damn sharp today. So, man, in black, in black. Thanks George. Nice. Thanks for listening to this conversation with George St. Pierre. And thank you to all form, express VPN, blinkist, TheraGun and the information. Check them out in the description to support this podcast. And now let me leave you with some words from me, a moto, a moussashi. Think lightly of yourself and deeply of the world. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.