 The following is a conversation with Ryan Schiller, creator of Liebrecht's, an anonymous discussion feed for college communities starting at first with Yale, then the Ivy Leagues, and now adding Stanford and MIT. Their mission is to give students a place to explore ideas and issues in a positive way, but with much more personal and intellectual freedom than has defined college campuses in recent history. I think this is a very difficult but worthy project. Quick thank you to our sponsors, all form, magic spoon, better help, and brave. Click their links to support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that Ryan is a young entrepreneur and genuine human being who quickly won me over. He's inspiring in many ways, both in the struggle he had to overcome in his personal life, but also in the fact that he did not know how to code, but saw a problem in this world in his community that he cared about. And for that, he learned to code and built the solution in the best way he knew how. That's an important reminder for us humans. Let us not only complain about the problems in the world. Let us fix them. I also have to say that there's passion and Ryan's eyes for really wanting to make a difference in the world. His story, his effort gives me hope for the future. There is hate in this world, but I believe there's much more love. And I believe it's possible to build online platforms that connect us through our common humanity as we explore difficult, personal, even painful ideas together. As usual, I'll do a few minutes of As Now. I try to make these interesting, but I give you time stamps because I value your time and listen to the experience so you can skip, but please still check out our sponsors. I'm fortunate to be able to be very selective with the sponsors we take on. So hopefully if you buy their stuff, you'll find value in it just as I have. Click their links in the description. It really is the best way to support this podcast. This episode is sponsored by a new sponsor, all form. They make stylish, comfortable, customizable sofas. For an engineering mind, their modular design pleases my soul. I say they're a new sponsor, but I've had their stuff for quite a while. I have, in fact, their black leather love seat. How great is the term love seat? I think you can't help but step up the depth of human connection between any two people that sit on the love seat. I said on the all form love seat with Mr. Michael Mallace. And now I'm in love, see, it works. Some of the best experiences in my life had to do with just sitting with friends, talking and the weird friends, the out there friends. I think quote unquote adult life can kind of carry you down the stream of busyness where you no longer have these online conversations with weirdos in your life. I think that's probably why I never want to grow up. Anyway, all form is offering 20% off all orders for our listeners. That's you, my dear friend, at allform.com slash Lex. That's all form.com slash Lex defines your perfect sofa or love seat. Michael Mallace is not included with your purchase. Finally, they're deciding whether to sponsor this podcast long term. So now's the time to buy their stuff if you like it. This episode is sponsored by Magic Spoon, low carb keto friendly cereal. It has zero grams of sugar, 13 to 14 grams of protein, only four net grams of carbs and 140 calories in each serving. They have a couple limited edition flavors this month cookies and cream and maple waffle. But my favorite flavor is still cocoa, but these sound pretty good. I haven't tried them yet. I will try. You should too. Yes, I am very much excited to be living in this day and age when we have reusable rockets being launched into space and landing back on Earth. I think what really excites me is that we can have what used to be a sugar stuffed meal like cereal. That's not completely keto friendly. Anyway, Magic Spoon has a 100 happiness guarantee. So if you don't like it, they were funded. Even Dusty Eski, Sartre and Kamu would be impressed. Go to Magic Spoon.com slash Lex and use code Lex at checkout to save five bucks off your order. That's Magic Spoon.com slash Lex and use code Lex. This episode is also sponsored by BetterHelp spelled H-E-L-P help. They figure out what you need and match it with a licensed professional therapist under 48 hours. I've always been fascinated with talk therapy. I guess the broader way to phrase that is the power of conversations. In some sense, that's what podcasting is. When I was younger, I did see it as the ideal of psychotherapy that through this interaction between two humans, you can arrive at something deep and profound that's personal about your particular brain and almost from an engineering perspective, rewire things. I think there's a lot of ways in which our work with human robot interaction in the artificial intelligence space will teach us how to do this kind of re-engineering better. But anyway, BetterHelp is easy, private, affordable, available worldwide. Check them out at betterhelp.com slash Lex. That's betterhelp.com slash Lex. This show is also sponsored by Brave, a fast privacy-preserving browser that feels like Google Chrome, but without the ads or the various kinds of tracking that ads can do. I love using it more than any other browser, including Chrome. I also love Google Chrome, but I love Brave even more. You should check out my conversation with Brennan Ike, who's a creator of Brave, but also the creator of JavaScript and Mozilla foundation. I mean, this guy's done basically everything, but it's his work on JavaScript actually that's really stuck with me. In that conversation, I was reminded that changing the world doesn't have to start with a perfect solution. You can start with something to put it nicely that's imperfect and grow iterate over time. You don't have to start with something pretty. You just have to start. Anyway, get the browser at brave.com slash Lex. And it might become your favorite browser too, that's brave.com slash Lex. This is the Lex Friedman podcast, and now here's my conversation with Ryan Schiller. Let's start with the basics. What is Librex? What are its founding story and founding principles, and looking into the future, what do you hope to achieve with Librex? Sure, let me break that down. So what is Librex? Librex is an anonymous discussion feed for college campuses. It's a place where people can have important and unfettered discussions and open discourse about topics they care about, ideas that matter. They can do all of that completely anonymously with verified members of their college community. And we exist both on each Ivy League campus and we have an inter Ivy community. And actually this week, we just open to MIT and Stanford. So now we have MIT and Stanford community, and I expect you to sign up for your MIT account and start posting. What are for people who are not familiar like me actually, which are the Ivy Leagues? Sure, so we started at Yale, which is my, I don't know, can you call it Alma Mater because I haven't technically graduated. What's that called when you're actually still there? My university. Yeah, I guess, I guess, I guess, call it home. That's my home. Educational home. Started my educational home of Yale. And then we moved to, and we could get into the story of this eventually, if you'd like. And then we went to Dartmouth. And then quarantine hit. We opened to the rest of the Ivy League. And now we have, and the Ivy League, for those who don't know is Harvard, Yale, Princeton, Dartmouth, Columbia, Cornell, Brown, and Penn. I got it all in one breath. What's the youngest Ivy League? Penn? No, Columbia. I can't say. Okay, camera. We'll edit it in post. I don't know. Okay. I'll say you chip all all the all eight of them. And then you can just like get it in. Yeah, Penn. Harvard. There's actually a really nice software that people should check out like a service, which is using machine learning really nicely for podcast editing. Or you can, it learns the voice of the speaker. And it can change the words you said. It's like some deep fake stuff. It's deep fake, but for positive applications. It's very interesting. It's like the only deep fake positive applications I see. Have a friend who's obsessed with deep fake. Yeah. What's great about I think deep fakes is that it's going to do the opposite of sort of what's happening with our culture where everyone will have possible tonight ability. Yeah, exactly. I mean, that that's the hope for me is there's so many fake things out there that were going to actually be much more skeptical and think and taking multiple sources and actually like reason, like use common sense and use them like deep thinking to understand like what is true and what is not because you know, we used to have like traditional sources like the New York Times and all these kinds of publications that had a reputation. There are these institutions and other sources of truth. And when you no longer can trust anything as a source of truth, you start to think in your own and guess part of the individual that goes that takes us way back to like where I came from the Soviet Union where you can't really trust anyone source of news. You have to think in your own. You have to talk to your friends. Shroomedism have intellectual autonomy. Do you think it? Think about the societal consequences? Absolutely. I mean, we see so much decentralization in all aspects of our digital lives now, but this is like the decentralization of thought. Yes. You could say it's sadly, I don't think it's sad is decentralization of truth where like truth is a clustering thing. We have these like this point cloud of people just swimming around like billions of them and they all have certain ideas. And what's thought of as truth is almost like a clustering algorithm when you just get a bunch of people that believe the same thing. That's truth. But there's also another truth and there may be like multiple truths and it's almost will be like a battle of truths. Maybe even the idea of truth will like lessen its power in society that there is such a thing as a truth because like the downside of saying something is true is it's all owns the downside of what people like religious people call scientism, which is like one science has declared something as true. You can't no longer question it. But the reality is science is a moving mechanism. You constantly question you constantly question and then maybe truth should be renamed as a process, not a not a final destination. The whole point is to keep questioning, keep questioning, keep discovering kind of like we're going backwards in time to like back when back when people were sort of finding their identities and we were less globalized right. Like people would get together and they'd get together around common value system, common morals in a common place. And those would be sort of these clusters of their truth right. And so we have all these different like civilizations and societies across across the world that created their own truth. You know we talk about the Jews and the Talmud and Toro. Look at Buddhist texts. We can look at all sorts of different truths and how many of them get at the same things. But many of them have different ideas or different articulations. Yeah. Harari and Sapiens were wines that even farther back until like gay mantimes. That's the thing that made us humans special is who can develop these clusters of ideas. Hold them in their minds through stories past them onto each other and the girls and girls and finally we have Bitcoin. Which money is another belief system that has power only because we believe in it. And is that truth? I don't know, but it has power. It's carried in the minds of millions and thereby has power. But back to Lebricks. So what was the founding story? What's the founding principles of Lebricks? Sure. So I was on campus as a freshman and I was talking to my friends. Many of them felt like it was hard to raise your hand in class that's a question. They really felt like even outside the cluster, it was hard to be vulnerable. And the thing you have to understand about Yale is it's not that big a place. Everyone knows someone who knows someone who knows you basically. And people come to these schools, first of all, they're home for people and they want to be themselves. They want to feel like they can be authentic. They want to make real friendships. And second of all, it's a place where people go for intellectual vitality to explore important ideas and to grow as thinkers. And fortunately, due to the culture, my friends expressed that it was very difficult to do that. And I felt it too. And then I couldn't talk to my professors. And I remember I talked to one specific global affairs professor and I was taking his class and his area of expertise was in the Middle Eastern conflict. And I went to him and I said, Professor, we're almost finished this class. And we haven't even gotten to sort of the reason I originally want to take the class was to hear about your perspective on the Middle Eastern conflict because something I learned at Yale, and this is maybe a sort of a tangent, but I'll flesh it out a bit. So I learned at Yale is that you can learn all sorts of things from a textbook. And what you kind of go to Yale to do is to get like the opinions of the experts that go beyond the textbook and to have those more in-depth conversations. And so that's sort of the added value of going to a place like Yale and taking a course there as opposed to just reading a textbook. But also interact with that opinion. Exactly. It's an interesting thing to interact with that opinion, to hear it, to respond to it, to push back on it and to have that with some great minds. And there really are great minds at Yale. Don't get me wrong. It's a place, it's still a place of tremendous brilliance. So I'm talking to this professor, right? And I'm like, we haven't, I haven't heard your area of expertise. And I'm like, are we going to get to it? What's the deal? And he is during office hours mind you. So we're one on one. He says Ryan, to be honest, I used to teach this area every single year. In fact, I would do a section on it, which is like a small seminar, like break away from the class where he would talk to the students and small groups and explain his and explain his perspective, his research and have a real debate about it, like around a hardness table. And he said, I used to do this. And then about two years ago, a student reported me to the school. And I realized my job was at risk. And I realized the best course of action was basically just not to approach the topic. And so now I just don't even mention it. And he's like, you can say whatever you want, but I'm not, I'm not going to be part of it. And it's a real shame. It's a real loss to all of the students who I think came to the school to learn from these brilliant professors. In that context of these world experts, the problem seems to be that reporting mechanism where there's a disproportionate power to a complaint of a young student, a complaint that an idea is painful or an idea is disrespectful to, you know, or ideas creating an unsafe space. And the conclusion of that, I mean, I'm not sure what to do with that because it's a single reporting, maybe a couple, but that has more power than the idea itself. And that's strange. I don't know how to fix that in the administration except to fire everybody. So like this is to push back against this storyline that academia somehow fundamentally broken. I think we have to separate a lot of things out. Like one is you have to look at faculty and you have to look at the administration. And like at MIT, for example, the administration does tries to do well, but they're the ones that often lack courage. They're often the ones who are the source of the problem. When people criticize academia, and I'll just speak to myself, you know, I want you to take heat for this is they really are criticizing the administration, not the faculty because the faculty oftentimes are the most brilliant, the bolder thinkers that you think, whenever you talk about we need like the truth to be spoken, the faculty are often the ones who are in the possession of the deepest truths in their mind. And in that sense, and they also have the capacity to truly educate in the way that you're saying. And so it's not broken, like fundamentally, but there's stuff that like needs that's not working out well. And you kind of took my words. That's what I thought you're going to ask me if I think the Ivy League is broken. That's totally that's exactly it. So you don't think so. So on the question, do you think that Ivy League is broken? Like what how do you think about it? The academia in general I suppose, but Ivy League still I think it represents some of the best qualities of academia. What more is there to say there? I think the Ivy League is producing tremendous thinkers to this day. I think the culture has a lot that can be improved, but I have a lot of faith in the people who are in these institutions. I think like you said, the administration, and I have to be a little careful because I've been in some of these committees and I have talked to the administration about these sorts of things. I think they have a lot of stakeholders and unfortunately it makes it difficult for them to always serve these brilliant faculty and the students in the way that they would probably like to. Yeah. Okay. So this is me speaking, right? The administration, I know the people and they're oftentimes a faculty holding positions in these committees, right? Yes. But it's in the role of quote unquote service, they are trying to do well. They're trying to do good. But I think you could say the mechanism is not working, but I could also say my personal opinion is they lack courage and one, courage and two, grace when they walk through the fire. So courage is stepping into the fire and grace when you walk through the fire is like maintaining that like, like as opposed to being rude and insensitive to the lived quote unquote experience of others or like, you know, just not eloquent at all. Like as you step in and take the courageous step of talking and saying the difficult thing, doing it well, like doing it skillfully. So both of those are important. The courage and the skill to communicate difficult ideas and they often lack them because they weren't trained for it, I think. So you can blame the mechanisms that don't that allow 19, 20-year-old students to have more power than the entire faculty or you could just say that the faculty need to step up and grow some guts and skill of graceful communication. A really administration. Yeah. And the administration. That's right. That's the administration. So the faculty are sometimes more of the most brave outspoken people. Yes. Within the bounds of their career. Yeah. So that takes a, that's like the founding kind of spark of a fire that led you to then say, okay, so how can I help? Yeah. And I explored a lot. I explored a lot of options. I wrote many articles to my friends, talked to them. And I realized it sort of need to be a cultural change. Sort of need to be bottom up grassroots. Something I knew the energy was there because you just look at the most recent institutional assessment from Yale. This was basically the number one thing that students, faculty and alumni all pointed to to the administration was cultivating more conversations on campus and more difficult conversations on campus. So the people on campus know it. And you look at a Gallup poll, 61% of students are on Ivy League campuses afraid to speak their minds because of the campus culture. The campus culture is causing a sort of freezing effect on discourse. Can you pause on that again? Yeah. So what percentage of students feel afraid to speak their minds? 61% nationally. And then you're talking about places, nothing like the Ivy League where I'd say I'd imagine it would be even worse because of just the way that these communities kind of come about and the sorts of people who are attracted or are invited to these sorts of communities. That's nationwide that college students and it's going up that college students are afraid to say what they believe because of their campus climate. So it's a majority. It's not a conservative thing. It's not a liberal thing. It's a group thing. We're all feeling it. The majority of us are feeling it. And basically just it doesn't even you don't even necessarily need to have anything to say. You just have a fear. That's right. So when you're like teaching you know metaphors a really powerful thing to explain you know and there's just the caution that you feel that's just horrible for humor. Now comedians have the freedom to just talk shit which is why I really appreciate somebody who's been a friend recently Tim Dillon who has who gives zero apart my French fox about anything which is very liberating, very important person to just tear down the powerful. But you know inside the academia as an educator, as a teacher, as a professor, you don't have the same freedom. So that fear is felt I guess by the majority of students that's that you're getting at something there too which is that if you're afraid to speak metaphorically if you're afraid to speak imprecisely it can be very difficult to actually think at all and to think to the extremities of what you're capable of because these are the these are the mechanisms we use when we don't have quite the precise mathematical language to quite pinpoint what we're talking about yet. This is the beginning. This is the creative step that leads to new knowledge. And so that really scares me is that if I'm not allowed to sort of excavate these things these ideas with people in the sort of messy sloppy way that we do as humans when we're first being creative are we how are we going to be able to continue to innovate are we going to continue to be able to learn. That's what really starts to scare me. So you've explored a bunch of different ideas you wrote a bunch of different stuff how did Lee Brooks come about. It basically came to me that it had to be kind of a grassroots movement and it had to be something that changed culturally and it had to be relatively personal people meeting people people finding out that no I'm not the only one on campus who feels this way. I feel alone and there are a lot of other people who feel alone. I believe this thing and it's not as unpopular as I thought. You know the basically creating heterodoxy of thought and it's creating that moment where you realize that your politics are personal and that your politics are shared by a lot of people on campus. And so I just started coding it. I didn't have much coding experience but I went headfirst in and figured how hard could it be? I mean this is really fascinating. So I talked to a lot of software engineers AI people. Obviously that's where my passion my interests are. My focus has been throughout my life. The fascinating thing about your story I think it should be truly inspiring to people that want to change the world is that you don't have a background in programming. You don't have even maybe a technical background. So you saw a problem. You explored different ideas and then you just decided you're going to learn how to build an app like without a technical background. Like you didn't try to. That's so bold. That is so beautiful man. He can take me through the journey of deciding to do that of like learning to program without a programming background and building the app like detailed. Like what do you actually like how do you start? You want to buy a Mac? I learned you need you had to buy a Mac. I'm just going to go step by step right? I'll be as dumb as possible because it was truly it's really leading by your feet. So you need a computer for this? Yeah I had a PC at the time and I was Android at the time and I realized it should be like an iOS app. So that was a decision but I knew kids these days they're always on their phone and I wanted you to be able to say a passing thought in class make a passing like you're walking around and you have a thought and you can express it or you're in the dining hall and you have your phone out you can express it. So it was clear to me it should be an iOS app. By the way, yeah Android is great. To have you check that out. We also are now available on Android but we'll get there for the Android users from MIT Stanford or the Ivy League. So back to how it happened. So I realized I had a Mac so when I got back and I realized I had an iPhone for testing eventually. I got an iPhone. So those were the real robot blocks to start with. From there, I mean there's almost too much information out there about programming. The question is like where do you start and what's going to be useful to you? And the first thought was I should look at some yellow classes but it became very clear very quickly that was not the right place to start. That would probably be the right place to start if I wanted to get a job at Amazon but Michael was slightly different. Yeah and I definitely had it in mind that what I was trying to make was I'm trying to prove out an idea. I'm not trying to make a finished product. I'm just trying to get to the first step because I figured if I keep if I keep getting to the next step at least I won't die now. You know like at least things will move forward. I'll learn new things. Maybe I'll meet new people. I'll show a degree of seriousness about what I'm doing and things will come together and that is as you'll see what ends up happening. So I start with Swift right and I find this video from the Stanford professor that had like a million views that was like how to make basically Swift apps like perfect. And you just like so you got this Mac and you what like go to google.com and you type in a load xcode and that's code. Yeah and then I type it on YouTube like Stanford iOS Swift Enter. First YouTube video has a million views and like it has to be good at Stanford as million views. I got lucky. I mean that turned out to you a very good video. And it's basically like introductory course to Swift. Yeah I mean you say introductory. I think most of the people in that class probably had a much better background than I did. The salts were developed or probably the computer scientist. And it was slow for me. I don't think I realized it fully at the time just how far behind I was from the rest of the class because I was like wow. It seems like people are picking this up really quickly. So it took a little longer and you know a lot of time was back overflow. But eventually I made a truly minimal viable product. The most minimal like we're talking you know put text on screen. Add text to screen comment on top of text. You know make a post make a response and anyone with a yell email can do this and you plug it into a certain a cloud server and you verify people's accounts and you you're off you have to figure out how to like the whole idea of like having an account. So there's a permanence like you can create an account with an email. Verify verify it. Okay so that that's not you know and that's literally how I thought about right like so what do I need to do? And I'm like well first thing I need is a login page. And I'm like how to make a login page and Swift. I mean it's that easy if someone this has been dumb before of course I'm the first page that pops up was probably a pretty damn good page when you it wasn't that bad it wasn't perfect but like maybe it got me 80% of the way there. Yeah and then I came into some bugs and then you know I asked back overflow a few questions and then I got a little further and then I found some more bugs and then I'm like maybe this isn't the right way to do it maybe I should do it this way and I'm sure my code isn't great but the goal isn't to make great code the great wasn't the goal wasn't to make scalable code it was to understand is this something my friends will use like what is the reaction going to be if I put it in their hands and am I capable of making this thing? And that's awesome. So you're focusing on the the experience like actually you just really driving towards that first step. Fitting out the first step and really driving towards it. Of course yet I'll also figure out like concept of like storage like database. You know something funny. What's that? I just made the database structure with no knowledge of databases whatsoever and I start showing it to my friends who have been experiencing CS now like you used to heap that's so interesting. You're like why did you decide to store it in this way? I'm like bro I don't even know what a heap is. Yeah. I just didn't because it works like I'm trying to make calls and stuff and they're like yeah they're like the hierarchy is really like I'm like what? Well there's a deep profound lesson in there that I don't know how much you've interacted with computer science people since but they tend to optimize and have these kind of discussions and what leads what results is over optimization. It's like worrying is this really the right way to do it and then you go as opposed to doing the first thing on Stack Overflow you go down this like rabbit hole of what's the actual proper way to do it and then you're like you wake up five years later working on Amazon working on Amazon because you've never finished the login page like it's kind of hilarious but that that's a really deep lesson like just get it done and and there's like what's a heap bro is the right that should be a t-shirt that that's really the right approach to building something that ultimately creates an experience and then you iterate eventually that's how the great some of the greatest software products in this world have been built as you create it quickly and then just iterate. What was by the way in your mind the thing that you were chasing as a prototype like what was the first step that it feels like something is working like do you interact with another friend yeah I think the first step was like it's one thing to tell someone about an idea but it's another thing to put in their hands and it's kind of see like the way their their eyes kind of look and when I go I'd walk around Cross Campus which is part of Yale and I'd literally just go up to people and run up to them and be like try this try this you gotta try this this is a pre-quarantine by the way of course this would never be the same post-quarantine by like you gotta try this you gotta try this like what is it and I'd be like and I explain it's like an anonymous discussion feed for the for a Yale campus yeah and you see their gears turning and they just some people would be like not interested yeah like fine not your target demographic I get it you'll come eventually um but some people like you could see it they got it they're like yes and that's when I was like okay okay there is and you don't need I mean you don't need 50% of people to like it yeah you need what 5% 10% to love it and then they'll tell 5% 10% yeah yeah Warner Mouth yeah and you're good um of course the first version was very very crappy but seeing people trying despite all the crappiness wasn't it was sort of enough to be the first step and you know since since then all of my coach been stripped out I now have friends who basically have told me don't bother with the coding part you do you do the rest you just make sure that we can code because they want to code of yeah great I mean I'm not an engineer yeah I never intended to be an engineer and there's a lot to do that's not engineering yes but the point was just to validate the idea so to speak when was the moment that you felt like we've created something special maybe a moment where you're proud of that this is uh this is this has the potential to actually be the very um implementation of the idea that I initially had there's so many there's so many little moments it's like and I bet there'll still be moments in the in the future that make that make it hard to like totally say like yeah we should say this is this is still very early years of Liebrek's yeah it's literally it's only been a year since we've had like actual like a lot of people on the app yeah about a year oh wow okay I mean there's some crazy moments I could talk about sort of going to Dartmouth because it's one thing to like get some traction at your school yeah people know you and you know it's it's your school you know it's another thing to go to another school and we're no one knows you and sign up 90% of the campus overnight wow so tell me that story you're invading another territory it was literally like that did you buy it like a Dartmouth sweatshirt a purposefully I didn't want to fraud anyone but I was purposefully nondescripted am I clearly yeah no yell stuff no Dartmouth stuff um just blend in um I'll get I'll go back there so what happened was this was like March of last year um so almost almost a year ago today and I really wanted to see if we could go from sort of one campus to campuses so I didn't know anyone at Dartmouth campus but I kind of had some cold emails some warm-ish emails um and I went to people and I was like basically can I sleep on your floor for two days during finals period yeah I had a lot of people who said this is crazy like no one's gonna no one's gonna tell an app during finals period a social after-and-a-nobody but I he met a few people I was like you know can I sleep on your floor and one of them was crazy enough to say sure comes my come to my dorm I have a nice floor um and he ended up today he's still really close he's really close friend but anyway I take a train knowing nothing about this guy besides his first and last name and I arrive and Dartmouth is really really remote way more remote than you think to the point where I'm like he's like he warned me he's a really hospitable guy he warned me like it's gonna be hard to get the campus from the train station because it's really remote and I'm like I'm sure it's fine I'll just get a new bird there are no ubers and handovers what do you think this is new ham sure so uh Connecticut I mean Yale is pretty remote as well no yeah Yale is um well I mean Yale's in New Haven which is a real city it has a ubers it has food it has a culture it has a nightclub even yeah like we're talking about real city like it's not New York it's not Philadelphia where I'm from but it's a city uh new ham sure it's something very different yeah beautiful campus I'm sure beautiful oh my gosh I could tell I could talk so much about I was blown away by Dartmouth I I started wondering like why I didn't apply legitimately um between the people and the culture it was it was a it was a beautiful vacation so I arrived there no uber but eventually I called this guy who's like the only guy who can get you to Dartmouth and takes a couple hours but we get there I sleep on this guy's floor I wake up I ask him if there's any printing he's like oh Dartmouth happens to have free printing in the copy room um I print out like 2000 posters and so the guy in the copy room literally ghost me is like kid I don't know what you're doing but you need to get out of here my god I'm going I'm going um I just found the limits I know yeah I found the limit um and I think a lot of startups is about finding the limits because it's a little piece of advice um socially yeah he's like you gotta get out here and I um I then go to every single dorm door I put a poster under every single dorm door advertising the app with with the with the QR code yeah I walk around campus saying hi to everyone and talking about the app I go from table to table in the cafeteria introduce myself say hi and thumbs down on the app it's exhausting day so many steps so many it's crouching down to slip the poster into the dorm door my legs were burning um but by the end of it the 24 hours later I'm sitting on a I'm sitting in a bus and I'm just pressing the refresh button on the count creation panels it's like going up by hundreds yeah I'm like oh my gosh there's no word of mouth is working in a sense I mean certainly you're like initial seat is it's powerful just a piece yeah but then the word of mouth is what carries it forward and what was the explanation you gave to the app it's uh is an anonymity of fundamental part of it like saying this is a chance for you to speak your mind about your experiences on campus yeah I think people get it you don't need to you what I've realized is you don't need to tell people why to try it yeah they know yeah it it's a hunger for this yeah exactly yeah so I all I do is I'm very factual I said and this is where I kind of end up pointing the kind of the line that I now used to say it because I said it so many times and that was 24 hours I just said it's an anonymous discussion feed for Dartmouth and they're like yes like they've been waiting for it you know some people more skeptical but a lot of people were like great I'm excited to try this I'm excited to meet people and connect and I mean the way Dartmouth take into is incredible everything from professors writing poems during finals period to be like um good luck in finals period you're gonna rise like a phoenix or whatever to like yeah it's crazy to I heard about uh to women meeting on Liebrecht since starting a finance club um at Dartmouth to significant others meeting there's an article recently written up at Yale as well about two queer women who met on Liebrecht since our relationship which was pretty it was pretty interesting to see people throwing parties pre-COVID um yeah it was just amazing to see how when you allow people to be vulnerable and social they connect they people have this natural desire to connect yeah when you have what have a natural desire to have a voice and then when that voice is is uh paired with freedom that you could truly express yourself and there's something liberating about that and in that sense uh you're like you're connecting is your true self whatever that is what are the most powerful conversation you've seen on the app you mentioned like people connecting hard part of that that is the sorting you know figuring out which one am I gonna put it the time mental sorting out I just something to stand out to sorry I don't mean to do like the top 10 conversations ever of all time ever on the app I just mean like stuff that you remember this stands out to you I remember this one really amazing comment from this he was a Mexican international student who spoke out and he this this this post was super edgy but yet it got hundreds and hundreds of upvotes within the Yale community it was a Yale community specific post and we should point out that there's a school specific community now and there's an all ivy community um so this was specifically in the Yale community and this was a little while ago but it stuck with me this Mexican um international student comes to Yale and he starts talking about his experience in the um La Casa which is the Mexican Latinx as they would say cultural center at Yale and how he doesn't feel welcome there because he's Roman Catholic basically and international and how he doesn't feel like he fits with their agenda and as a result this place that's supposed to be home for him he feels outcasted and feels more alone than he does anywhere else on campus that's powerful that was powerful to me yeah hearing someone someone who should be feeling supported by this culture say actually this is not doing anything for me like this is not helping me yeah this is this is not where I feel at home so what do you make of anonymity because it seems to be a fundamental aspect of the power of the app right but at the same time anonymity on the internet uh so it protects us right it gives us freedom to have a voice but it can also bring out the dark sides of human nature like trolls or people who want to be malicious want to hurt others purely for the joy of hurting others being cruel for fun and going to the dark places so like would he make of anonymity as a fundamental feature of social interaction like the pros and the cons yeah just to break that down a bit I would say a lot of those same things about a place like Twitter where people are very unannotonous yeah having said that of course there's a different sort of capacity people have when they're anonymous right well in all in all different sorts of ways so what do I make of anonymity I think you can be incredibly liberating and a lot of people be incredibly vulnerable and to connect in different ways both on politics and there was a lot to talk about this year regarding politics and you know personally vulnerable being vulnerable talking about relationships and mental health I think it allows people to have a community that's not performative and of course there's this other side where you know people can sometimes break rules or say things that they wouldn't otherwise say that people don't always agree with or that people might find repugnant and to an extent these can facilitate great conversations and on the other hand we have to have moderation in place and we have to have community guidelines to make sure that the anonymity doesn't overwhelm the purpose which is that anonymity first of all anonymity is a toolfully in Librex it was not the purpose of Librex it is a way that we get towards these authentic conversations given our campus climate and second of all I would say it's a spectrum it's not just it's not just Librex is anonymous right because Librex isn't totally anonymous everyone's a verified Ivy League student you know exactly what school everyone goes to you only have one account per person at Yale meaning if meaning that I mean what that amounts to is people have more of an ownership in the community and people know that they're connected and they have a common vernacular so the anonymity is a scale and it's a tool but you can also trust I mean this is the difference between Reddit and anonymity where you can easily create multiple accounts when you have only one account per person or at least it's very difficult to create multiple accounts then you can trust that the anonymous person you're talking to is a human being not about I try to be completely unannonymous not only my well public interactions I try to be as real in every way possible like zero gap between private me and public me what why exactly did you it seems like this is a intentional mission what made you want to sort of bridge that gap between the private sphere and public sphere because that's that's unique I know a lot of intellectuals who would make a different decision yeah interesting I had a discussion about when the vol about this actually when with a few others that have a very clear distinction between public and private something I'm struggling with by the way personally I'm thinking about so one on the very basic surface level is if you carry with yourself lies small lies or big lies it's extramental effort to remember what you like to remember what you're supposed to say not supposed to say so that's on a very surface level of like it's just easier to live life when you have the smaller the gap between the private you and the public you and the second is I think for me from an engineering perspective like if I'm dishonest with others I will too quickly become dishonest with myself and in so doing I will not truly be able to think deeply about the world and come up and build revolutionary ideas there's something about honesty that feels like it's that first principle thinking that's almost like overused as a term but it feels like that requires radical honesty not radical ask whole unleashedness but radical honesty with yourself with yourself and I feel like it's difficult to be radically honest with yourself when you're being dishonest with the public and also I have a nice feature honestly that in this current social context so we can talk about race and gender and what are the other topics that are touchy? I quote this today and nationality all those things I mean like family structure maybe I'm in eloquent in the way I speak about them but I honestly want to look in the mirror like I'm not deeply hateful of a particular race or even just hateful particular race I'm sure I'm biased and I tried to like think about those biases and so on and also I don't have any creepy shit in my closet but I'm living like I haven't done it seems like everybody it seems like a lot of people got like did a lot of creepy stuff in their life and I just feel like that's really nice and deliberating and especially now you know it's funny because I've gotten a bit of a platform and I think it all started when I went and this is a famous community female comedian Whitney Cummings and you know I've gotten a lot of amazing women writing me throughout but when I went on Whitney it was like the number of DMs I get on Instagram from women it's just ridiculous and I think that was a really important moment for me is like I speak and I feel you know I really value love long-term monogamy with like one person and it's like I could see where a lot of guys would now continue that message in public and in private just start sleeping around and so like that's an important statement for me mentally he's like nope straight narrow he's just go straight and not out of fear but out of like principle and just like live life honestly and I just I feel like that's truly liberating as a human being forget public hold that because then I feel like I'm on sturdy ground when I say difficult things and at the same time this is sorry I'm renting on this apology I'm interested personally and stuff you've gone I honestly believe in the internet and people on the internet that when they hear me speak they can see if I'm full of shit and not like I won't be able to fake it yeah like they'll see it through yeah I so I feel like if you're not lying about stuff you have the freedom to truly be yourself and the and the internet will figure it out like we'll figure who you are people have a natural tendency to be able to tell bullshit and it makes sense from an evolutionary standpoint right exactly like why why wouldn't why of all the things that we could evolve to be good at being able to detect honesty seems like one that would be particularly valuable especially in the sorts of societies we developed into and then also from a selfish perspective like a success perspective I think there's a lot of folks that have inspired me like the Elon is one of them that shows that there's a hunger for genuineness like you can build a business as a CEO and be genuine and like real and do stupid shit every once in a while as long as it's coming from the same place of who you truly are like Elon's inspirational that and then there's a lot of other people I admire that are counter inspirations in the sense like they're very formal they hold back a lot of themselves and it's like I know how brilliant those people are and I think they're not being as effective of leaders public faces of companies as they could be I mean to be honest like not to throw shade but I will is like Mark Zuckerberg as an example of that Jack Dorisys also a bit of an example of that I like Jack a lot I've talked to him a lot I will talk to him more I think he's a much more amazing person than he conveys through his public presentation I think a lot of that has to do with PR and marketing people having an effect listen is difficult I think it's really difficult it's probably some many of the same difficulties you will face is the pressures but it's it's hard to know what to do but I think as much as possible as an individual you should try to be honest in the face of the world and the company that wants you to be more polished and that being more polished turns into a politician and politician eventually turns into being dishonest dishonest with the world and dishonest with yourself something I noticed which the people of the people you mentioned those things have had ramifications in terms of letting things go too far get out of hand and you wonder like it's an aspect of lying right you say one lie goes to another lie you push it down does it doesn't matter you can talk and figure it figured out later you can figure out later pretty soon you've done a pretty big hit hole and I think if we look at Twitter and we look at Facebook I think it goes without saying what sorts of holes have been dug because of perhaps because of a lack of honesty that goes all the way up to the leaders so yeah there's two problems within the company it doesn't make you as effective of a leader I think that's one and two for social media companies I think people need to trust like it doesn't have to be the CEO but it has to be like this is how humans work we want to look to somebody where like I trust you if you're going to use this social media platform I think you have to trust the set of individuals working at the top of that social media social media. So I really was really quickly one of the lessons throughout the startup was that people don't totally connect to products as much as they connect to people yeah and I mean I don't know if you've I have much to spend on Lieberks you've only been here the last couple we like last week but I mean I love the product and one of the one of the aspects of me loving the products that I'm super active and I've been super active throughout the entire time and the amount of support I've received has made that very easy to do from the community and the fact that I could I mean so I came to Boston for the center for you right yeah I came to Boston I got off the train yeah it's around 5 30 p.m. I check Lieberks someone is writing hey I'm in Boston does anyone want to get dinner yeah 30 minutes later where I'm going to dinner with them that's amazing and I mean it's incredible first of all as an Omppitrapreneur the amount of stuff I learned from these people and the one and one day reiterate and I hear that they got the message through the problem I mean that's incredibly validating but also I mean I think it's just important to be able to put a face to a brand and especially a brand that's built on trust because fundamentally the users are trusting us with some really important discussions it's really an improvement to some degree it's a community and a movement I say actually why I didn't use the app very much so far is there's something really powerful about the way it's constructed which I felt like a bit of an outside because I don't know the communities it felt like it's a it's a really strong community around each of these places yeah and so I felt like I was I made me really wish there was an MIT one and so there's both discussions about the deep like community issues within Columbia or Yale or so on and Dartmouth and there's also the broader community of the Ivy leagues that people are discussing but I could see that actually expanding more and more and more but which is it's a powerful coupling just the feeling of like the little village of this little community we're building together but also the broader issues yeah as you could do both discussions one thing that was important to me is talking about social media as a concept right I think the way people socialize is very much context dependent so we're talking about people understanding each other through language through English and these languages are constructed they're in a very nuanced way in a very sort of temperamental way right and you kind of need a similar context to be able to have productive conversations so to me it's really important that these these groups they share people something in common a really big-lived experience the Ivy League or their school community and they have a similar vocabulary they have a similar background they know what's happening in their community and so having social media that is community connected to me was fundamental like you talk about anonymity to me community is the is the thing that when I think about Librex I think what makes it different it's the fact that everyone everyone knows what's going on everyone comes from a similar context and people can socialize in a way where they're they understand each other because they're been through use or lived experience they've been through so many of the same lived experiences one like clarification is there an easy way if you choose to then connect in in meetspace in physical space so the I guess the sort of magic of it and I was talking to a bunch of Harvard Librexers who I met off the app while I was in Boston and every time I told me this is the favorite part of the app this is what I love about the app we have this matching system which is an anonymous direct message that you can send to any poster so like I was talking to this guy who um he was really into coin collection and he met other people who were really into coin collection through a post and what they he would make a post about coin collection um and then someone would come to him and they'd be like and they they could direct message him anonymously and it would just show them his it would just show him their their school and then they could just text chat totally anonymously direct message if he accepted the anonymous request do they see the user names right um there are no user names only bricks it's all just schools names so he made this post about coin collection and he got it direct message yeah I guess so right no user because I was just looking at the text yeah that's interesting that's right and I can tell you I can go into why um that's really interesting yeah I can go into it truly is anonymous it's well I mean but it's not exactly it's a very different kind of anonymous and the reason the reason that we made that decision yeah it's because we wanted people to connect two ideas we're on people to connect to things in the moment we don't want people to go oh I know this guy he said this other thing and we didn't want people to feel like they were at risk of being doxed so it's just these are small communities right yeah we talked about this everyone knows someone who knows you yeah and in 2021 it would not take much to be able to figure out who someone might be just do a couple of posts um so it's both safety and about the ideas in terms of not adding user names anyway we have this anonymous direct message system where you can direct message the original poster of any post the OP if you're a editor um of any post and you that that makes it really easy to meet up because once you guys are one-on-one you can exchange a number you can exchange a snapchat you can exchange a email probably not very often but good and then that's how people meet up matching and then a lot of people connect in this way uh let me let me just take a small step into the technical I read somewhere I don't know if it's true that uh one of the reasons you were rejected from YC Y Combinator in the final rounds is because one of the principles is to refuse to sell user data can you speak to that what's uh what why do you think it's important not to sell user data sort of which draws a clear contrast between other basically any other service on the internet i mean to be honest it's quite simple i mean we talk about this platform people are talking about their most intimate secrets their political opinions you know what how are they feeling about what's going on in their city you know during the summer um how are they feeling about um the the political cycle and also their mental health their relationships these are some of the like most intimate thoughts that people were having point blank i don't think it was ethical to pawn them off for a profit i didn't think it was moral i don't think i could sleep at night if if that was what i was doing is turning these people's most intimate beliefs and secrets into a currency that i bought and sold there's something very off about that i tend to believe that there is uh some room so like like a facebook would just take that data and sell it right but there is some room in transparency in giving people the choice on which parts they can i wouldn't even see it as sell but like share with advertisers are you going to give them a profit um so right so you have to monetize you have to create an entire system you have to rethink this whole thing right but if as long as you give people control and are transparent and make it easy like i think it's really difficult to delete a facebook account or like delete all your data it's it's not tried it's very difficult so like just make it easy and trust in that if you create a great product people are not going to do it and if if they do it then they're not actually i deep loving member of the community was that um so we very quickly realized that user privacy was something that um was not only a core value but was something that users really cared about and we added we added this functionality it's just a button that says forget me yeah um you press it yeah like two clicks um it's not that hard we just remove your email from the database um yeah you're good beautiful i think facebook should have that i i honestly so call me crazy but maybe you can actually speak to this but i don't think facebook well now they would but if they did it earlier they would lose that much money if they allow like transparently tell people you could just delete everything they also explain that in ways that's going to potentially like lessen your experience in the short term like explain that but then there shouldn't be like multiple clicks of a button that don't make any sense i i'm trying to hold back from ranting about this instagram because let me just say real quick because i've been locked out of instagram for a month uh and there's a whole group inside facebook they're like supporters of like like lex free help lex free lex free lex uh i wasn't blocked it was just like a bug in the system somebody was hammering the api with my account so they kept thinking i'm a bot anyway it's a bug it happens to a lot of people but like first of all i appreciate the love from all the amazing engineers and instagram and facebook love those folks the entire mechanism though is somehow broken i mean that i put that on the leadership but it's also difficult to operate a large company once it scales all those kinds of things but it should not be that difficult to do some basic basic things that you want to do which is in the case of facebook that's verify your identity to the app and also in the case of facebook in the case of lex become like disappear if you if you choose there's downsides to disappearing but it should not be a difficult process and um yeah i think i think people are waking up to that i think there's a lot of room for an app like lebrex with it's with with it's foundational ideas to redefine what social media should look like you know and like you said i think beautifully ananimity is not the core value it's just a tool you use and who knows maybe ananimity will not always be the tool you use like if you give people the choice who knows what this evolves from the login page they initially created the key thing is the founding principles and again who knows if you give people a really nice way to monetize their data maybe they'll no longer be a thing that uh you say do not sell user data yeah all those kinds of things but the the basic principles should be there and also a good simple interface design um is goes goes a really long way like simplicity and elegance which a lebrex kernel that is clubhouse is a lot better by the way i don't i don't mean to uh i don't mean to go too deep into the history but the um it was bad it was i didn't look at the early pictures oh thank goodness i i i we're at somewhere that it was like a white screen like with black there's these two mouth-based and down-bow buttons were like these big these big freaking boxes and like i don't i don't i could go on but um it was my it was my genius design skills um i almost failed art class when i was like in first grade and i think i still have some more skills to my first grade self but uh it's kind of a lot better and thanks to a lot of my friends who have you know sort of chipped in here in there oh i love the idea of a botan i just like forget me um i don't know that's that's really moving actually that uh that's actually all people want is they they want i think okay i'll speak to my experience like i will give so much more if i could just like disappear if i needed to and i trusted the the community i trusted like the founders and the principles that's really that's really powerful man like trust and ease of escape yeah uh you've also kind of mentioned moderation which is really interesting so with this anonymity and this community i don't know if you've heard of the internet but there's trolls on the internet so i've heard and uh even if they go to Yale and Dartmouth uh there's still people that probably enjoy uh the the sort of being the the guerrilla warfare contra revolutionary and just like creating chaos in a place of love so how do you prevent chaos from and hatred uh breaking out and leabrex so the way i think about it is we have these principles um they're pretty simple and they're pretty easy to enforce and then beyond the principles we have a set of moderators moderate from every single ivy league school seem of diverse moderators to enforce these principles but not only enforce the principles but kind of clue us in to what's happening in their community and how the real life context of their community translates to the leabrex context of their community and beyond that we have conversation with them about the standards of the community and we're constantly talking about what needs to be further elucidated and what needs to be tweaked and we're in constant communication with the community now if you want me to get into the principles that underlie leabrex's moderation policy yeah please maybe you can explain that there's moderators what does that mean how are they chosen and what are the principles until which they operate sure so how are the moderators chosen the moderators are all volunteers their leabrexers who reach out to me and respond to the opportunity to become moderator and the way they're chosen um is basically we want to make sure that they're in tune with their community we want to make sure they come from diverse backgrounds and we want to make sure that they're they sort of understand what the community is about and then we ask them some questions about how they would deal with certain scenarios ones that we've had in the past and we feel strongly about and then also ones that are a little more murky where we want to see that they're sort of thinking about these things in a critical way yeah um and from there we choose a set and uh they have the power to um take down posts of course everything at the end of day pens my review but they can take them down and we can reinstate them if it's if it's a problem but they can take down posts and they can advocate for you know different moderation standards and different moderation policies so for now you're the Linus Torval to this community and uh so meaning like you're able to like people are actually able to like email you or like text me text you contact you and get a response like you respond to basically everybody and then you're you're like really you know you're you're living that live on people's floor life currently that's not necessarily this is the early days folks I knew Ryan he was a billionaire and he was cool and then he was in a mansion making uh meets on his barbecue no okay oh but you know how does it scale um like what I suppose how does it scale is the question I mean with Linus uh I don't know if you're familiar with the Linux open source community but he still stayed at the top for a while it was really important like leadership there was really important to drive that large scale really productive open source community what do you see your your role as Librex grows and um in general what are the mechanisms of scaling here for moderation so I see it open discourse is fundamental to the purpose of the app right so as the I guess you could say founder CEO what have you um part of my purpose has to be to enforce the vision right and part of the vision is open discourse and that does come down in part to reasonable moderation and community guided reasonable moderation so I imagine that will always be something that I'm intimately involved with to some degree now the degree to which the way in which that manifests I imagine will have to change right um and hopefully I'll be able to just like you can hire a CTO hopefully I'll be able to be integrated in hiring people who are who understand the the way that we are sort of operating and the and the reasonable standards of moderation and there can be a sort of hierarchical structure but I think when you have a product whose key purpose is to allow people to have these difficult conversations on campus that need to be had yeah I can never support that yeah I can never fully I don't think I can fully ever abdicate that responsibility I think that would be like I mean that would be like baseless abdicating e-commerce right right like that is yeah that's part of the job yeah of course you can run companies in different ways I think that because he might have abdicated quite a bit of the details there it's hard for me to say because the Amazon does so many things I think the probably the better examples like Elon will draw as he's still at the core of the engineering he's at the core of the engineering there's some fundamental questions of what he probably does way too much of the engineering like he's like the lowest level detail but you're saying like the core things that are that make the app work is is the moderation of difficult conversations and by the way I'm 21 years old let's let's remind us everyone of that if this thing does scale and if this thing continues to be a positive force and a lot of people's lives who knows what will what will happen in the next what I'll learn I'm still growing definitely as a leader still growing as a thinker still growing as a person I don't I can't pretend that I know how to run a business that is worth you know up to $1 billion whatever yeah I can't pretend I know how to run a business that's you know going to have millions of users I expect that there are going to be a lot of amazing people who will teach me and that a lot of people who have already kind of stepped into my life and helped me out and taught me things and I imagine that I'll learn so much more I just know that moderation is always going to be important to me because I don't think Leabrex is Leabrex unless we have open discourse and moderation reasonable open light touch moderation is at the heart of creating that right so as a creator of this kind of community in place with anonymity and difficult conversations what what do you think about this touchy three words that people have been tossing around and politicizing I would say but as at the core of the founding of this country which is the freedom of speech how do you think about the freedom of speech this particular kind of freedom of expression and do you think it's a fundamental human right how do you define it to yourself when you when you're thinking about it I've I went down especially preparing for this conversation down a rabbit hole of like just how unclear it is philosophically what is meant by this kind of freedom it's not as easy as people think but it's interesting pragmatically speaking to hear what how you think about it in the context of Leabrex yeah it's a tough one right there's a lot there so I come from the background of being a math major maybe it's important to start with that yeah and I found myself um in the middle of this question of freedom of speech one one of the wonderful things is that uh the Leabrex community is filled with PhDs and governance majors who have taught me a ton about this sort of thing and I'm still learning I'm still growing I'm still probably going to modify my perspective to some degree hopefully don't worry I imagine I'll always um support for your discourse like learning yeah how to speak about stuff is is uh it's critical here because it's like I'm learning that this is like a minefield of conversations because the moment you say like even saying freedom of speech is a complicated concept people would be like oh we spot a communist like they'll say there's nothing complicated about freedom freedom is freedom bro it's it it is complicated with first of all if you talk about there's there's different definitions of freedom of speech uh if you if you want to go constitution if you want to talk about the United States specifically and what's legal it's actually not as exciting and not as uh uh beautiful as people think of it's complicated it's it's complicated I think there's ideals behind it that we want to see what is that actually materialize itself in that digital world where we're trying to communicate in ways that allows for difficult conversations and also at the same time doesn't result in the silencing of voices not through like censorship but through like just assholes being rude spam spam so it could be just bots racism uh racism going going back to the name of the app Librex yes Libre free um X was support onto for free exchange and the free exchange of what my purpose was to create as many as much intercommunication of ideas be them repugnant or otherwise as possible and of course to do that within legal bounds and to do that without causing anyone to be harassed or doxed so to keep things focused on the ideas not the people and then no BS crap you know stuff and so to me the easiest way to moderate around that because as you said figuring out what is hateful and what is hate speech is really hard was to say no sweeping statements against core identity groups and that seems to work on the whole pretty well to be pretty light touch and you hard to do though it's difficult it's difficult to generalize we humans it's difficult but what it comes down to is be specific yeah um and when you think about what are sweeping statements against core identity groups right oftentimes these are these are sort of hackneyed subjects these are things that have been broached and we've heard them before they don't really lead anywhere productive so yeah so it goes under this principle of be specific and the ideas you're discussing so even for like positive and humor stuff you try to avoid generalizations against core identity groups sorry what are core identity groups we're talking um you know race religion okay got it even positive stuff well against negative oh against sorry against against okay very very we've learned to be very specific very few words but the community gets it you know yeah they get it i mean this the thing they they um the the trouble with rules is uh as the community grows they'll figure out ways to manipulate the rules absolutely it's human nature it's creativity yeah something beautiful about it of course unlike them from an evolutionary perspective yes yeah the fact that people are so creative and so looking to and because people are genuinely interested in figuring out these things about social media and so they'll 100% like see like where's the edge and i mean part of that's maintaining some level of vagueness in your role set yeah which has its own set of questions and something we could think about and i'm not implying i have all the answers but there is something really interesting about people being so engaged that they're looking to figure out where those edges and what does that mean what does that edge mean you know so one of the things i'm kind of thinking about like from an individual user of Librex or an individual user of the internet i think about like that one person that is on Reddit saying hateful stuff or positive stuff doesn't matter or funny stuff one of the things i think about is the trajectory of that individual through life and how a social media can help that person become the best version of themselves i don't mean from like an hour or a well-earned sense like educate them properly or something i just mean like we're all i believe we're all fundamentally good and i also believe we all have the capacity to do to create some amazing stuff in this world whether that's ideas or art or engineering all those kinds of things just to be amazing people and i kind of think about like you know a lot of social media mechanisms bringing out the worst in us and i tried to think like in the long term how can of the social media or how can a website or how can it to the you create can make the best like you take a trajectory that makes you better better and better and like the best version of yourself so i think about that because like you know twitter can really take you down some dark trajectories i've seen people just not being the best version of themselves forget the cancel culture and all that kind of stuff it's just like they're not developing intellectually in the way that's going to make the best version of themselves i think reddit i'm not sure what i think about reddit yet because one positive side is all the shit posting i read it could be just like a release valve for some stress in life and you almost have like a parallel life where in your in meetspace you might be actually becoming successful and so on and growing and so on but you just need some time to be angry at somebody but i tend to not think that's possible i think if you're shit posting you're probably not spending your time the best way you could i don't know i am i'm torn on that but do you think about that with leabrex of creating a trajectory for the for the yield for the Dartmouth the students to where they grow intellectually one thing that i think about a lot is how do you incentivize positive content creation how do you incentivize well put yeah really intellectual content creation it's something that frankly you know i think about every single day and i think there are ways that i mean one thing that's great about humans is that they can be incentivized right and i think there are ways that you can incentivize people to make the right kind of content if that's your goal so you think such mechanisms exist for such an incentivization i do i don't want to let the cat out of the bag sure so to speak so we have already idea like concrete ideas in your mind and i think about the real concrete ideas that i'm very very optimistic about yeah and you don't even need to share them the the fact i understand totally but like the fact that you have them that's really good because i feel like sometimes the downfall of the social media is that there's literally not even a thinking or a discussion about the incentivization of positive long term content creation and twitter i really was excited about this when they said like when jack has talked about like creating healthy conversations yeah he does seem to care i've listened to him i mean he's very he has a very particular way of saying things but you get the impression that he's someone who actually cares about these things within the limits of his power yeah and that's the question the limits of the power leabrax is growing not just in the number of communities but also in the way you're incentivizing positive conversations like coupled with the moderation and so on so you think there's a lot of innovation to be had in that area there's a tremendous amount i think when you think about the reasons people post fundamentally people want to make a positive impact on their community to some degree now there always be bad actors and part of the benefit of sort of our moderation structure is that we can limit some of those bad actors you know no body counts no pergating at the same time the more you incentivize a certain type of behavior the better it's going to be and it's we don't see this our role as the platform to force the communion in that in a direction and frankly i don't think it would be good for anyone the community or the conversations if we forced a specific type of conversations uh conversation we just need to make the tools to allow people to be good yeah and to incentivize good behavior yeah believe that like if you you don't need you will not need to censor if you allow people at scale to be good the good will overpower the assholes that's that's my fundamental belief i i'm very optimistic about that but currently leabrax is small in the sense that it's just a small set of communities that i believe and you mentioned to me offline that by design you're scaling slowly that's right carefully so how does leabrax scale is it possible you know facebook also started with the small set of communities that were schools and then now grew to be basically the if not one of the largest social networks in the world do you see leabrax has potentially scaling to be beyond even college campuses uh but encompassing the whole world so it's a long timeline i'll say this this gets back to like where did pace facebook go wrong because clearly they did a lot right and we can only we can only speculate about what the objectives were of the founders of facebook um you know i'm sure they've said some things but it's always interesting to know what the what the mythology is versus what the truth is of the matter um so perhaps they and they've been very successful i mean they they've taken over the world to some extent at the same time the goals of leabrax are to create these positive communities and these open conversations where people can have real conversation and connection in their communities in a vulnerable authentic way and so to that end which i imagine might be different than the goals of a facebook for example one thing that we want to do is keep things intimate and community based so each school is its own community and perhaps you could have a slightly broader community maybe you could have a i know uh the California system is an obvious one pack time might be an obvious one and we can think about that um but fundamentally the unit the unit of community is your school or your school community so that that that's one difference that i think will help us the other thing is that we're scaling intentionally meaning that one way expand to a school we have moderators in place we have moderators who understand that school's environment in a very personal level and we're growing responsibly we're growing as we're ready both technologically but also socially you know but as we think we have the tools to um preserve the community and to encourage the community to create the sort of content that we want them to create and you know there's a lot of ways to define community so first of all there's geographic community as well uh but the way you're kind of defining community with Yale and uh Dartmouth is the email right that's what gives you there's a power to the email in the sense that uh that's how you can verify you efficiently verify yourself with being and a single individual in the university in that same way you can verify your employment at a company for example like google max off facebook do you see your uh potentially taking on those communities that'd be fascinating getting like anonymous community conversations inside google 100 percent crossed my mind so some extent this is this is something where i understand the college experience i understand the need god and i i i've never i've never worked at google i don't know if they would hire me um hopefully maybe as a product manager uh i think if there's a community that needs this product and has that and has that will which i think especially as lebrusk continues to grow and expand and change and learn and because that's what we're doing is we're learning right with each community it's not just about growing it's about learning from these from each of these communities and iterating um i think it's quite likely they're going to be all sorts of communities that could use this tool to improve their culture so to speak so forgive me i'm not actually like that knowledgeable out the history of attempts of building social networks to solve the problem the you're solving uh but i was made aware that there was an app uh app or at least a social network called yik yak uh that was had a similar kind of um focus um i think the thing you've spoken about that differs between lebrusk and yik yak is that yik yak was defined in my pronouncing it right even uh you're good i'm good i met the founders though i can confirm okay you can confirm cool uh the that it was constructed a geographical area versus like to the actual community um and that and that somehow had fundamental like actual differences in social dynamics that resulted but can you speak to the history of yik yak like how does lebrusk differ what lessons have you learned from that oh and i should say that i guess there was controversial i don't know i didn't look at the details but i'm guessing there's a bunch of racism and hate speech and all that kind of stuff that emerged there was on yik yak okay so that's an example of like okay here's how it goes wrong when you have an anonymity on college campuses so how does lebrusk going to do better yeah you're getting a lot of problems content problems but the content problems go deeper than maybe what the press would reveal there's a lot to say and part of it is parsing exactly what to talk about when it comes to yik yak and when you talk about startups i mean you know this i you know startups um and you look at the post mortem it's almost never what people think it is and and oftentimes these things are somewhat unknowable and the the degree to which people seeking confirmation bias to something seeking closure yes look to find a singular attribute that caused the failure it feels like the little details often make all the difference yes and i think i think the details are so little that as humans we are not capable of parsing even what they are but i'll tell you also my perspective on it knowing that i am also a human with biases in this particular case very significant biases yeah i um so i started building lebrusks for its own merits i at first i wasn't aware of yik yak but as i started to talk to people about this platform i was building i i was made aware of the yik yak and i built it from day one with a lot of the issues yik yak had in mind the so as you said the one difference between yik yak is the geographical versus community based aspect going along with that one thing i realized by researching social media sites is that the majority of the negative content the content that's terrible and breaking all the rules is created by really and the people who are not reformable so to speak the people who are not showing the best part of the human experience yeah um it's a really small minority right yeah i remember i was listening to the founder of for cham moot talk about this how like one guy was able to basically destroy like large swaths of his community yeah that's part of what makes it exciting for that minority is how much power they can have so if you're predisposed to think in this way it's exciting that you can walk into like where i mentioned the party before you have a party of a lot of positive people and it feels especially if you don't have much power in this world it feels exceptionally empowering to just to to uh to destroy like the lives of many and if you think this way it's a problem but i i i i i'm hopeful that you're right that in most cases it's going to be a minority of people i think it is and that's what the researchers showed and one really powerful thing is that we can really actively control who comes in and out of our community based on the dot edu verification and we can also control who's not in our community because we have that lever where each account is associated with a dot edu um sets the first point out point out point out there second point is controlled expansion meaning that we've community moderation we have this panel that allows the moderators to see all of the highly downloaded content content all of the reported content all the flagged content and look through it and decide what they like and what's appropriate and what's not appropriate and we have um we ping every moderator when there's a report so things are taking down pretty quickly and we have our standards and we have i think above all of that we have a mission and it's a community based mission yukik was more of a fun app and by its own admission it was a place where people couldn't enjoy themselves and could sort of yack yack yack you know chit chat um we have a we have a bigger purpose than that frankly and i think i think that shows and the people who self select be on that app to be on lebrex and to be on yukik respectively the last thing i'll say is yukik was very few characters it was a twitter-esque platform and that doesn't allow for a tremendous amount of nuance it doesn't allow for a tremendous amount of conversation um lebrex is much more long form and so the kind of um post that you'll get on lebrex are can spam pages they're like what people are starting to realize is that they can reach a lot more people at a lot more pertinent of a time a lot more quickly by posting their thoughts on lebrex than if they went to their school newspaper and i think the school in those papers might be a little worried about that but more importantly we're connecting people in this way we're long form communication with nuance that takes into account everything that's happening in the community temporally is really available at lebrex and you know not really communicable in 240 or 480 or whatever the number of characters the acts were um bound to and then you know i could talk about the history of yukik if you want me to go further um they started i think they were at 12 schools and then spring break it people told their friends look at this app a thousand schools signed up and we had active communities they had a problem on their hands and then the high schools come on board yeah i think a lot of the things you said uh ring true to me but especially the vision one which i do think uh having a vision in the leadership having a mission makes all the difference in the world now that that's both for the engineers that are building like the team that's building the app the moderation and uh users because they kind of the mission carries itself uh through the behavior of the of the people on the social network as a small tangent let me ask you something about um parlor but it's less about parlor more about AWS so AWS removed parlor from his platform you know for whatever reasons doesn't really matter but the fact that AWS would do this was really really bothered me personally because um i saw AWS as the computing infrastructure and i always thought that part could not put a finger on its scale and i don't know what your thoughts are like were you bothered by uh parlor being removed from AWS and how does that affect how you think about the computing infrastructure on which uh Librex is based i was bothered not so much by parlor specifically being taken out of AWS but more the fact that something that's like a highway something that people rely on that people build on top of that people assume it's going to be somewhat position agnostic um like a road that people drive on is is becoming ideologically sort of discriminatory i just and of course mind you amazon can do what it wants it's a private company and i support the rights of private companies i just on an ethical and sort of a deep moral level i wonder like at what point should a company sort of be agnostic in that in that regard and let developers build on top of their infrastructure and where where does that responsibility hold yes it makes you uh hope that there's going to be from a capitalist sense competitors to AWS would say like we're not going to put our finger on the scale i mean on the highway highway is a good sort of example it's like if i privately owned highway exactly said uh you know we're no longer going to allow we're only going to allow electric vehicles and a bunch of people in this world would be like yes because electric is good for the environment and uh you know yes but then you have to consider the like the slippery slope nature of it but also like the negative impact on the lives of many others and what that means for innovation and for like competition again in the capitalistic sense so there's some nature there's some level to this hierarchy of our existence that we should not allow to manipulate what's built on top of it it should be truly infrastructure and it feels like compute is uh storage and compute is the that layer like it shouldn't be messed with um i haven't seen anybody really complain about it like in terms of government and i'm not even sure government is the right mechanism to policy and regulation to step in because again they do a messy job of fixing things but i do hope there's competitors to AWS to make a AWS and step up because i do think you know i'm a fan of AWS except this it's a good service i'd tell this so yeah until they rip out the the rug and the point is it's not necessarily their decision was a bad one with parlor in particular it's that like the the slippery slope nature of it but also the it takes the good actors that are creating amazing products it makes them more fearful and when you're more fearful it's the same reason that anonymity is a tool that you don't create the best thing you could possibly create when you're fearful you don't create i think we kind of talked about it a little bit but i wonder if it can kind of revisit it a little bit um i talked to a guy named Ronald Solven who was a faculty at Harvard law professor he was on a legal defense team he was the lawyer for Harvey Weinstein and Aaron Hernandez for the double murder case so he takes on these really difficult cases on unpopular figures because he believes like that's the way you test that we believe in the rule of law but he was there's a big protest in Harvard to get him uh basically censor him and uh to get him to no longer be faculty dean all those kinds of things and uh it was by a minority of students but uh it was a huge blowback obviously in the public but also inside Harvard like that's not okay he stands for the very principles that the founding of Harvard and at the principles of the founding of this country and the law and so so on but the the basic argument is that is was about safe spaces that it's unsafe to have somebody who is basically supporting Harvey Weinstein right um what do you think about this whole idea of safe spaces uh on college campuses because it feels like the the mission of Lieberks is pushing back against the idea of safe spaces i think safe spaces are fine when they're within people's private lives within their homes you know within their religious organizations think the problem becomes when the institution starts encouraging or um backing safe spaces because what are people being safe from and oftentimes it seems like there's this idea that the harm that's being attempted to be mitigated is the harm of confronting opinions you disagree with opinions you might find repugnant right and if this is conflated with a need for safety then that's where the idea of liberal arts education sort of dies um of course it's complicated and we still want to have safe intellectual environments but the way that i hear the term safe space used today i think it doesn't really have a place within like the intellectual context yeah it's funny i mean this is why Lieberks is really exciting is it's pushing those difficult conversations and i'd love to see ultimately there does seem to be an asymmetry of power that results in the concept of safe spaces and hate speech being redefined in the slippery slope kind of way where it means basically anything you wanted to mean and uh it basically is used to silence people to silence people they're like good thoughtful experts also beyond that i would say it has not just a pragmatic purpose which is the silencing but also sort of an ideological purpose which is an linguistic purpose which is to conflate words with unsafety and harm and violence which is what you kind of see on a cultural linguistic level happening all around us right now is that this idea that words are harmed is very dangerous and slippery concept i mean it's not you don't have to slip that far to see why that's a problem once we start from making words into violence and we start criminalizing words we get into some really authoritarian territory things that i think i mean myself and my background i don't know how much we have to go into it but uh things in my that my ancestors certainly would be worried about what's your background um a child of Holocaust survivors and program survivors so yeah i mean me as well from different directions i'll come from the Soviet Union so there's uh while like in most of us hate and love runs through our blood from our history you mentioned MIT is being at a telebricks has it already been added yes it was added um today today okay so let me ask this is exciting because um i don't know what your thoughts are about this but i'll tell you from my perspective if you're in a lot of MIT folks listen to this i would love it if you join Lieberks it'd be interesting to explore conversations on several topics inside MIT but one of the most most moving that hasn't been discussed at all except in little flourishes here and there is the topic of Jeffrey Epstein now there's been a huge amount of like impact that uh the connections of various faculty to Jeffrey Epstein and the various things that been said had on MIT but it feels like the difficult conversation haven't had been had it's the administration trying to clean up and give a bunch of BS to try to pretend like let's just hide this part like nothing is broken nothing to see here here's a bad dude that did some bad things and uh some faculty that kind of uh misbehaved a little bit because they're a little bit clueless that's what let's all look the other way harvard did this much better by the way they completely it's almost like people pretend like harvard didn't have anything to do with Jeffrey Epstein but i think i'd be curious to to hear what those conversations are because uh there's conversations in the topic of like well obviously sort of sexual assault and disrespecting women on any kind of level within academia but just women in general that's an important topic to talk about various many sets of different conversations and the other topic is uh you know funding uh for research like how are like what are we okay taking money from and what are we not okay taking money from you know a lot there's a lot of just interesting difficult conversations to be had of uh working with people who will you know refuse to take money from dod department of defense for example because in some indirect or direct way you're funding military industrial complex all those kinds of things i think what you're if you have seen it's even more stark this contrast of like well what is and isn't ethical to take money from and i just think forget academia i think there's just a lot of interesting deep human discussions to be had and they haven't been and there's been somebody uh i don't know if you're familiar with Eric Weinstein who has been outraged by the fact that nobody's talking about Jeffrey Epstein nobody's having these difficult conversations and Eric himself has had sort of complicated journey through academia uh in the sense that he's a really kind of renegade thinker many kinds of ways i'm not sure if you know who erica's my name's heard the name okay actually uh checked out zav it was heartening for me to see that i was not the youngest person on the street on the five guys second youngest second youngest that's hilarious uh uh uh but uh but but eric has he's kind of a renegade thinker he's a uh mathematical physicist uh with a believe a PhD in Harvard and he spends some time at MIT and so on but he he speaks to the fact that sort of there's a culture of conformity and so on and if you if you're somebody who's a bit outside the box a bit weird and whatever dimensional weird that makes you actually kind of interesting that the system kind of wants to make your not cast wants to throw you out and so he kind of opposes that whole idea so he's the perfect person to have conversations with in this kind of liberate kind of context of uh and an enmity because um i'll tell you the few conversations that came across and there were very quickly silenced and i'm troubled by it i'm not sure what to think of it is there's a few uh threads inside MIT like on a mailing list discussing uh marvin minnski i don't know if you know that is he's an AI researcher he's a summit figure in AI before your time but one of the most important people in art in the history of artificial intelligence and uh there was a discussion on a on a on a thread that involved uh the interaction between marvin minnski and jeffrey upstein that conversation was quickly shut down uh one person was pushed out of MIT richer stahlman who was one of the key figures in the because of that because he wanted some clarity about the situation but he also miss he spoke like we were mentioned earlier without grace right but he was quickly punished with administration uh because of a few people protesting and just that conversation uh i guess what bothered me most is it didn't continue it didn't it didn't expand there was no like complexity and and it was there's a hunger that was clear behind that conversation especially so sort of for me i'd like to understand marvin minnski was one of the one of the reasons i wanted to come to MIT uh he's he's passed away but he's one of the key figures in the field that i deeply care about art artificial intelligence and uh i thought that his name was dragged to the mud uh through that situation and without ever being like resolved and so it's unclear to me like what am I supposed to think about all this and and the only way to come to a conclusion there is to keep talking it's like the thing we started this conversation with about truth is like it is conversation so in that sense i'd love uh if people on leobrex perhaps in other places but it seems like leobrex is a nice platform to discuss marvin minnski to discuss japhie abstain to learn from it to grow from it to see how we can make MIT better as uh i'm still one of the people i've always dreamed of being at MIT and it was a dream come true in many ways and i still believe that MIT is one of the most special places in this world like many other universities universities in general is truly special man i you know it hurts my heart when people speak poorly of academia i understand what they mean uh they're very correct but there is much more in my opinion that's beautiful about academia than that's broken i mean i don't know uh you have something to comment either it doesn't have to be a bodge japhie abstain but there's these difficult things that come up that test the academic community right that it feels like conversation is the only way to resolve it i think people have a natural need for closure and it's not just i i'm not as plugged into the what academics are talking about as you would be like but i even over these days no respect for minnski exactly i mean especially in the i i commune in the i'm not not necessarily a programmer um but what i will say is that um people come to lee brex and we always see a huge spike in users whenever there's like a tragedy on campus or something where people need closure um recently there was a suicide just the other day um on yelts campus and people were just coming to pay respects and to stay rest in peace and speak also about what might have led to an environment where people are drawn to these terrible results um so just having a conversation is important there is it like it's a little need people need the space especially when no one wants to go out and put their head above you know be the longest blade of grass on that one yeah because of the stigma yeah people need to be able to speak yeah that fear really bothers me the fear that silences people like were they self-sensor were they self-silence well um you've created an amazing place i i'm kind of interested in your struggle and your journey of creating positive incentives because uh it's a problem in a very different domain that i'm also interested in um so i you know i love robotics i love human robot interaction and so i believe that most people are good and we can bring out the best in human nature social networks is a very tricky space to do that in so i'm glad you're taking on the problem and i'm glad you have the mission that you do i hope you succeed but uh you mentioned offline that you used to be into chess tell me about your journey through chess sure i was a very competitive tournament player growing up till about like 13 i got for the chess fans i got through on two thousand um uscf so i was a competitive player especially my age group and um that actually led me to poker i was um i was playing a tournament and what happens is when you're like a very strong 13 year old and you're playing locally if you want a good match you're gonna end up playing a lot of adults and i ended up playing this um mid 40 sky who we played a really strong game he actually beat me i still i still remember the game and and think oh i could i should have played that move into that one but after after the game we had a post-mortem it was this me i think i'll 13 at the time in this 40 year old like hanging over this chess board and looking over the moves and even at that even at my age it occurred to me that this guy was absolutely brilliant yes and after after the post-mortem not only by the way in chess but just like in the way he articulates his thoughts as some people are um after the post-mortem i went and looked him up online and i found out that he was a world star's poker champion and his name is bill Chan oh wow and i haven't really kept up with him except one time there was another chess tournament when i was around 14 and i followed him into an elevator as he was leaving the chess hall like pretending that i was gonna go up just because i wanted to i just wanted to talk to him and i suggested a sequel or some changes that he could that i thought he'd be because you make first book and he was like actually i was thinking of doing the same thing which was incredibly validating to my 14 year old or 15 year old self um but i really haven't kept up with him so just shout out to him but and then that he wrote a book called the mathematics of poker at that i started reading and that first of all kickstart my interesting game theory and second of all in poker um so i started from chess and then poker and i started with bitcoin poker and had a lot of success with that met a lot of amazing friends um learned a ton about i mean i think about entrepreneurship as well as taking risks reasonable risks positive expected value risks and um also just growing as a person and mathematician and what did you say big coin poker yeah what's big coin poker so you have to understand i was 14 years old right yes so how is a 14 year old with wonderful parents who care about him yeah and probably don't want him playing poker yeah um going to start playing poker because i wanted i wanted to challenge i love the challenge i love the competition and i realized the answer is probably big coin because the implications of that and uh they had they had these uh free roll tournaments which for those of you don't know what free rolls are there's these promotional tournaments that sites put on where they'll put like a few dollars in and then thousands of people sign up and the winners get like a dollar and i started there and i worked my way up and that's amazing what's your sense about from that time to today of the growth of the cryptocurrency community i'm actually having like four or five conversation with bitcoin proponents bitcoin maximalist and like all these i'm just having all these cryptocurrency conversations currently because there's so many brilliant like technically brilliant but also financially and philosophically brilliant people in those communities it's fascinating with the explosion of impact like and also if you look into the future the possible revolutionary impact on society in general but what's your sense about this whole growth of bitcoin i'm definitely less knowledgeable on the currency again like programming it was a means to an end yes right at it what i will say is that there was this amazing community that grew out of it and you'd have people who were willing to stake me or have me be their horse and they're my backer for having never met me for literally full bitcoin tournaments like full bitcoin entry fee tournaments and i get a percentage of the profits and they get a percentage and to have that level of community for that degree of money i mean it gives you hope about the potential for you know humans to act in mutual best interest with a degree of trust yeah there's a really fascinating strong community there but speaking of like bringing out the best of human nature it's a community that's currently struggling a little bit uh in terms of their ability to communicate in a positive inspiring way like the bitcoin folks and we talk about this a lot they um i honestly think they have a lot a lot of love in their hearts and minds but they just kind of naturally because the world has been like institutions and the centralized powers have been sort of mocking and uh fighting them for many years that they've become sort of worn down and cynical and so they tend to be a little bit more aggressive and negative on the internet in the way they communicate especially on twitter and it's just created this whole community of basically being aggressive and mocking and trolling and all this kind of stuff yeah but people are trying to you know as the as the big little community grows as the cryptocrons of community grows they're trying to revolutionize that aspect too so they're trying to find the positive core and grow uh and grow in that way so it's it's fascinating because I think all of us are trying to find the positive aspects of ourselves and trying to learn how to communicate in a positive landline it's like the internet has been around social networks haven't been around a long way trying to we're trying to figure this thing out let me ask you the ridiculous question uh i don't know if you have an answer but who is the greatest chess player of all time in your view so since you like chess you tell them how you define it but if you're talking about raw skill like if you put everyone across time into a tournament together yeah um Carlson would win i don't think that's particularly controversial oh you mean like with the same exact skill level exact man is Carlson okay is the object now if you talk about political importance i think Bobby Fisher is uh you know he's uh he's the only one that people still we used to go to someone on the street they know Bobby Fisher because he was because what he represented right who do you think is more famous on the street uh garrick a sparrow or bobby Fisher Bobby fit in America but Fisher think so yes that's interesting i think we're gonna have to put that to the test yeah maybe it's maybe it's more reflective of the community that i was a part of but yeah also in the community you're part of like young minds playing chess Bobby Fisher was a superstar for in terms of like the roots so because he's American and you know he stood up against the big bad Russians yes at the time and uh you know unfortunately he had a very bad downfall but um what you know for our geopolitical situation he meant a lot and then if you talk about compared to contemporaries actually i would say paumorphi was a bit of a throwback was he's one of those geniuses that uh was just head and shoulders above everyone else is there somebody that inspired your own play like as a young mind yeah i really like mckelthal so like you see you were and i think it was very aggressive right yeah very tactical yeah um which is funny because i um i found that i was better at like sort of slow methodical play than quick tactics but i just i mean there's something beautiful about the creativity and that's something i always latched on to is being a creative player being a creative person i mean chess doesn't really reward creativity as much as a lot of other things especially entrepreneurial pursuits um which i think is part of the reason why i sort of grew out of it but i always was attracted to the creativity that i did see in chess so let me ask the flip the uh the other because he said poker is there somebody that stands out to could be the greatest poker player of all time i could you uh admire that's in that and that's a more controversial one because these chess players are such like first of all there's more an objective object of standard and second of all there's like they're like almost like cultural figures to me whereas poker players are more like live living they feel more like yeah they feel more accessible but they also have like personalities yeah poker have like philite their vices their forces their quirks their humor like we i guess we've seen videos of them yeah because it's such a recent development i say one person who i admire so much and like if i if i could like have a dinner list of people that i want to have to air with like maybe it'll happen now actually well i would love to have dinner with him um philite galfont um wow who i don't most people probably won't know yeah but uh on this podcast but the way first of all he democratized poker learning in like the mathematical nitty gritty how do you get good at poker type sense to the entire world and like an unprecedented way he was he gave he had this gift that he had learned and distilled by working with some of the greatest poker minds and he just democratized it um through his website and um i learned a ton from him and not only that but you just listen to him think and it's almost like a philosophical meditation the way that he breaks things down and thinks about these different elements and has such a holistic thought process it's like watching a genius work and you know he's also just a nice fun sociable guy that like you can you can imagine being at your table yeah all that combined which is not true for a lot of poker players right uh them are dark to say the least yes i like i really like the what is he canadian day on the grano he's also a nice guy he's also nice guy but he's also somebody who's able to express his thoughts about poker really well but also an entertaining way he seems to be able to predict cards better than anybody ever seen like what do you watch the challenge with challenge he uh he lost like a million dollars recently to uh duck poke he lost a million dollars to duck poke heads up online it's really interesting yeah it's it's awesome to watch these guys work so i know you're twenty twenty one twenty one uh so asking you for advice is uh is a little bit funny but uh but at the same time not because you've created a social network you've created a startup from nothing is what talked about earlier like without knowing how to program you've programmed i mean you've taken this whole journey that a lot of people i think would be really inspired by so given that uh and given the fact that twenty years from now you probably laugh at the advice you're gonna give now absolutely i hope so if i don't laugh at the advice i give now something went desperately wrong right yeah uh so do you have advice for people uh that want to follow footsteps and create a startup whether it's in the software app domain or whether it's anything else so i'll speak specifically about social media apps yes um try to give it as narrow as possible so i can laugh as little as possible when i'm forty one um and what i would say is that if you're like a twenty one twenty two year old who's looking at me and being like i want to do something like this um what i would say is you probably know better than just about anyone and if you have a feeling in yourself that this is something that i have to do and this is something i could imagine myself doing for the next ten years because if you're successful you are gonna have to do it for the next ten years and through the ups and the downs through the amazing interviews with Lex and through the not so amazing articles you might have with other people right um and you're gonna have to ride those highs and lows and you're you have to believe in what you're doing but if you have that feeling what i would say is listen to as few people as possible because people are experts in in domains but when it comes to like what's hot and what's what what makes sense in a social context you are the authority as a young person who's going through these things and living in in your sort of milieu and i mean i've talked to at this point you know so many experts experts so many investors bcs um so you're saying you've been amazed at the advice i've gotten advice i've gotten so there's like a minefield of bad advice that's the hardest part i think for young people ends when people like i help i help yelis all the time who asks like i never turned down when a founder asked me to have a conversation i never turned it down i'm always there for them um and the number one thing i worry about is that at yell were taught implicitly and explicitly that you listen to the adult in the room you listen to the person with the highest you know pay grade and it's devastating because that's how innovation dies and you know yeah it's intimidating too like you talk that vc who probably made worth a billion dollars yeah billion dollars and they're going to tell you you know all the all the successful startups they helped funders or even just a successful business owner uh it's going to tell you some advice and it's hard psychologically to think that they might be wrong yeah but you're saying that's the only way you succeed the only way you yourself because if they knew what they were doing they would have built it themselves um and what's especially hard is people go oh of course you know i'll listen to the people's i'll listen to their advice but i'll know why it's wrong yeah and then i'll and i'll do my own thing and that sounds greatly abstract but sometimes you can't always even put your finger on why they're wrong yeah and i think to have the conviction to say you're wrong and i can't tell you why but i still think i'm right it's a rare thing especially at like it's very counterintuitive and you might even say it's hubris or yeah arrogant but i think it's necessary because a lot of these things are they're not things that you can really put into words until you see them in action like a lot of them are kind of happy accidents yeah it's been it's been tough for me like as a as a person who like i'm very empathetic so when people tell me stuff i kind of want to understand them and it's been a painful process especially people close to me basically everything i've done especially in the recent few years a lot of people close to me said not to do you know and like my parents too that's been a hard one is it's basically acknowledged to myself that you don't know like you don't that everything you're going to say by way of advice for me is not going to be helpful like i love my parents very much but like they're just like they don't get it and as you put it beautifully it's very difficult to put your finger on exactly why because a lot of advice sounds reasonable that's the worst kind yeah if it if it sounds really good that just means it's an earworm like that's like a song that you hear on the radio and then you're like mm-hmm you're humming it in the car and it's like it's the same thing the more the better it sounds the more skeptical yeah reason is a bad drug like should be very careful because like you know the things that seem impossible every every major innovation every major business seems impossible at birth but even not just the impossible things i think you know you look at like love for example it's very easy to give advice to sort of point out all the ways you can go wrong or marriage all the divorces that people go through all the pain of years that you go through the divorce like the system of marriage the marriage industrial complex all the money that's wasted all those kinds of things but that advice is useless when you're in love the point uh the point is just pat the person in the back and say go get him kid like uh what is it uh goodwill hunting and went to see about a girl uh yeah that's a good movie i love them but yeah that that's uh that took me a long time to figure out i'm still trying to fight through it but especially when you're young that's hard but uh nothing in life is uh worth a accomplishing is easy so but i think it's really interesting you make that connection between like startup advice and like your parents because it's the exact same sort of mechanism where when you're young your parents are usually like right yeah right and the experts are usually right and you know if you listen to them and you you you follow their orders you're gonna go to a school like Yale yeah and at a certain point stops making sense and i've i've seen my friends at Yale go down paths because they just continued listening to their parents that i know in their heart of hearts is not the right path for them yeah you know what that's how i see that the education system the whole point is to guide you to a certain point in your life and everybody's point is different and your task is to at that point to have a personal revolution and create your own path but no one tells you that you know nobody tells you that because they're they want you to keep following the same path as they they're leading you towards like they're not going to say your whole job is to eventually rebel yeah that's how revolution that's how rebellion works you're not supposed to be told but that is the task they can take you just like you said and depending who you are they can take you really far but at a certain point you have to rebel that could be getting you know some of that could be in your undergrad that could be high school yeah to be at any point one thing that i think played a pretty pivotal role and i've never really mentioned this um he might not even know the person about to tell you about um in sort of me actually going out and making Liebregs was that taking this graduate level math class um i think my sophomore year and i met this uh i met this uh phd student who is also in it and had considerable citations and also startup experience and i think he actually ends up being the ct of a unicorn later on um i've sort of lost touch with him but we're still Facebook friends as it is in the 21st century right um so and i was in a class and i was telling him i really want to i really want to make this thing but i have no technical background um and he disguised computer genius he worked under dance belman a a a y all so he's a good guy right and we were doing some math together um we were doing something on discrepancy uh for those of you who really care about math uh so commentatorics um and uh he just turns to me he's like i think you could do it like what do you mean i you think i could do he's like i think you could do it yeah i was like really but i respected this guy so much um his name was young duck um shout out to young duck i respected this guy so much that i was like if young duck says i can do it and young duck is little jit genius and he knows and he knows me because we we were in two classes together and we spent a lot of time together if he thinks i can do it then who might i say i can't do it yeah you know that's a lesson for mentorship is like oh he has no idea probably well he might not even remember that interaction which is funny but the the point is that when a crazy young kid comes up to you with a crazy dream uh you know every once in a while you should just pat him on the back and say i believe in you like he can do it if they look up to you that means your awards have power and if you say no no come on be like reasonable like you know uh finish your schoolwork kind of thing like that's that's unreasonable to take that leap now just finish your education blah blah blah whatever whatever the reasonable advice is every once in a while maybe often as a mentor you should say you know go see about a girl in in California or whatever the equal one this was my moment that was my good will hunting for like your good will hunting moment um man i miss robin Williams i was a special guy okay people love it uh when i ask about book recommendations in general of course your journey is just beginning but is there something that jumps out to you technical fiction philosophical sci-fi coloring books blog posts you read somewhere that had an impact on your life uh video games video just uh you recommend to others minecraft manual manga i mean yeah video you can mention video games too if there's something that jumps out to you that just i'd like an impact um i guess i'll say i really like the book the the word of art um which is a book about creative resistance and the creative struggle and what it means to be creative um and part of what i see in this conversation and what you're doing Lex is so much of the word of art's idea is that you just keep writing and writing and writing until you get to the new crap yeah yeah and yeah just you just you just roll with it right and that's sort of what happens when you have like three hour conversations with people is you can only have so much scripted or societally constructed stuff until you get to the real you and you have to show up i mean he's that book that book is kind of painful it's really painful and it's not something i'd recommend for every part of it but for what it did in my life at the time it also kind of normalized i don't know um i part of my coming of age story is part of it's about realizing that i'm a creative person and person who needs to create um that's sort of god-given thing i think for a lot of people but it's something that i don't really feel like i can live without and part of it was realizing that even within some of these more rigid structures it's okay that i don't sort of fit in with them and to hear about the struggles of other creatives was something for my own self-esteem and my own growing up that was really important to me so i don't think the book itself might be perfect but for what it did for my life it was really impactful yeah i think exactly the words may not be uh exactly right by way of advice but i think the journey that a lot of creatives take by reading that book is uh kind of profound he also is another one called turning pro i think i mean he in general espouse is like taking it seriously like uh if you have a creative mind and you want to create something special in this world go do it it's not don't you know show up and so many people so many people would like tell me like would encourage me either blatantly or through like implicit means to like basically take the app less seriously it's a good signal by the way um it's a good signal because my really close friends the ones who have always supported me i then ever said that because they got it they understood that was that that was my path and there might be skeptical they might be like i mean one of my friends i remember told me like i was always like taking a back about why you were so certain this would work out and he's like i finally got it like once i saw it like popping off but like before that i just didn't get it but like he still supported me and i think i think it's a really good signal and actually just the fact of going through this process has made me socially feel so much more connected and i've somewhat consolidated my social life to some degree but it's so much more vulnerable connected and that's part of the creative process i have to thank for that i there's something that's like unstoppable about the creative mind it's like it's right there that fire and i guess part of the part of the thing that you're supposed to do is let that fire burn in whichever direction it's gonna hurt it's gonna hurt fire will hurt but on top of a video game she's a master Stanley parable offline is there a you said you placed some video games is there a video game that you especially love do you recommend i play for example yeah i'll uh i'll mention it's actually really in keeping with what we've been talking about it's the beginner's guide which is what i it was made by the same guy davie rangen who made the Stanley parable which i i briefly saw you i i just clicked the video and then i want to sleep it was two a.m. and then um but i briefly saw that you were looking at um and it's the it's a game that is better treated as art and i think um i won't claim to understand the creator because that would be a cardinal sin to me of uh as a creative person but uh it gets still the heart of a lot of the things that we've been uh that we've been talking about which is the creative mind um the game can be interpreting a lot of ways in a feminist way it could be interpreted as story of friends it could be interpreted as um the story of critics versus a creative the way i like to interpret it and i don't want to give out a way too much um is the story of the creative part of your mind that creates just for the sake of creating meaning the part that creates for no rhyme or reason or clear meaning so almost it's almost a theory uh versus the part that's you could call it the editor you could call it the pragmatist you could call it the necessary force of ego in our in our lives we can't totally be egoless right but we need to be egoless to be creative and how that sort of internal censure what role does it play and how do we allow our creative minds to be creative and yet how we still become useful because um and it's funny that a video game right could have this in fascinating tension which reminds me about the dickiest question every once in a while ask about meaning and death so this this whole this whole right ends you're at the beginning of the right but it could end any day actually that's kind of the way human life works you could die today you could die tomorrow uh do you think about your immortality do you think about death do you meditate on it and in that context as the creative but a a pragmatist too as running a startup uh what do you think is the meaning of this whole thing yeah so on mortality right um um about about three years ago four years ago now I was excited to go to yell I was playing six hours of squash a day which squashes the sport I love so much and I was really getting a lot better and I was even thinking I could maybe walk on to the yell team um and uh I woke up one day I felt really really sick I went and I decided not to go squash that day and I know um I wanted to I almost did um and you'll see how the story turns out you'll decide if I made the right choice I decided not to go squash today and I decided to get my driver's license uh where I had to get my driver's license except wanted to get driver's license before I you know it's just how young I am before I went off to college because otherwise I might never get it um and I'm going back and I successfully got my driver's license brashem and I come back to uh I come back to my house and I decided I don't want to drive back because I just feel so sick like things are spinning I have the worst headache I go home I run back right into my bed and feeling really sick to the point where I even like ask my mom who is the doctor I'm like should I should I go to the hospital and she's like you can just wait it out I'm sure you'll go better you're out young now like your mom yeah um and then you know and then at one point I look at my arms and they're like covered in this like red splotchy stuff uh yeah and I'm like well I think and she's like yeah we have to go um and so I go there and they're like you've scarlet fever and uh they're like there's nothing we can do you should probably just go back home so I go back home six hours later I wake up in the morning they'd let me out of like three a.m. they'll let me I come home in the morning and I feel this like a spear through my chest and I never felt anything like it and I was it was very disconcerting when you have a because we're all used to difference for some pain right and that was sort of pain out never felt before as opposed to an athlete you're used to like you know pain um so I tell my parents and immediately we hop back in the car we go to the same hospital as that six hours ago and they initially didn't want to let me in and I was like I have chest pain they're like oh come in because they're like you're a healthy guy wait your time I'm like no you don't understand I have like a pain in my chest and then they let me in they start doing tests on me they like put something like in my back which is really scarce huge needle and I'm smiling because it's like one of the ways I reduce stress I guess or deal with this sort of thing and make light of it but like know that you know it's definitely very scary in the moment shocking and scary and they go when they they do a bunch of tests and they determine that a virus like attacked my heart and I had my accreditis and pericarditis and I said I had maybe 25 to 35 percent chance at one point of dying and so I'm sitting in my I they they've made me into hospital I'm in the bed in my bed for about three weeks um and I'm just I'm just standing there and I had this moment also that I remember very specifically where I was in so much pain that like I was crying not out of like emotional standpoint but actually just purely out of the pain itself like I could feel my heart in my chest and when I leaned back I felt it touched my ribcage and feel horrible so I couldn't go to sleep and lean back I had to lean forward to all throughout the night right and I'm feeling my and I'm feeling my chest I'm feeling this terrible pain in my chest I'm crying unstoppable and I mean also maybe I should mention that at the time I was someone who'd like refused to take in anything into my body that wasn't natural and so a lot of the time I I tried to be unmedicated um eventually I didn't allow them to add a little medication to my body but there's just so much uncertainty and pain and the first time I had to come to terms with mortality uh first of all I think you still should have gone play squash I mean come on I thought you're I thought you're serious about this you still carry that with you sort of the there is power to realizing the ride can end right in very suddenly very suddenly yeah and painfully and you know it has pragmatic application to like what you to trajectories you take the life right something else that is worth noting is that I for the next year couldn't walk to my classes so I get to yell they put me in a medical single alone and I have to get shuttled to all my classes I have to ask I had to ask a few professors to even move classes so I could actually get there um I can't move my book I can't lift my book bags I can't I can't walk upstairs um I spent like 12 hours a day in my dorm room just like staring at the walls and more so and more than that all this like you I got to watch my body like deteriorate and like the muscle like fall off of it because I was I was taking these pills and they're kind of catabolic um and for an 18 year old I mean I think every 18 year old has feelings about their body um man or woman and you know just seeing this it's like you're watching sort of dress death transpire and you're also very fatigued because your heart's not at peak condition and you're thinking about the future and a lot of the things you enjoy have kind of been stripped away from you and I um I took up a meditation practice like started with like five minutes a day um at my peak I was at like 40 minutes a day kept it up consistently for about two years um and I started thinking about like what do I want to do and like what do I care about and to get to your point I think you're asking like how does this carry forward try I think I realized that you know there's an end and I realized that there are things I believe and things that I believe that might not be so overtly popular but that I truly think make the world a better place and in spite of and it basically if my conditions provided I wanted to make something that I wanted to do something that would make me feel sort of whole in that way yeah I mean that's an amazing journey to take that time and to come out on the other end now man that's amazing I did not realize like that there was a long-term struggle I think that's in the end if you do succeed will have a profound positive impact because struggles ultimately like humbling but also empowering so I'm glad to see that but from the perspective of the creator of the other ridiculous question about meaning do you think about this kind of stuff um is that uh the you know the the meaning of life for you the meaning of life for us to send this evapes in general the first thing I'd like to say is that I think part of like when we talk about the meaning of life the part of it is the fact that we get to struggle with this question we get to do it together for a long time and we sometimes I think it's accepting that there's no meaning at all and sometimes I think it's accepting that or even just parsing the phrase and thinking about the meaning of life I sometimes I'm looking very young um again I hope that anything I say now is going to be um very different in the future because I think meaning uh life has so many meanings that it'll be crazy to see what I think in 20 years about the meaning of life and rise from the future cut them some slack please do um perspective perspective perspective having said that you know I think part of what brings meaning to my life is things like this where we think about these things with people who are really really really on the ball and we get to connect with these people that certainly brings meaning to my life human connection yeah this conversation is is just another like echo of the thing you're trying to create in the digital space right yeah that's the same kind of magic from from what I understand about what you're trying to create is the same reason I fell in love with the long form podcast thing like as a fan that's what I listened to long form podcast is there something deeply human and genuine about the the interchange through the voice but I do think that connection through text can be even more powerful like I think about letters I still write letters to Russia you know there's something powerful in letters when you when you put a lot of yourself in the words you say in the words you write that's powerful you can really communicate not just the actual semantic meaning of of the words but like a lot of who you are through those words and create real connection so I hope you succeed there and listen Ryan I think this is an incredible conversation I'm glad that people like you are fighting the good fight for bringing out the best in human nature in the digital space I think that's a battleground where the good will win like love will win and I'm glad you're creating technology that does just that so thank you so much for wasting all your time for coming down I can't wait to see what you're doing the future thanks for talking today thank you for having me bam bam how many fingers have you gotten at the end of podcast zero thanks for listening to this conversation with Ryan Schiller and thank you to all our sponsors all form magic spoon better help and brave click their links to support this podcast and now let me leave you with some words from George Washington on March 15th 1783 If freedom of speech is taken away, then dumb and silent we may be led like sheep to the slaughter. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.