The following is a conversation with Eric Weinstein, the second time we've spoken on this podcast. He's a mathematician with a bold and piercing intelligence, unafraid to explore the biggest questions in the universe and shine a light on the darkest corners of our society. He's the host of the portal podcast, a part of which he recently released his 2013 Oxford lecture on the Stereogeometric Unity. That is at the center of his lifelong efforts to arrive at a theory of everything that unifies the fundamental laws of physics. This conversation was recorded recently in the time of the coronavirus pandemic. For everyone feeling the medical, psychological, and financial burden of this crisis, I'm sending love your way. Stay strong, we're in this together. We'll beat this thing. This is the Artificial Intelligence Podcast. If you enjoy it, subscribe on YouTube, review it with five stars and Apple podcasts supporting on Patreon or simply connect with me on Twitter, Alex Friedman spelled F-R-I-D-M-A-N. This show is presented by CashApp. The number one finance app in the App Store. When you get it, use code Lex Podcast. CashApp lets you see my new friends by Bitcoin investing the stock market with as little as $1. Since CashApp does fractional share trading, let me mention that the order execution algorithm that works behind the scenes to create the abstraction of the fractional orders is an algorithmic marvel. So big props to the CashApp engineers for solving a hard problem. Then the end provides an easy interface that takes a step up to the next layer of abstraction of the stock market, making trading more accessible to new investors and diversification much easier. So again, if you get CashApp from the App Store Google Play and use code Lex Podcast, you get $10 and CashApp will also donate $10 to first an organization that is helping to advance robotics and STEM education for young people around the world. And now here's my conversation with Eric Weinstein. Do you see a connection between World War 2 and the crisis we're living through right now? Sure. The need for collective action, reminding ourselves of the fact that all of these abstractions, like everyone should just do exactly what he or she wants to do for himself and leave everyone else alone, none of these abstractions work in a global crisis. And this is just a reminder that we didn't somehow put all that behind us. When I hear stories about my grandfather who was in the army and so the Soviet Union were most people die when you're in the army. There's a brotherhood that happens, there's a love that happens. Do you think that's something we're going to see here? Sense of view. We're not there. I mean, what the Soviet Union went through. I mean, the enormity of the war on the Russian doorstep, this is different. What we're going through now is not, we can't talk about Stalin, Gregg and COVID in the same breath yet. We're not ready. And the sort of, the sense of the great patriotic war and the way in which I was very moved by the Soviet custom of newlyweds going and visiting war memorials on their wedding day. It's like the happiest day of your life. You have to say, thank you to the people who made it possible. We're not there. We're just restarting history. I've called this on the Roman program. I called it the Great NAP, the 75 years with very little, by historical standards in terms of really profound disruption. And so when you call it the Great NAP, being lack of deep global tragedy, well, lack of realized global tragedy. So I think the development, for example, of the hydrogen bomb, with something that happened during the Great NAP. And that doesn't mean that people who lived during that time didn't feel feared and no anxiety. But it was to say that most of the violent potential of human species was not realized. It was in the form of potential energy. And this is the thing that I've sort of taken issue with with the description of Stephen Pinker's optimism is that if you look at the realized kinetic variables, things have been getting much better for a long time, which is the Great NAP. But it's not as if our fragility has not grown, our dependence on electronic systems, our vulnerability to disruption. And so all sorts of things have gotten much better, other things have gotten much worse in the destructive potential of skyrocketed. It's tragedy the only way we wake up from the Big NAP? Well, no, you could also have a, you know, jubilation about positive things, but it's harder to get people's attention. Can you give an example of a big global positive thing? Well, I think the when, for example, just historically speaking, HIV went from being a death sentence to something that people could live with for a very long period of time. It would be great if that had happened on a Wednesday, right? Like all at once. Like you knew that things had changed. And so the bleed in somewhat kills the sort of the Wednesday effect where it all happens on a particular day at a particular moment. I think if you look at the stock market here, you know, there's a very clear moment where you can see that the market absorbs the idea of the coronavirus. I think that with respect to positives, the moon landing was the best example of a positive that happened at a particular time or recapitulating the Soviet American link up in terms of Skylab and Soyuz, right? Like that was a huge moment when you actually had these two nations connecting in orbit. And so yeah, there are great moments where something beautiful and wonderful and amazing happens, you know, but it's just they're a few of them. That's why as much as I can't imagine proposing to somebody at a sporting event, when you have like 30,000 people waiting and, you know, like she says, yes, it's pretty exciting. So I think that we shouldn't we shouldn't discount that. So how bad do you think it's going to get in terms of the global suffering that we're going to experience with this crisis? I can't figure this one out. I'm just not smart enough. Something is going weirdly wrong. They're almost like two separate storylines. We in one storyline, we aren't taking things nearly seriously enough. We see people using food, packaging lids as masks, who are doctors or nurses. We hear horrible stories about people dying needlessly due to triage. And that's a very terrifying story. On the other hand, there's this other story which says there are tons of ventilators someplace. We've got lots of masks, but they haven't released. We've got hospital ships where none of the beds are being used. And it's very confusing to me that somehow these two stories give me the feeling that they both must be true simultaneously and they can't both be true in any kind of standard way. And I know whether it's just that I'm dumb, but I can't get one of the other story to quiet down. So I think weirdly, this is much more serious than we had understood it. And it's not nearly as serious as some people are making it out to be at the same time and that we're not being given the tools to actually understand. Here's how to interpret the data. Here's the issue with the personal protective equipment is actually a jurisdictional battle or a question of who pays for it rather than a question of whether it's present or absent. I don't understand the details of it, but something is wildly off in our ability to understand where we are. So that's policy, that's institutions. What about, do you think about the quiet suffering of millions of people that have lost their job? Is this a temporary thing? I mean, what I'm, my ears not to the suffering of those people who have lost their job or the 50% possibly of small businesses that are going to go bankrupt, do you think about that? Shroud suffering? Well, and how that might arise itself could be not quiet too. I mean, right, that's the could be a depression. This could go from recession to depression and depression could go to armed conflict and then to war. So it's not a very abstract causal chain that gets us to the point where we can begin with quiet suffering and anxiety and all of these sorts of things and people losing their jobs and people dying from stress and all sorts of things. But look, anything powerful enough to put us all indoors in a, I mean, think about this as an incredible experiment. Imagine that you proposed, hey, I want to do a bunch of research. Let's figure out what changes in our emissions, emissions profiles for our carbon footprints when we're all indoors or what happens to traffic patterns or what happens to the vulnerability of retail sales as Amazon gets stronger, you know, et cetera, et cetera. I believe that in many of those situations, we're running an incredible experiment. Am I worried for us all? Yes, there are some bright spots. One of which is that when you're ordered to stay indoors, people are going to feel entitled. And the usual thing that people are going to hit when they hear that they've lost your job, you know, there's this kind of tough, tough love attitude that you see, particularly in the United States, like, oh, you lost your job poor baby. Well, go retrain, get another one. I think there's going to be a lot less appetite for that because we've been asked to sacrifice to risk to act collectively. And that's the interesting thing. What does that reawaken in us? Maybe the idea that we are actually our nations and that, you know, your fellow countrymen may start to mean something to more people. It certainly means something to people in the military. But I wonder how many people who aren't in the military start to think about this is like, oh, yeah, we are kind of running separate experiments. And we are not China. So you think this is kind of a period that might be studied for years to come. From my perspective, we are a part of the experiment, but I don't feel like we have access to the full data, the full data of the experiment. We're just like little mice. Yeah, in a large, does this one make sense to you, Lex? I'm romanticizing it and I keep connecting it to World War Two. So I keep connecting to historical events and making sense of them through that way or reading the plague by Kamu, like almost kind of telling narratives and stories, but my, I'm not hearing the suffering that people are going through. Because I think that's quiet. Everybody's numb currently. They're not realizing what it means to have lost your job and to have lost your business. There's kind of a, I don't, I, I'm afraid how that fear will materialize itself once the numbness wears out. And especially if this lasts for many months, then if it's connected to the incompetence of the CDC and the WHO and our government and perhaps the election process, you know, my biggest fear is that the elections get delayed or something like that. So the basic mechanisms of our democracy get slowed or damaged in some way that then mixes with the fear that people have that turns to panic, that turns to anger, that anger. Can I just play with that for a little bit? Sure. What if in fact all of that structure that you grew up thinking about and again, you grew up in two places, right? So when you were inside the US, we tend to look at all of these things as museum pieces, like how often do we amend the Constitution anymore? And in some sense, if you think about the Jewish tradition of Simhattora, you've got this beautiful scroll that has been lovingly hand-drawn in calligraphy that's very valuable. And it's very important that you not treat it as a relic to be revered. And so one day a year, we dance with the Torah and we hold this incredibly vulnerable document up. And we treat it as if, you know, it was ginger Rogers being led by Fred Astaire. Well, that is how you become part of your country. In fact, maybe the election will be delayed, maybe extraordinary powers will be used, maybe any one of a number of things will indicate that you're actually living through history. This isn't a museum piece that you were handed by your great-great-grandparents. But you're kind of suggesting that there might be a community thing that pops up, like as opposed to an angry revolution, it might have a positive effect of... Well, for example, are you telling me that if the right person stood up and called for us to sacrifice PPE for our nurses and our MDs who are on the front lines, that people wouldn't reach down deep in their own supply that they've been like stocking and carefully storing their just say, here, take it. Like right now, an actual leader would use this time to bring out the heroic character. And I'm going to just go wildly patriotic because I freaking love this country. We've got this dormant population in the US that loves leadership in country and pride in our freedom and not being told what to do. And we still have this thing that binds us together and all of them, the merchants of division, just be gone. I totally agree with you. There's a... I think there is a deep hunger for that leadership. Why hasn't that... Why hasn't one reason? Because we don't have the right surgeon general. We have this guy saying, you know, come on, guys, don't buy masks. They don't really work for you. Save them for our healthcare professionals. No, you can't do that. You have to say, you know what? These masks actually do work and they more work to protect other people from you. But they would work for you. They'll keep you somewhat safer if you wear them. Here's the deal. You've got somebody who's taking huge amounts of viral load all the time because the patients are shedding. Do you want to protect that person who's volunteered to be on the front line who's up sleepless nights? You just change the message. You stop lying to people. You level with them. It's like, it's bad. Absolutely. But that's a little bit specific. So you have to be just honest about the facts of the situation. Yes. But I think you were referring to something bigger than just that. Yes. Inspiring, like, you know, rewriting the constitution, sort of rethinking how we work as a nation. Yeah. I think you should probably, you know, amend the constitution once or twice in a lifetime so that you don't get this distance from the foundational documents. And, you know, part of the problem is that we've got two generations on top that feel very connected to the US. They feel bought in. And we've got three generations below. It's a little bit like watching your parents writing the tricycle that they were supposed to pass on to you. And it's like, you're now too old to write a tricycle. And they're still whooping it up, ringing the bell with the streamers coming off the handlebars. And you're just thinking, do you guys never get bored? Do you never pass a torch? Do you really want to, we had five septiginarians all born in the 40s, running for president of the United States when Clovisher dropped out. The youngest was Warren. We had Warren, Biden, Sanders, Bloomberg, and Trump from like 1949 to 1941, all who had been the the oldest president at inauguration. And nobody, nobody says, grandma grandpa, you're embarrassing us. Except Joe Rogan. Let me put her on you. You have a big platform. You're somewhat of an intelligent eloquent guy. What role do you somewhat? What role do you play? Why aren't you that leader? I mean, I would argue that you're in ways becoming that leader. So I haven't taken enough risk. Is that your idea? What should I do or say at the moment? No, you're a little bit, no, you have taken quite a big risks. And we'll talk about it. But you're also on the outside shooting in, meaning you're dismantling the institution from the outside as opposed to becoming the institution. Do you remember that thing you brought up when you were on the view? The view? I'm sorry, when you were on Oprah, I didn't make, I didn't get the interview. I'm sorry. When you were on Bill Mars program, what was that thing you were saying? They don't know we're here. They may watch us. Yeah. They may quietly, slip us a direct message. But they pretend that this internet thing is some dangerous place where only lunatics play. Well, who has the bigger platform, the portal or Bill Mars program or the view? Bill Mars in the view. In terms of viewership or in terms of what's the metric of size? Well, first of all, the key thing is take a newspaper and even imagine that it's completely fake. And then there's very little in the way of circulation. Yet, imagine that it's a hundred-year-old paper and that it's still part of this game, this internal game of media. The key point is that those sources that have that kind of mark of respectability to the institutional structures matter in a way that even if I say something in a very large platform that makes a lot of sense, if it's outside of what I've called the Gated Institutional Narrative or Gin, it sort of doesn't matter to the institutions. So the game is, if it happens outside of the club, we can pretend that it never happened. How can you get the credibility and authority from outside the Gated Institutional Narrative? Well, first of all, you and I both share institutional credibility coming from our associations. So we were both at MIT. We would harbor it at any point. Nope. Okay, well, and lived in Harvard Square. So did I. But, you know, at some level, the issue isn't whether you have credentials in that sense. The key question is, can you be trusted to file a flight plan and not deviate from that flight plan when you are in an interview situation? Will you stick to the talking points? I will not. And that's why you're not going to be allowed in the general conversation, which amplifies these sentiments. But I'm still trying to. So your point, it would be, is that we're, let's say, both, so you've done how many Joe Rogan four? I've done four two, right? So both of us are somewhat frequent guests. The show is huge. You know the power as well as I do. And people are going to watch this conversation. Huge number watched our last one. By the way, I want to thank you for that one. That was a terrific, terrific conversation. Really did change my life. Like your brilliant interviewer. So thank you. Thank you. That was that you changed my life too. That you gave me a chance. So, I was, no, no, I'm so glad I did that one. What I would say is, is that we keep mistaking how big the audience is for whether or not you have the kiss. And the kiss is a different thing. Kiss? Yeah. That's the answer. It's not an acronym yet. Okay. It's a, thank you for asking. It's a question of, are you part of the interoperable institution friendly discussion? And that's the discussion which we ultimately have to break into. But that's what I'm trying to get at is how do we, how does Eric Weinstein become the president of the United States? I shouldn't become the president of the United States. Not interested. Thank you very much for asking. Get into a leadership position where, I guess I don't know what that means, but where you can inspire millions of people to the inspire the sense of community, inspire the, the kind of actions required to overcome hardship, the kind of hardship that we may be experiencing, to inspire people to work hard and face the difficult hard facts of the realities we're living through all those kinds of things that you're talking about. That leader, you know, cannot leader emerge from the current institutions or alternatively can it also emerge from the outside? I guess that's what I was asking. So my belief is that this is the last hurrah for the elderly centrist kleptocrats. Can you define each of those terms? Okay. Elderly, I mean people who were born at least a year before I was. That's a joke you can laugh. No, because I've born at the cusp of the Gen X boomer divide. So, centrist, they're pretending, you know, that there are two parties, Democrat and Republican party in the United States. I think it's easier to think of the mainstream of both of them as part of an aggregate party that I sometimes call the looting party, which gets us to kleptocracy, which is ruled by thieves. And the great temptation has been to treat the US like a trough, and you just have to get yours because it's not like we're doing anything productive. So everybody's sort of looting the family mansion and somebody stole the silver and somebody's cutting the pictures out of the frames. You know, roughly speaking, we're watching our elders will live it up in a way that doesn't make sense to the rest of us. Okay, so if it's the last hurrah, this is the time for leaders to step up. Well, no, we're not ready yet. We're not ready to disagree with that. I call out, you know, the head of the CDC should resign. Should resign. That the surgeon general should resign. Trump should resign. Pelosi should resign. De Blasio should resign. They're not going to resign. I understand that. So that's what, so we'll wait. No, but that's not how revolution's work. You don't wait for people to resign. You step up and inspire the alternative. Do you remember the Russian Revolution of 1907? It's before my time. But there wasn't a Russian Revolution of 1907. So you're thinking we're in 1907. I'm saying we're too early, but we got this, you know, Spanish flu came in 1718. So I would argue that there's a lot of parallels there. Or the one, I think it's not time yet. Like John Prine, the songwriter, just died of COVID. That was a pretty big. Really? Yeah. By the way, yes, of course, I, every time we do this, we discover our mutual appreciation of obscure brilliant would he? Yeah, songwriter. He's really quite good, right? He's really good. Yeah. He died. My understanding is that he passed recently due to complications of Corona. So we haven't had large enough, enough large enough shocking deaths yet. Picture-esque deaths. Deaths of a family that couldn't get treatment. There are stories that will come and break our hearts. And we have not had enough of those. The visuals haven't come in. But I think they're coming. Well, we'll find out. But that you've got to, you have to be there. He have to be there when they come. I mean, but we didn't get the visual, for example, of falling man from 9-11. Right. So the outside world did, but Americans were not. It was thought that we would be too delicate. So just the way you remember, Pulitzer Prize winning photographs from the Vietnam era, you don't easily remember the photographs from all sorts of things that have happened since, because something changed in our media. We are in sense that we cannot feel or experience our own lives and the tragedy that would animate us to action. Yeah, but I think there, again, I think there's going to be that suffering that's going to build and build and build in terms of businesses, mountain pop shops that close. And I think for myself, I think often that I'm being weak and and I feel like I should be doing something. I should be becoming a leader in a small scale. You can't. This is not World War II and this is not Soviet Russia. Why not? Why not? Because our internal programming, the malware that sits between our ears, is much different than the propaganda is malware of the Soviet era. I mean, people were both very indoctrinated and also knew that somehow it was BS. They had a double mind. I don't know, there must be a great word in Russian for being able to think both of those things simultaneously. You don't think people are actually sick of the partisanship, sick of incompetence. Yeah, but I called for revolt the other day on Joe Rogan. People found it quicksad. Well, because I think you're not, I think revolt is different. I think ask like, okay, I'm really angry. Yes. I'm furious. I cannot stand that this is my country at the moment. I'm embarrassed. So it's built a better one. Yeah. That's the, I mean, okay, so, well, okay, that's something I think about. So let's take over a few universities. Well, let's start running a different experiment at some of our better universities. When I did this experiment, I said, if this were 40 years ago, the median age, I believe, of a university president was 51. That would have the person in Gen X and we'd have a bunch of millennial presidents, a bunch of, you know, more than half Gen X. It's almost 100% baby boom at this moment. And how did that happen? We can get into how they changed retirement. But this generation above us does not feel, or even even the older generation, silent generation, I had Roger Penrose on my program. Excellent. And I thank you. Really appreciate that. And I asked him a question. It was very important to me. I said, look, you're in your late 80s. Is there anyone you could point to as a successor that we should be watching? We can get excited. You know, I said, here's an opportunity to pass the baton. He said, well, let me, let me hold off on that. I was like, oh, is it ever the right moment to point to somebody younger than you to keep your flame alive after you're gone? And also, like, I don't know whether I'm, I'm just going to admit to this. People treat me like I'm crazy for caring about the world after I'm dead. Or, or why do you remember it after you're gone? Like, well, what does it matter to you? You're gone. It's this deeply sort of secular, somatic perspective on everything where we don't, you know, that phrase in as time goes by, he says, it's still the same old story. A fight for love and glory. A case of to a death. I don't think people imagine then that there wouldn't be a story about fighting for love and glory. And like, we are so out of practice about fighting, you know, rivals for love and, and, and, and fighting for glory and something bigger than yourself. But the hunger is there. Well, that was the point then, right? The whole idea is that Rick was, you know, he was like Han Solo of his time. He's just like, I stick my neck out for nobody. You know, it's like, oh, come on, Rick, you're just pretending you actually have a big soul, right? And so at some level, that's the question. Do we have a big soul or is it just all bullshit? See, I think, I think there's huge Manhattan project style projects, whether you talk about physical infrastructure or going to Mars, you know, the SpaceX NASA efforts or huge, huge scientific efforts. Well, we need to get back into the institutions and we need to remove the weak leadership that we have weak leaders and the weak leaders need to be removed and they need to seek people more dangerous than the people who are currently sitting in a lot of those chairs or build new institutions. Good luck. Well, so one of the nice things of, from the internet is for example, somebody like you can have a bigger voice than almost anybody at the particular situations we're talking about. That's true. But the thing is I might say something. You can count on the fact that the, you know, provost at Princeton isn't going to say anything. What do you mean? To afraid? Well, if that person were to give an interview, how are things going in research at Princeton? Well, I'm hesitant to say it, but they're perhaps as good as they've ever been and I think they're going to get better. Oh, is that right? All fields? Yep. I don't see a weak one. It's just like, okay, great. Who are you and what are you even saying? We're just used to total nonsense 24, so yeah. What do you think might be a beautiful thing that comes out of this? Like, what, is there a hope that like a little inkling, a little fire of hope you have about our time right now? Yeah, I think one thing is coming to understand that the freaks weirdo's mutants and other near duels sometimes refer to as grifters. I like that one. Grifters and gadflies were very often the earliest people on the coronavirus. That's a really interesting question. Why was that? And it seems to be that they had already paid such a social price that they weren't going to be beaten up by being told, oh my god, you're xenophobic. You just hate China. Or wow, you sound like a conspiracy theorist. So if you had already paid those prices, you were free to think about this and everyone in an institutional framework was terrified that they didn't want to be seen as the alarmist, the chicken little. And so that's why you have this confidence where De Blasio says, get on with your lives, get back in there and celebrate Chinese New Year in Chinatown despite coronavirus. It's like, okay, really? So you just always thought everything would automatically be okay if you adapted that posture. So you think this time reveals the weakness of our institutions and reveals the strength of our gadflies and the weirdos and the... No, not necessarily the strength, but the value of freedom, like a different way of saying it would be, wow, even your gadflies and your grifters were able to beat your institutional folks because your institutional folks were playing with a giant mental handicap. So just imagine like we were in the story of Harrison Virgeron by Vonnegut and our smartest people were all subjected to distracting noises every seven seconds. Well, they would be functionally much dumber because they couldn't continue a thought through all the disturbance. So in some sense, that's a little bit like what belonging to an institution is, is that if you have to make a public statement, of course the surgeon general is going to be the worst. Because they're just playing with too much of a handicap. There are too many institutional players who don't screw us up. And so the person has to say something wrong. We're going to back propagate a falsehood. And this is very interesting. Some of my socially oriented friends say, Eric, I don't understand what you're on about. Of course masks work, but you know what they're trying to do. They're trying to get us not to buy up the masks for the doctors. And I think, okay, so you imagine that we can just create scientific fiction at will so that you can run whatever social program you want. This is what I, you know, my point is get out of my lab, get out of the lab. You don't belong in the lab. You're not meant for the lab. You're constitutionally incapable of being around the lab. You need to leave the lab. You think the CEC and WHO knew that masks work. And we're trying to sort of imagine that people are kind of stupid and they would buy masks and in an excess if they were told that masks work. Is that like a, because this does seem to be a particularly clear example of mistakes made. You're asking me this question. Yeah. No, you're not. What do you think, Lex? Well, I actually probably disagree with you a little bit. Great. Let's do it. I think it's not so easy to be honest with the populace when the danger of panic is always around the corner. So I think the kind of honesty you exhibit appeals to a certain class of brave intellectual minds that appeals to me, but I don't know from the perspective of WHO, I don't know if it's so obvious that they should be honest 100% of the time with people. I'm not saying you should be perfectly transparent and 100% honest. I'm saying that the quality of your lies has to be very high and it has to be public spirited. There's a big difference between, so I'm not, I'm not a child about this. I'm not saying that when you're at war, for example, you turn over all of your plans to the enemy because it's important that you're transparent with 360 degree visibility far from it. What I'm saying is something has been forgotten. And I forgot who it was who told it to me. It was a fellow graduate student in the Harvard math department. And he said, you know, I learned one thing being out in the workforce because he was one of the few people who had had a work life in the department as a graduate. He said, you can be friends with your boss, but if you're going to be friends with your boss, you have to be doing a good job at work. And there's an analog here, which is if you're going to be reasonably honest with the population, you have to be doing a good job at work as the surgeon general or as the head of the CDC. So if you're doing a terrible job, you're supposed to resign. And then the next person supposed to say, look, I'm not going to lie to you. I inherited the situation. It was in a bit of disarray. But I had several requirements before I agreed to step in and take the job because I needed to know I could turn it around. I needed to know that I had clear lines of authority. I needed to know that I had the resources available in order to rectify the problem. And I needed to know that I had the ability and the freedom to level with the American people directly as I suffered. All of my wishes were granted. And that's why I'm happy here on Monday morning. I've got my sleeves rolled up. Boy, do we got a lot to do? So please come back in two weeks and then ask me how I'm doing then. And I hope to have something to show you. That's how you do it. So why is that excellence and basic competence missing? The big net. You see, you come from multiple traditions where it was very important to remember things. The Soviet tradition made sure that you remembered the sacrifices that came in that war. And the Jewish tradition, we're doing this on Passover, right? Okay. Well, every year we tell one simple story, well, why can't it be different every year? Maybe we can have a rotating series of seven stories? Because it's the one story that you need. It's like, you work with the men in black group, right? And it's the last suit that you'll ever need. This is the last story that you ever need. Don't think I fell for your Neuralizer last time in any event. We tell one story because it's the get out of Dodge story. There's a time when you need to not wait for the the bread to rise. And that's the thing, which is even if you live through a great nap, you deserve to know what it feels like to have to leave everything that has become comfortable and and unworkable. It's sad that you need that tragedy. I imagine to have the tradition of remembering. It's sad to think that because things have been nice and comfortable, means that we can't have great competent leaders, which is kind of the implied statement. Like, can we have great leaders who take big risks, who inspire hard work, who deal with difficult truth, even though things have been comfortable? Well, we know what those people sound like. I mean, you know, if, for example, Jaco Willink suddenly threw his hat into the ring, everyone would say, okay, right? Party's over. It's time to get up at 4.30 and really work hard and we've got to get back into fighting shit. And yeah, but Jaco is a very special, I think that whole group of people by profession put themselves in the way of and into hardship on a daily basis. And he's not, I don't know, but he's probably not going to be, well, could Jaco be president? Okay, but it doesn't have to be Jaco, right? Like, in other words, if it was Kyleni or if it was Alex Honald from rock climbing, right? But they're just serious people. They're serious people who can't afford your BS. Yeah, but why do we have serious people that do rock climbing and don't have serious people who lead the nation? That seems to be because that was a, those skills needed in rock climbing are not good during the big nap. And at the tail end of the big nap, they would get you fired. But I don't, don't you think there's a fundamental part of human nature that desires to excel to be accepting good at your job? Yeah, but what is your job? I mean, in other words, my point to you is if you, if you're a general in a peacetime army and your major activity is playing war games, what if the skills needed to win war games are very different than the skills needed to win wars because you know how the war games are scored and you've you've done moneyball, for example, with war games. And you figured out how to win games on paper. So then the the advancement skill becomes divergent from the ultimate skill that it was proxying for. Yeah, but you create, we're good as human beings to, I mean, at least me, I can't do a big nap. So at any one moment, when I finish something, a new dream pops up. So go into Mars. What do you like to do? You like to do Brazilian Jiu Jitsu? Well, first of all, I like to do every. You like to play guitar guitar. You do this podcast, you do theory, you're always, you're constantly taking risks and exposing yourself, right? Why? Because you got one of those crazy, I'm sorry to say, you got an Eastern European Jewish personality, which I'm still tied to and I'm a couple generations more distant than you are. And I've held on to that thing because it's valuable to me. You don't think there's a huge percent of the populace even in the United States. That's that, maybe a little bit dormant, but do you know Anachachen from the Red Scare podcast? Did you interview her? Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah, she was great. She was great, right? Yeah, she's fun. She's terrific. But she also has the same thing going on. And I made a joke in the liner notes for that episode, which is somewhere on the road from Stalin-Grad to forever 21, something was lost. Like how can Stalin-Grad and forever 21 be in the same sentence? And, in part, it's that weird thing. It's like trying to remember. Even words, like I mean Russian and Hebrew things like it's like put Pomiya and this core, these words have much more potency about memory. And I don't know. I do I think I think there's still a dormant populace that craves leaders on a small scale and large scale. And I hope to be that leader on a small scale. And I think you sir have a role to be a leader. You kids go ahead without me. I'm just gonna do a little bit of weird podcast. See, now you're you're putting on your Joe Rogan hat. He says I'm just a comedian. Oh, no, I'm not saying I'm just a... It's not that. If I say I want to lead too much because of the big nap, there's like a group, a chorus of automated idiots. And they're first I was like, ah, I knew it. So it's a power grab all along. Why should you lead? You know, just like and so the ideas you're just trying to skirt around and not stepping on all of the idiot landlines. It's like, okay, so now I'm gonna hear that in my inbox for the next three days. Okay, so lead by example, just live... No, I mean, a large platform. Look, we should take over the institutions. There are institutions. We've got bad leadership. We should mutiny. And we should inject a, I don't know, 15%, 20%, disagreeable, dissident, very aggressive, loner, individual, mutant freaks. All the people that you go to see avengers movies about or the X-Men or whatever it is. And stop pretending that everything good comes out of some great giant inclusive communal 12-hour meeting. It's like, stop it. That's not how shit happens. You recently published the video of a lecture. You give it Oxford presenting some aspects of a theory, a theory of everything called geometric unity. So this was a work of 30, 30 plus years. This is life's work. Let me ask you of the the silly old question, how do you feel as a human? Excited, scared, the experience of posting it? You know, it's funny. One of the things that you learn to feel as an academic is the great sins you can commit in academics is to show yourself to be a non-serious person, to show yourself to have delusions, to avoid the standard practices, which everyone has signed up for. And you know, it's weird because like you know that those people are going to be angry. He did what? You know, why would he do that? And what we're referring to, for example, the traditions of sort of publishing incrementally, certainly not trying to have a theory of everything, perhaps working within the academic departments. Yep. All those things. So that's true. And so you're going outside of all that? Well, I mean, I was going inside of all of that. And we did not come to terms when I was inside. And what they did was so outside to me, was so weird, so freakish. Like the most senior respectable people at the most senior respectable places were functionally insane as far as I could tell. And again, it's like being functionally stupid if you're the head of the CDC or something where, you know, you're giving recommendations out that aren't based on what you actually believe. They're based on what you think you have to be doing. Well, in some sense, I think that that's a lot of how I saw the math in physics world as the physics world was really crazy. And the math world was considerably less crazy, just very strict and kind of dogmatic. We'll psychoanalyze those folks. But I really want to maybe linger on it a little bit longer of how you feel. Yeah. So it's such a such a special moment in your life. Well, I really appreciate. It's a great question. So that if we can pair off some of that other those other issues, it's new. Being able to say what the observer is, which is my attempt to replace space time, is something that is both closely related to space time and not space time. So I used to carry the number 14 as a closely guarded secret in my life. And where 14 is really four dimensions of space and time plus 10 extra dimensions of rulers and protractors or for the cool kids out there, symmetric two tensors. So you had a geometric, complicated, beautiful geometric view of the world that you cared with you for a long time. Yeah. Did you did you have friends that you colleagues essentially know? Talked. No. In fact, part of these part of some of these stories are me coming out to my friends. And I use the phrase coming out because I think that gays have monopolized the concept of the closet. Many of us are in closets having nothing to do with their sexual orientation. Yeah, I didn't really feel comfortable talking to almost anyone. So this was a closely guarded secret. And I think that I let on in some ways that I was up to something and probably but it was a very weird life. So I did I had to have a series of things that I pretended to care about so that I could use that as the stalking horse for what I really cared about. And to your point, I never understood this whole thing about theories of everything. Like if you were going to go into something like theoretical physics, isn't that what you would normally pursue? Like, wouldn't it be crazy to do something that difficult and that poorly paid if you were going to try to do something other than figure out what this is all about? Now I have to reveal my cards, my weaknesses and lack and an understanding of the music of physics and math departments. But there's an analogy here to artificial intelligence and often folks come in and say, okay, so there's a giant department working on quote unquote artificial intelligence. But why is nobody actually working on intelligence? Like you're all just building little toys. You're not actually trying to understand and that breaks a lot of people. They it confuses them because like, okay, so I'm at MIT, I'm at Stanford, I'm at Harvard, I'm here, I dreamed of being working on artificial intelligence. Why is everybody not actually working on intelligence? And I have the same kind of sense that that's what working on the theory of everything is that strangely, you somehow become an outcast for even but we know why this is, right? Why? Well, it's because let's take the artificial, let's play with AGI for example. Yeah. I think that the idea starts off with nobody really knows how to work on that. And so if we don't know how to work on it, we choose instead to work on a program that is tangentially related to it. So we do a component of a program that is related to that big question because it's felt like at least I can make progress there. And that wasn't where I was, where I was in this funny, there was this book of called Frieden-Ulenbach and it had this weird mysterious line in the beginning of it. And I tried to get clarification of this weird mysterious line and everyone said wrong things. And then I said, okay, well, so I can tell that nobody's thinking properly because I just asked the entire department and nobody has a correct interpretation of this. And so it's a little bit like you see a crime scene photo and you have a different idea. There's a smoking gun and you figure, that's actually a cigarette lighter. I don't really believe that. And then there's a pack of cards and you think, oh, that looks like the blunted instrument that the person was beaten with. So you have a very different idea about how things go. And very quickly, you realize that there's no one thinking about that. There's a few human sides to this and technical sides, both of which I'd love to try to get down to. So the human side, I can tell from my perspective, I think it was before April 1st, April Fools, maybe the day before I forget, but I was laying in bed in the middle of the night and somehow it popped up, you know, on my feed somewhere that your beautiful face is speaking live and I clicked. And you know, it's kind of weird how the universe just brings things together in this kind of way. And also, and I realized that there's something big happening in this particular moment, it's strange. Like, on a day like any day and all of a sudden you were thinking of, you had this somber tone, like you were serious, like you were going through some difficult decision. And it seems strange, I almost thought you were maybe joking, but there was a serious decision being made and it was a wonderful experience to go through with you. I really appreciate it. I mean, it was April 1st. Yeah, it was kind of fascinating. I mean, it's just a whole experience. And and so I want to ask, I mean, thank you for letting me be part of that kind of journey of decision making that took 30 years. But why now? Why did you think? Why did you struggle so long not to release it and decide to release it now? And while the whole world is on lockdown, on April fools, is it just because you like the comedy of absurd ways that the universe comes together? I don't think so. I think that the COVID epidemic is the end of the big nap. And I think that I actually tried this seven years earlier in Oxford. So I and it was too early. Which part was to it? Is it the platform? Because your platform was quite different now, actually, the internet. I remember you read several, you're really in the answer that people should read for the edge questions. One of them was related to the internet. And it was the first one. Was it the first one? That's a called go virtual young man. Yeah. Yeah, that's like forever ago. Now, while that was 10 years ago, and that's exactly what I did is I decamped to the internet, which is where the portal lives, the portal, the portal. Yeah. Well, when the certain, the theme, the ominous theme music, which you just listen to forever, I actually started recording tiny guitar licks for the audio portion, not for the video portion. You kind of inspire me with bringing your guitar into the store, but keep going. So you thought so the Oxford was like step one and you kind of, you put your foot into the and the water to sample it, but it was too cold at the time. So you didn't want to step in. I was just really disappointed. What was this point about that experience? It's a hard thing to talk about. It has to do with the fact that, and I can see this, you know, as mirror as a disappointment within myself, there are two separate issues. One is the issue of making sure that the idea is actually heard and explored. And the other is the question about, will I become disconnected from my work? Because it will be ridiculed. It will be immediately improved. It will be found to be derivative of something that occurred in some paper in 1957, when the community does not want you to gain a voice. It's a little bit like a policeman deciding to weirdly enforce all of these little known regulations against you and, you know, sometimes nobody else. And I think that's kind of, you know, this weird thing where I just don't believe that we can reach the final theory necessarily within the political economy of academics. So if you think about how academics are tortured by each other and how they're paid and where they have freedom and where they don't, I actually weirdly think that that system of selective pressures is going to eliminate anybody who's going to make real progress. So that's interesting. So if you look at the story of Andrew Wiles, for example, from our last term, I mean, he, as far as I understand, he pretty much isolated himself from the world of academics in terms of the bulk of the work he did. And it, from my perspective, is dramatic and fun to read about, but it seemed exceptionally stressful. The first step he took, the first steps he took when actually making the work public. And that seemed to me would be hell. But it's like so artificially dramatic. You know, he leads up to it at a series of lectures. He doesn't want to say it. And then he finally says it at the end, because obviously this comes out of a body of work where, I mean, the funny part about from our last term is it wasn't originally thought to be a deep and meaningful problem. It was just an easy to state one that had gone unsolved. But if you think about it, it became attached to the body of regular theory. So he built up this body of regular theory, gets all the way up to the end, announces. And then like, there's this whole drama about, okay, somebody's checking the proof. I don't understand what's going on in line 37. You know, and like, oh, is this serious? Seems a little bit more serious than we knew. I mean, do you share the concern that your experience might be something similar? Well, in his case, I think that if I recall correctly, his original proof was unsalvageable. He actually came up with a second proof with a colleague, Richard Taylor. And it was that second proof which carried the day. So it was a little bit that he got put under incredible pressure. And then had to succeed in a new way, having failed the first time, which is like, even a weirder and stranger story. That's an incredible story in some sense. But I mean, now you, I'm trying to get a sense of the kind of stress you're on. I think that this is okay, but I'm rejecting. What I don't think people understand with me is the scale of the critique. It's like, I don't, you, people say, well, you must implicitly agree with this and implicitly agree. It's like, no, try me. Ask before you decide that I am mostly in agreement with the community about how these things should be handled or what these things mean. Can you elaborate? And also, why this criticism matter so much here? So you seem to this like the burden of criticism that it will choke away all these different kinds of criticism. There's constructive criticism and there's destructive criticism. And what I don't like is I don't like a community that can't, first of all, like if you take the physics community, just the way we screwed up on masks and PPE, just the way we screwed up in the financial crisis and mortgage back securities, we screwed up on string theory. Can we just forget the string theory happened or? Sure, but then somebody should say that, right? Somebody should say, you know, it didn't work out. Yeah. But okay, but you're asking why do you guys get to keep the prestige after failing for 35 years? That's an interesting question. You guys, because to me, if there is a theory of everything to be had, right, it's going to be a relatively small group of people where this will be sorted out. Absolutely. It's not tens of thousands. It's probably hundreds at the top. But within that community, there is the assholes. You have, you always in this world have people who are kind, open mind to. It's a question about, okay, let's imagine, for example, that you have a story where you believe that ulcers are definitely caused by stress. And you've never questioned it, or maybe you felt like the Japanese came out of the blue and attacked us at Pearl Harbor. Right? And now somebody introduces a new idea to you, which is like, what if it isn't stress at all? Or what if we actually tried to make resource star of Japan attack us somewhere in the Pacific so we could have Cassus Bell to enter the Asian theater? And the person's original idea is like, what? What are you even saying? You know, it's like too crazy. Well, when D'Arrak in 1963 talked about the importance of beauty as a guiding principle in physics. And he wasn't talking about the scientific method. That was crazy talk. But he was actually making a great point. And he was using Schrodinger. And I think it was Schrodinger was standing in for him. And he said that if you equations don't agree with experiment, that's kind of a minor detail. If they have true beauty in them, you should explore them because very often the agreement with experiment is an issue of fine tuning of your model, of the instantiation. And so it doesn't really tell you that your model is wrong. And of course, Heisenberg told D'Arrak that his model was wrong because that the proton and the electron should be the same mass if they are each other's antiparticles. And that was an irrelevant kind of silliness rather than a real threat to the D'Arrak theory. But okay, so I'm amidst all this silliness. I'm hoping that we could talk about the journey that geometric unity has taken and will take as an idea and an idea that we'll see the light. Yeah, so first of all, let's I'm thinking of writing a book called geometric unity for idiots. Okay, and I need you as a consultant. So can we first of all, I hope I have the trademark on geometric unity. You do. Good. Can you give a basic introduction of the goals of geometric unity, the basic tools of mathematics used to view points in general for idiots like me. Okay, great. Fun. So what's the goal of geometric unity? The goal of geometric unity is to start with something so completely bland that you can simply say, well, that's the something that begins the game is as close to a mathematical nothing as possible. In other words, I can't answer the question, why is there something rather than nothing? But if there has to be a something that we begin from, let it begin from something that's like a blank canvas. Let's even more basic. So what is something? What are we trying to describe here? Okay, right now we have a model of our world and it's got two sectors. One of the sectors is called general relativity. The other is called the standard model. So we'll call it GR for general relativity and SM for standard model. What's the difference between the two? What are the two described? So general relativity gives pride of place to gravity and everything else is acting as a sort of a backup, a backup singer. Gravity is the star of the show. Gravity is the star of general relativity. And in the standard model, the other three non-gravitational forces. So if there are four forces that we know about three of the four non-gravitational, that's where they get to shine. Great. So tiny little particles and how they interact with each other. So photons, gluons, and so-called intermediate vector bosons. Those are the things that the standard model showcases and general relativity showcases gravity. And then you have matter, which is accommodated in both theories, but much more beautifully inside of the standard model. So what does a theory of everything do? So first of all, I think that that's the first place where we haven't talked enough. We assume that we know what it means. But we don't actually have any idea what it means. And what I claim it is is that it's a theory where the questions beyond that theory are no longer of a mathematical nature. In other words, if I say, let us take X to be a four-dimensional manifold. To a mathematician or physicist, I've said very little. I've simply said there's some place for calculus and linear algebra to dance together and to play. And that's what manifolds are. They're the most natural place where there are two greatest math theories can really intertwine. Which are the two-oh, I mean, calculus and linear algebra. Okay. Now the question is beyond that. So it's sort of like saying, I'm an artist and I want to order a canvas. Now the question is, does the canvas paint itself? Does the canvas come up with an artist and paint an ink which then paint the canvas? Like that's the hard part about theories of everything, which I don't think people talk enough about. So can we just bring up Escher and the hand that draws itself? The fire that lights itself or drawing hands, the drawing hands. Yeah. And every time I start to think about that, my mind like shuts down. No, don't do that. There's a spark. And this is the most beautiful part. We should do this together. No, it's beautiful, but this robot's brain sparks fire.
