 The following is a conversation with Diana Walsh Poussalca, a professor of philosophy and religion at UNCW and author of American Cosmic, UFOs, Religion and Technology. This book is one of the most fascinating explorations of the interconnected nature of technology, belief, and the mystery of alien intelligence. Quick mention of our sponsors, Element Electrolite Drink, Grammarly Writing Plugin, Business Wars Podcast and Cash App. So the choice is health, grammar, knowledge, or money. Choose wisely, my friends. And if you wish, click the sponsor links below to get a discount and to support this podcast. As a side note, let me say, as I did in the recent video on how many intelligent alien civilizations are out there, that the nature of alien life, intelligence, and how they might communicate with us humans is likely stranger than we imagine, and perhaps stranger than we can imagine. What is most fascinating to me is how the belief in the communication with such civilizations changes people's understanding of the world, and, as Diana argues, the technology we create. Technological innovation itself seems to manifest the mythology in our collective intelligence that turns the seemingly impossible into reality, just a matter of years, through the belief of individual humans that carry out that innovation. The nature and power of this belief in both technology and extraterrestrial intelligence is mysterious and fascinating. Perhaps holding the key to us humans understanding our own mind, our consciousness, and engineering versions of it in the machines we create. If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube, review it, and have a podcast. Follow on Spotify, support on Patreon, or connect with me on Twitter, Alexa Friedman. As usual, I'll do a few minutes of ads now, and no ads in the middle. I do try to make these interesting, but I give you time stamps, so if you skip, please still check out the sponsors by clicking the links in the description. It is the best way to support this podcast. This episode is brought to you by Element, Electrally Drink Mix, spelled LMNT. For many years now, my diet has been a low carb one, mostly keto, with about 20 to 30 grams of carbs a day. In conjunction with that, I fast-off in either intermittent fasting for like a 16 to 8 hours split, or 1 meal a day with a 24 hour fast. I try to learn a lot about my body, so I do know through some experimentation that this does work for me, and I do also know that it works for many others, both to maximize physical and mental performance. To do these diets correctly, the number one thing you have to get right is electrolytes, specifically sodium, potassium, and magnesium. That's where Element comes in. It's my go-to, Electrally Drink Mix for avoiding any kind of bad feeling while I'm on the keto diet on one fasting. Also, I drink it before running. In fact, electrolytes help with any kind of prolonged exercise, but for me, it's essential before a long run. Special teams use it, Olympians use it, tech people use it. As I said, I swear by the stuff as a part of my keto diet. Try it risk-free with free shipping. If you don't like it, they'll give you your money back, no question test. They truly are obsessed with good customer services, it's ridiculous really. But I'm pretty sure everyone loves the products, so it really doesn't matter. Go to drinklment.com slash Lex. That's, let me try to spell it out, drinklement.com slash Lex. Spelled LMNT, but pronounced element. Enjoy, hope it works for you, just like it works for me. This episode is also brought to you by Grammarly, a service I use in my writing to check spelling, grammar, certain structure, and readability. It's like a second pair of eyes that helps make sure that my writing sounds more like Ernest Hemingway's The Old Man in the Sea, one of my favorite books, and less like James Joyce's Finnegan's Wake, which is a novel of attempted to read several times in college and failed miserably. As a side note, Grammarly is doing a test run with this podcast, and they're judging us right now. If you want to support the podcast and support Grammarly, check them out, sign up to Grammarly Premium, which I've been using and enjoy for many years now, that's based on what they're going to judge, whether they continue this contract or not. So you know what to do. Get 20% off Grammarly Premium by signing up at Grammarly.com slash Lex. Do I really have to spell Grammarly? Okay. There's two Wemmes in it. It's GRAMMARLY. Success in life was defined by how will you do it spelling or the spelling be competitions. I would be a miserable failure, but I would at least try to make it look good. Okay. Now, here's the tricky part. You have to sign up on a desktop, not your smart phone, but your smart phone. You have to sign up on a desktop. You have to sign up on a desktop. You have to sign up on a desktop. You have to sign up on a desktop. You have to sign up on a desktop. You have to sign up on a desktop. You have to sign up on a desktop. Not your smart phone. They don't make it easy. Otherwise, it doesn't count as a support for this podcast. So please use your desktop or laptop. This episode is also brought to you by Business Wars Podcast. Tech entrepreneurs are in and all out race, that's hard to say, to cash in on our collective addiction to social media. Yes, they are. In the newest season of Wanderies, Business Wars, TikTok versus Instagram, I feel like I should be doing the movie trailer voice. They track the war between two social media giants. I have spoken about possibly entering this space by helping build a new social network. This is something I struggle with quite a bit because it feels like standing on the edge of a cliff hoping to fly. I want to keep my mind at heart open, fragile, but as I look at the world, I think deeply about it. It does seem that the world can easily destroy such a mind. And so I wonder if I'm able to face such destruction. Perhaps the choice isn't mine to make. Perhaps it has already been made. I think I'm not sure, but 2021 for my little ant life just might be a pivotal year. Anyways, this podcast season looks at just one heated competition in the space, where the game, at least in my view, is not one that makes for a better world. Listen to the latest season of Business Wars, TikTok versus Instagram, an Apple Podcast, Spotify, or Listen Add Free by Joining Wanderie Plus in the Wanderie app. As I have as well, I'm a huge podcasting fan. Fan first, podcast for a second. This show, finally, is also presented by Cash App, the number one finance app in the App Store. When you get it, use the Lex Podcast. Cash App lets you send money to friends by Bitcoin and invest in the stock market with as little as $1. I'm thinking of doing more conversations with folks who work in and around the cryptocurrency space. Similar to artificial intelligence, there are a lot of charlatans in this space. I enjoy saying the word charlatan for some reason. I have no idea why. But there are also a lot of free thinkers and technical geniuses that are worth exploring, ideas in depth with and with care. If I make mistakes in guest selection and details and conversations, I'll keep trying to improve, correct where I can, and also keep following my curiosity wherever it takes me. So again, if you get Cash App from the App Store Google Play and use the code Lex Podcast, you get $10 and Cash App will also donate to $10 at the first. An organization that is helping to advance robotics and STEM education for young people around the world. And now, here's my conversation with Diana Walsh Poussalca. You are a scholar of religious belief or belief in general. So the fascinating question, what do you think is the difference between our beliefs and objective reality? What is real, period? Sure, what is real? Easy question. So first let me start with belief. So belief is generally there are different definitions of belief just as there are different definitions of what is real. So for belief in my field, it would be attitudes toward something that dictate our actions. So we believe the sun is going to rise tomorrow. Therefore we act as if it will rise tomorrow. Beliefs can be wrong. For a long time, people believed and actually some still do that the earth was flat. Well, that's obviously an erroneous belief. So beliefs can be wrong. Now the bigger question that philosopher has asked is, is this belief accurate toward what we consider to be objective reality? Now let me go to objective reality. So what is real? I don't think we can actually obtain a correct understanding of what is real. And in that sense, I have to refer to a philosopher again. And that would be a manual Kant. So a manual Kant is one of the, he was basically in the 1750s, he wrote critiques of reason and things like that. So he said, well, if you're a philosopher or have any kind of understanding of Western history, you know who he is. He had this idea that we can actually never get to the thing in itself. Okay, so he called that the newmanal, the thing in itself. He said, let's take this table, for instance, that you and I are talking across. So this thing is a table. You and I both know that we assume it's real. We believe in it because we put our water on it and our water stays on it. Okay. However, can we know this thing in and of itself as a table? So that would be what he then would call the phenomenal. How do we know that that phenomena exists as we know it is? Okay, how do we know? We use our faculties. So we use our senses and things like that. But again, even our senses can be wrong. So I've been on committees just recently this year, last year, for hiring professors in my department who are philosophers. And we're hiring metaphysicians and people who are thinking about the nature of reality. And basically what I've learned from them, yeah, they're very... I'd love to attend those faculty talks. Metaphysics professors. What's funny is that for each one of them, I'm convinced each time. They all say different things, but they're so convincing. I'm like, yes, hire that one, right? Is it like historical philosophy, like particular talk? No, they have an actual belief. They're practicing metaphysicians. So what they do is they come and they're usually excellent philosophers from Harvard or USC or whatever. They come and they give what's called a job talk. That's what philosophy. Well, every academic does a job talk in order to get it. They talk to us about a department about what they do. And so it so happens that we need a metaphysician and now we're hiring again for one. And so I've learned a lot about metaphysics in the last year. And this is what I've learned, that they use physics as a basis for understanding what we can know about what is real. And what is real is really difficult to pin down. And so your question is, what is belief? Well, belief does it correspond to reality? That's the question I would ask. And first, we don't even know what is real. So the table, they would say, how do we know that the table even exists? Well, how do we differentiate it from the floor, for example? So these are the questions that philosophers are asking. No one else is, of course. But philosophers are asking these questions and they have different answers for it. So I would say that it's very difficult to know what is real. And in fact, what I do usually is I paraphrase my friend and colleague, brother Guy Consolmanio. He's a Jesuit priest. He's also an astronomer. And he's the director of the Vatican Observatory. And so he says this. He's a very smart person. He says, well, truth is a moving target. So basically, to know what is real out there, like gravity or something like that, you've got to approximate it. And as human beings, we have senses to tell us what, at least so we don't get hurt, you know, we're not going to fall off building or something like that. We have eyes to see and things like that. So we can approximate what reality is, but we're never going to get to it unless we develop better senses. And I think that that is what we are in the process of doing. We're developing better senses. We have telescopes. We have microscopes. We have extensions of ourselves, which are now called technology. And we can get to a better understanding of what reality is and what the objective world is. And therefore our beliefs can be honed. So we can get better beliefs, more accurate beliefs, but can we get beliefs that actually correspond to reality? Not in any precise way, but in approximate ways. So I hope that's not like too big an answer to your question. What do you think beliefs are in themselves can become reality? I mean, so you've now adapted the in this little bit of a conversation. Adopted the metaphysician view of reality, which is the physics. Yes. But, you know, we humans kind of operate in the space of ideas very much so. Like we've kind of in the collective intelligence of human beings have come up with a set of ideas that persist in the minds of these many people. And they become quite strong and powerful. Like in terms of like impact on our lives, they can have sometimes more impact than this table does. Than the physics. Yeah. And in that sense, is there some sense in which our beliefs are reality? Even if they're not connected to the physics. Yes, even if they're not real. Yeah, even if, okay. So yes, absolutely. So our beliefs are tremendously, they create social effects. Absolutely. There was a belief that I'm going to use this example. Uh-oh. There was a belief back in the day. And then we're talking about, when I say back in the day, I'm a historian, so I'm talking about like a thousand years ago. Right. That women had no souls. Okay, so look, I don't know if human beings have souls. I can tell you this though, that if human beings have souls, probably animals do too. That's my own personal belief. That's not a professor belief there. But there was this belief among the Catholic Magisterium, which is the runs Europe. That women had no souls, so they had to have this big meaning about it. You know, did women have souls? But that belief had consequences for women. I mean, women were treated and have been treated as if they didn't have souls. Okay, so there's- And the soul was really the essence of the human beings. It was. It's the, it's called the animus, right? It's what is the essence of what is eternal? You know, women were eternal. Here's another example. Okay, this is an example from my own research. All right, so there in the Catholic tradition, there's this idea of purgatory, hell, and heaven. And these are three destinations that people can go to when they die. And if you're great, you go to heaven automatically and you're considered a saint. If you're okay, you go to purgatory, right? And you suffer for a time and then get back into heaven. If you're terrible, you go to hell, right? Okay. Well, there was a place that the Catholics determined. And this was a belief for a long time, like a thousand years or more. And it was called limbo, all right? And limbo comes from the Latin limbus. And it means edge. And it was either on the edge of hell or on the edge of heaven. No one really could determine which it was. No historians are like, well, this person says it was on the edge of heaven. Well, listen, this was a terrible, first of all, there is no limbo anymore. In 2007, Benedict, the then Pope, got rid of the idea that there was limbo. Okay, so Catholics kind of went crazy because they didn't really know. They forgot that limbo existed and they thought it was purgatory. Right. And they said, how could you get rid of purgatory? But actually, he just got rid of this idea of limbo. Oh, so that's a distinct thing from purgatory. It was. And by the way, people should know they have a book on purgatory that came before. American cosmic, yes, I wrote a book on purgatory. Anyway, so limbo is a distinct thing from purgatory. Yeah. The types of people who go to limbo happen to be virtuous pagans, okay, like Socrates or somebody like that. And children who weren't baptized. So think of this. Think of for like more than a thousand years, mothers and fathers gave birth to babies who weren't baptized and couldn't be buried with their family in these burial. And you know, then they couldn't be reunited with them in heaven. Think of the pain of suffering that that caused. And that was nothing. Limbo is nothing. Yet the belief in it caused untold suffering. And that's just a small example. And that was as real to them. It was absolutely real. I mean, the effects were real. Let's put it that way. The place itself, not real. But the families themselves, do you think they believed it? They totally believed it. I've read. As much as the table is real. Yes. I've read, but listen, we have trigger warnings today, right? So don't read this. It's going to make you upset, okay? History, primary sources, no trigger warnings, okay? So you're going through like, you know, somebody's diary from 1400. And you hear the suffering and pain that they went through. There were times in my research where I'd have to put my primary source down, you know, and just basically go outside and take a walk because it was so horrific. I knew it was true because they wouldn't write something. You know, they're not going to write in their diary something that's not true. And it was horrible. So yes, these people went through untold suffering for nothing. For, you know, because they had an erroneous belief. But they didn't know it was erroneous. So it was real to them. Yeah. So I don't know if you're familiar with Donald Hoffman. He has this idea that in terms of the distance we are from being able to know the reality, which is there, the physics reality, is where we're actually really, really, really, really far away from that. Yeah. So like it's, I think his idea is that, or basically like completely detached from it. Yes. What's your sense? How close are we to the reality? We'll talk about a bunch of ideas about our beliefs in technology and beyond. But in terms of what is actually real from a physical sense, how close are we to understanding that? Pretty far. I'm going to use examples from what I do. Okay. So this idea that we're suspicious of what we actually think is real is not new. Of course, it goes back a long time, thousands of years, in fact. And philosophers, I'm not actually technically a philosopher, but I was one. I'm a professor of religious studies. Yeah. What do you introduce yourself at a bar when the bartender asks, what do you do? I never tell people what I do, especially on airplanes. It's a bad idea. Okay. So generally, if they push, though, I say, you know, I'm the chair of philosophy and religion, although I stepped down last year. So I'm no longer the chair. But I have, I have like a master's degree in philosophy and I was a philosophy major and I've studied philosophy. So I integrated into my research. All right. So this idea that we can't know, we're suspicious of what we know is called external world skepticism. That's the official philosophical name for it. Our faculties and our senses don't give us accurate perceptions of what is there. Okay. Especially at a quantum level or a molecular level. I mean, that's just obvious. So, yes. So I think that you're the person you mentioned is correct in that. I think we're far away from it. I think you're talking about our direct senses. But, you know, we have tools, measurement tools from microscopes to all the tools of astronomy, cosmology. It gives us a sense of the big universe and also the sense of the very small. Do you think there's some other things that are completely sort of other dimensions or there's ideas of panpsychism that consciousness permeates all matter? That there's like fundamental forces of physics were not even aware of yet? Oh, absolutely. I do think, and this is why I write about technology. And I mean, that's actually what I specialize in is belief in technology with respect to religion. So, in my opinion, thank goodness for thank for technology because where would we be without it? I mean, frankly, I think that it's like Marshall McLean was the person who said technology is like an extension of our senses. And I absolutely believe that to be true. I think that we're lucky that we, you know, that Prometheus gave us technology, okay? And that we use it and we're making it better and better and better and better. And that makes us more efficient. It makes us more efficient as a species. And like my point is that I think that our instruments, I mean, I don't want to be a religious technologist, you know, but our instruments will save us. I mean, they're already making life better for us. Do you think it's important that they also help us understand reality more directly, more deeply? I think directly is better than deeply. I think directly, more directly is probably a more accurate term for what you're trying to, I think, ask me, you know, can we actually, I mean, I think you're asking me that question that Kant basically was trying to get at was, can we know the thing in itself? Can we know that? Can we have like some kind of like intense knowing of it? It's almost mystical. And I would say that that's where religion comes in, okay? That's where we talk about religion. And if I may also go back to Emmanuel Kant, this idea that he just before he died, just as he died, he was working on, he did this critique of reason where basically he believed he basically talks about, can we know what's real? He basically has this long, you know, that question, can we know what's real? And then, you know, a thousand pages later, no. I'll just give you the rundown, okay? So, okay, yeah, yeah, exactly. Then he does this other critique and, okay, so he does like three critiques. Then he does this critique of judgment, okay? Well, judgment is this other thing altogether. And I think that that's what you're getting at. So how do we know things? How can we know things really intensely and intimately? And I think that he thought that judgment was the idea that we can actually know the thing in itself. And he was working on that as he died and then he never finished it. Hannah Arent, another philosopher of the 20th century, took it up, took up the critique of judgment and tried to finish it. Why the word judgment? Because judgment, think about it, when you see a work of art, who judges that to be decent? Okay, so there is a group of people who come to the decision that that's rotten. Or, you know, that's pretty good. You know, like, I noticed that you like to play guitar. Well, you choose music that I happen to like too. Okay, so you and I both have a sense of judgment, just a sense. So he said there's a sense that some people have. Why do certain communities have a similar sense? What dictates that? And so he was working on that. He thought it had something to do with the knowledge, the intimate knowledge of the thing in itself. Yeah, so another philosopher, that philosopher is actually don't like it all. But religious studies people do is Martin Heidegger. So Martin Heidegger has some great essays. One is called What is a work of art? And again, he gets to, you know, he talks about Van Gogh and Van Gogh's shoes. You know, that picture, the painting Van Gogh's shoes. It's really a really intense picture. It's just shoes. It's, you know, it's, but it's an amazing painting of shoes. And I think everybody can agree. That's a cool picture of shoes, right? And so why, you know, the question is, why is that a cool picture of shoes? You know, what kind of knowledge are we accessing to determine that indeed that works, right? And in fact, we still like it. So basically the nature of knowledge and what is it represent? It can operate in the space of, does the task from reality or can it ultimately represent reality? I guess that's the, is that the space of metaphysics? Is that the real? Yeah, so what can we know is actually called epistemology? But metaphysics is, I guess, is basically what is the nature of reality? Right. And those intersect. Absolutely. Yeah. A lot of things intersect in philosophy. We just have fancy names for them. Another non-philosopher that may be considered a philosopher, since we're talking about reality is I'm Rand and her philosophy of objectiveism. What are your thoughts on her sense of taking this idea of reality, calling her philosophy objectiveism, and kind of starting at the idea that you really could know everything, and it's pretty obvious. And then from that you can derive an ethics about how to live life. Like what is the good ethical life and all the virtue of selflessness and all that kind of stuff? So you talked a lot of academic philosophers, so I'd be curious to see from the perspective of like, is she somebody that's taken seriously at all? Why she dismissed, as I see, from my distant perspective by serious philosophers? And also like your own personal thoughts of like, is there some interesting bits that you find inspiring in her work or not? Okay. So I'm Rand. I've had so many exceedingly intelligent students basically give me her books and basically say, please Dr. Psyllca read this book. And I will tell them, yes, thank you. I've read this book before. And then want to engage in, you know, let me put it this way. They're religious about I'm Rand. Okay. So to them, I'm Rand represents some type of way of life, right? Her objectiveism. Now, why is she not taken seriously by philosophers in general? Well, let me put it this way. And philosophers in general tend to get pretty, I guess you could call it their, their kind of scientists, but with words. I always call philosophy when I describe it to someone who's going to take a philosophy class. I say, it's basically math problems like word math problems. Okay. So that's basically what it is. So they take words very seriously and they're very formal and definitions very seriously. Yeah. So they all want to get on the same page so they're not so there is no confusion. So for I'm Rand to basically say you can know everything. And, you know, and establish ethics from that. I think philosophers automatically say no. Now that doesn't mean I say no. In fact, we even, we have at my university a wonderful business school. And when you walk into the dean of the business school's office, I'm Rand is everywhere. So it's so I want to say that not all academics are anti-Find Rand. And in fact, I don't think philosophers are either except that they don't teach Iran. Okay. So in one, one sense you could say that because they don't teach her, they're being exclusive and what they teach or very particular perhaps is another way to put it. Yeah, it's hard to know where to place people like her because you know, do you put Albert Kamu as a philosopher? So I guess what's the good term for that like literary philosophers or whatever the term is, it's annoying to me that the academic philosophers get to own the word philosophy. Because like, he's just like people who think deeply about life is what I think about as philosophy. And like to me, it's like, all right. So I know Nietzsche is another person that's probably not respected in the philosophy circles because he is full of contradictions, full of... I love Nietzsche. Nietzsche is my favorite philosopher. Oh really? Yes, I absolutely love Nietzsche. So he's deaf. You know, I love people that are full of ideas, even if they're full of contradictions and Nietzsche is just like that. And I and Rand is also that I'm able to look past the obvious ego that's there on the page and the fact that she actually has in my view a lot of wrong ideas. But there's a lot of interesting tidbits to pick up and the same same goes with Nietzsche. And I'm weirded out by the religious aspect here on both the people who like worship by Rand and people who completely dismiss her. I just kind of see is, oh, can we just read a few interesting things and get inspired by it and move on as opposed to have a document. Is there something you find about her work that's interesting to you or her personality or any of that? Oh, I think she's fascinating. I don't dismiss her. She was a woman who reached a level of success with her mind at a time when that was difficult. So, I mean, she's definitely worth looking at for even that reason. But also her idea, I guess part of the situation with Rand, first of all, I think that her work is you have to, it's misinterpreted. Okay. And I think that's the same with Nietzsche. Like a lot of people think that I'm in fact, it is the case that Nietzsche's writing before the 20th century. He's got that, you know, he's somewhat, his rhetoric is sexist and racist and, you know, of the time period, right? He was a educated philosopher of that time period. However, his books are amazing and Nietzsche's philosophy is incredible. And I think that, I think that's what you're saying about Rand too. And I agree. I mean, I think that we get caught up. I mean, likely we should and we should contextualize these thinkers in the time period within which they are. We should not forgive there, you know, because there were people during Nietzsche's time that were, you know, feminists and not racist and things like that. And, you know, so, but each has merit. I mean, I would say Nietzsche is, and you did ask me to talk about some of the books that made the largest impact on me. And Nietzsche's gay science is one of them is one of the best books ever, in my opinion. I do think Nietzsche was, I don't know about exactly sexist. He certainly was sexist, but it felt like he didn't get laid much in his life. No, it felt like it was extra sexist. I was like, his theories on women are like, all right, he's pretty angry. He seems frustrated. Yeah. It's like, all right, calm down, buddy. All the fate of philosophers. I just ignore everything which is says about women. So can we talk about myth and religion a little bit? Yes. I mean, can we start at the beginning, which is like myths? How are they born? There's this collective intelligence amongst us human beings. And we seem to create these beautiful ideas that captivate the minds of the world. How do we captivate the minds of millions? How is such a myth born? Great question. Okay. So that brings us to terminology again. And in my field, we definitely, I think, try not to distinguish between religion. I just is going to be controversial. I think between religion and myth, because we call other cultures, religions myths. And then we call our myths religions. And I guess myth has a bad connotation to it that it's not somehow real. Yeah. Now what's interesting is that people like Plato who lived thousands of years ago, 2500 about, basically made this distinction himself within his own culture, which was Greek. So Plato is a very famous Greek philosopher. And he would say things like this. He would say that he would make a distinction between the reality of the one God or the one he would call it, he didn't use the word God, but he's referencing a divinity of, okay. And he believes in the soul. Okay. So, but he would also say that the gods and goddesses of the Greeks are just myths. So even he would make that distinction again, you know, he would say the population is not too bright. So they believe in these gods and goddesses. But he himself is talking to his students and he's basically talking about forms. You know, so you know, that live and seem to live in these other dimensions, like this table, let's go back to this table that we're talking around right now. He would say that this table is the instantiation of the form table and that there's this table that actually exists somewhere. It's where this place where numbers exist, like the number two. Okay. So there we use the number two mathematically. Therefore it exists. But have you ever seen a real one? Have you ever seen the real two? No. Okay. So, but where does it exist? So he says that tables. So he was also talking about things that, you know, he says are real, making a distinction between the people. And by the way, he got this from Socrates is his mentor who was killed by Athens because he would say such things. And people don't like to be told that they what they believe in is not real, right? Yeah. By the way, his idea of forms is just you just make me realize how like incredible was that somebody like that was able to come up with that. I mean, that idea became a myth that the idea of forms right that permeated probably the most influential set of ideas in in the history of philosophy and the history of ideas. Yes. Yeah. I mean, Plato, we know him for a reason, right? Yeah. So let's say that we're not, it's a gray area between religious and myths and maybe not even it is gray. Yeah. So what, how's that idea with like little Plato start and permeate through all of society? Oh, how does that happen? Okay. So there are different ways that religions work. So a lot of people would call the UFO narrative today like a, and this is what I talk about my book like a myth, right? The UFO myth. But a lot of people believe in it. Okay. So how do these things work? Well, what I did was I took, there's a and tapes at UC Santa Barbara. She's a pretty well known academic who studies religion and she is this building block definition of religion like it builds. Okay. And so she says there are, there are no religious experiences or mythic experiences. There are experiences. And then they get interpreted as religious or mythic. Okay. And so I use that with the UFO narrative. So I take and I compare it to the religious narrative. So basically what happens? What happens is this is that a person generally has a very intense experience. It could be with something that they see in the sky, a being, you know, that they see, you know, like Moses in the burning bush or something like that. They tell other people. Okay. And those other people believe them because they say, that guy, let's take you. Okay, Alex. Okay. So you're playing, you know, some of your music, Jimmy Hendrix shows up out of the blue. Say Jimmy Hendrix, who's who does electric church stuff, right? The electric church movement. So he shows up. I was sorry for small danger. I was, I'm not aware of, I apologize if I should be. I'm just know how to play all of the songs. Electric church. Is this a? Yeah. Yeah. It's Jimmy Hendrix's thing. Yeah. That was like a philosophy of his or what? Yes. Yes. Yes. So he thought he was, it was like a mission for him, like a, like he was a missionary. And he was like doing the electric church. It was through his mission of music that he was actually impacting people spiritually. And I think you have to agree that his music is really spiritual. Yeah. Wow. That's so cool to know that there's like a philosophy there. Yeah. What if he's ever written anything? He's spoken about it many times. Interesting. Yeah. To actually do some, some research here. Wow. There's another level of depth. That's awesome. Okay. So. Okay. So say Lex is playing. Yeah. 100 one of his socks. Yeah. He shows up. What's your favorite Hendrix song? Oh, that's a hard one. I like castles in the sand. It's a sad one. But I like it. So I'm playing something. Yes. And also boom. Just like Elvis does for people. Yeah. Hendrix shows up. All right. And then your maize and they tell you something that's very, very significant. And he says you need to tell other people this. Okay. So then like, okay. I go on social media. Yes. And you start. And because people believe you. And because you are a person of, you know, credibility. Yeah. People believe you. And so all of a sudden a movement starts. Okay. And it's the Hendrix movement. It's Hendrix to or something like that. You know, we call it something. The next iteration of Hendrix. Yeah. Right. Hendrix lives, but he lives is this vibration. And only Lex can like, you know, can can manifest this vibration. Okay. So like, this is, this is how religion starts. Yeah. You know, excuse your audience who are religions. I'm actually practicing Catholic. So this is how religion starts. They start with first off a contact experience. Not, I mean, not all of them, but a good portion of them. Some person has an experience that's transcendent sacred to them. And they go and they tell other people. And then those people tell other people. And then something gets written about it. Okay. And then it becomes because it's a charismatic movement. People become affected by it. And if too many people are affected by it, an institution steps in and tries to control the narrative. So this is what you'd call the beginning of a religion or a myth, a very powerful myth. And so it's almost like a star, right? A star is born. Okay. Yeah. When you say institution, do you mean some other organization that's already powerful? Yes. Want to become overpowered by this new movement? Yes. Absolutely. Is this usually governments? It's usually. Yeah. So I have a couple of examples. I use the example of the Christian church in my book, because I'm most familiar with the history of Christianity. And you know, Christianity, you know, was started by this Jewish man. And it was a movement that, you know, he was a very powerful, charismatic person. Other people believed in him. And then his followers talked about him. And then other than, you know, usually early Christians before the 300s were generally people who were disenfranchised because he had a pretty radical idea that, you know, humans should have dignity. And this was pretty radical during that time. So women who didn't have dignity and, you know, slaves who didn't have dignity at the time, and converted Christianity and droves. And so what happened was that all of a sudden, it became this belief system that was undercurrent and then Constantine, who was an elite, had an experience and made Christianity to state religion. And by that time there were different forms of Christianity, probably hundreds of them, well, most likely. And Constantine and the people who were powerful with him decided that their idea, this is the council of Nicaea now, decided that there was one form, and they called it universal. The one form of Christianity and this should be it. And so they, they kind of took out all the other denominations of Christianity in different forms of it. So you can see that a very, very powerful set of beliefs put a culture on fire. Right. And so how did they, they had to deal with that fire somehow. And so they narrativized it. They decided, how do we interpret this? And they interpreted it as they wished. But that wasn't the only interpretation of Christianity. I have another example. I'm in the Catholic church. A lot of times. And I'm going to use the example of Faustina. She's, she's a nun and she's Polish. And I think it was in the early 20th century, if not the 1800s, that she had a very powerful. Many experiences actually of Jesus. And she saw Jesus with rays coming out of his heart. And basically she called this his divine mercy. And it became a devotion in Poland and it spread. The Catholic church was not not into this at all. Okay. And so they did everything they could to try to suppress Faustina's influence, which was growing and growing and growing and growing. Okay. And so they were very successful in trying to keep her quiet. And she died. Okay. Years later, John Paul II Polish, sainted her and created the divine mercy devotion, which is worldwide now. And millions and millions of people. But do you see how they, they, you know, completely controlled so fast thing that it, uh, that it just starts with a single, so like you said, contact experience experiences the keyword. And is your sense that those experiences are legitimate. So it's not Yes. I was really, I was artificially constructed. Yeah. I think for the most part, there are legitimate experiences that people have. Why would someone want to put themselves through what they go through like, why would Jesus want to get crucified? I mean, that's a pretty nasty way to die. You know, why would Faustina bring this upon herself? Um, the people that I meet who said that they've seen you have, most of them don't want to be known because of the ridicule that goes along with it. So I honestly think that, you know, there are people who are maybe not stable and would like the attention. But for the most part, normal people don't want this attention. So you mentioned building blocks. Uh, you didn't mention the word God. Um, or sort of the afterlife. Are those essential to the myth? So there's a contact experience. Is there some other aspects of myth and religion, which makes them viral, which makes them spread and captivate the imagination of people? Yes. Is there a pattern to them? I think that for each era, it's different. And people have first, let's talk about the definition of religion. If that's okay. Because most people assume the definitions that we in the West are familiar with, which is that, you know, that of Christianity, Islam, Judaism, you know, monotheistic religions. And there are That's not, I mean, those are just some religions. There are so many different types of religions. Some religions have no God at all. Zen Buddhism, for example, is a religion that asks you to take away your belief structures, like to kind of like, in fact, I would call that a Conti and type religion, right? And that it's basically telling you to get rid of your concept of what you think about things so that you can actually have the experience like you were talking about earlier of the thing in itself. And they call that satore. So there are people who believe, you know, they try to, they call it meditation, Zen meditation. And it's fairly radical actually in some monasteries. I don't know if they still do this, but they'll whack you on the head. If you appear to be not focusing and, you know, that kind of thing, you know, they do things to basically take you away from your Conceptions of reality and bring you into a state of all that is, which is what they call satore. And that has nothing to do with God. I like this religion. And anything that involves sticks and whacking in order for you to focus better. I'm going to have to join a monastery. So, okay, so this, so Digging into definitions religion. So like what is what do you think is the scope that defines a religion? Oh, okay. So in my field, we have a few different definitions of religion. As you can imagine, just like philosophers have different definitions of what is real. So I take this definition and it comes from John Livingston. And it's religion is that set of beliefs and practices that to turn that is inspired by a transformative. What is perceived actually to be a transformative and sacred power. Can you say that again? Yeah. So religion is a set of it's not just belief. It's also practices. It's both belief and practices because you won't have the practices without the belief. So you have those together. Okay. And it's inspired by what is perceived because we don't know if it's real or not. What is perceived to be of sacred and transforming power. So perceived by the followers versus connected to the original sort of experience. No, no, it will. It's perceived by the followers. That's a really good definition. So And that's the governing idea is that there's something of great power. Yes, perceived to be of great power, which you can connect yourself either emotionally or intellectually somehow in order to explore the world that is beyond your own capabilities. Yes. And is there communication also involved or generally, yeah, that's a great definition. Okay. So within that falls everything that we've talked about so far, including technology and Alien life and so on. Do you think ultimately religion Is good for human civilization. Let me maybe phrase it differently is what's religion good for? Okay. Yeah, that's a great question. Thanks for asking that. Most people don't ask that. And I think it's the question to ask. Why do we still have religion? That's the question, right? Because scientists and others scholars Humanists even Thought that there's this thing called the secular secularization thesis and it's this idea that the more we progress rationally and We have better instruments for understanding our reality the less religious we will be but that's been found to be untrue We're still very religious. Okay, so why why is it around? Well, it's adaptive in some way in my opinion Most many people would not agree with me, but I kind of see it as an evolutionary adaptation now think about religions. Okay, think about Christianity again for one Here comes this idea when you have this ruthless empire called the Roman Empire which litters its It's roads with crucified bodies to let you know Don't mess with us. Okay. All right here all of a sudden you have this guy saying God is love. Okay. All right Well, that's weird. Okay, so why why does this take off? Well, it takes off because we're becoming a Colonial power that means we're going into other countries Conquering them we are you know How do we survive together as as cultures that don't clash? Well, we have to have a belief structure that allows us to and I think religions function that way So so the religions help us from also Richard Dawkins Me my dear it allows us to explore space of ideas And that in itself is the So it's like evolution of ideas And this is the powerful tool for it is yes because you know if if I believe that Men have souls Do they? Yes, they do I We're trying to figure that out you know Why still in terms of souls do believe cats don't have souls but We'll never will never we'll never be able to confirm that Maybe if we get better instruments, you know the soul instrument you need to come up with that one please For cats. Yeah, not just for cats, but for all animals and people in general You you can put them in like a little you know Soul machine find out what's the status of their soul That's funny. I hope we'll become a scientific discipline of consciousness and Consciousness is in some sense connected to maybe what the meaning of the word soul used to be Mm-hmm And I think it's a fascinating open question like what is consciousness and so on to maybe we'll touch on In a little bit, but yeah, anyway back to our Religions being adaptive. I think that Christianity probably helped us Become better people to each other as we moved into a more global society And I also this it goes along with my book which is basically making the argument that belief in non-human intelligence or ET's or UFOs UAPs whatever you want to call them is a new form of religion and How does that work with the The scientific method Do you think there's always this role of religion as being in his broad definition religion as being a complement to our sort of very rigorous empirical pursuit of understanding reality where there's always going to be this coupling will always define redefine new errors of civilization of what That religion actually looks like So you talk about technology and so on being the modern set of religious beliefs are on that is that so is that always going to is religion is religion always going to kind of Cover the space of things we can't quite understand with science yet, but we still want to be thinking about Oh, I see you're saying that's a great question when you say religion. I would I would Use the word religiosity Because I think that we're moving out of the dogmatic types of religions into more of a I hate to put it this way But an ex files type religion where we could say I want to believe or the truth is out there But we don't know that it's out there or we don't we don't know yet what it is, but we know it's out there So there's this this kind of built-in capacity for belief and something that we don't have evidence for yet and that's a sort of faith So I would say yes to that question absolutely. I think it's adaptive in that way. We're moving into a new I mean heck we're move we've already moved into this culture most people have not caught up with it yet I see that in the school systems, you know, and I think that I'm hoping we can catch up fast Because really it's moving faster than we are So I mentioned to you offline that I'm finishing up on the Rise and fall of the third Reich. I'm not sure if you have anything in your exploration interesting to say But the use of religion by dictators or the lack of the use of religion by dictators Whether we're talking about Stalin which is most the secular Apologize if I'm historically incorrect on this, but I believe it's a secular and Hitler I think there's some controversy about how much religion played a role in his own personal life and in general in terms of influencing the Using it to manipulate the public But definitely the church played a role Do you have a sense of the use religion by governments to control the populations by dictators for example or is that outside of your Little explorations as a religious scholar It's not outside of my framework. Absolutely not I think that it's done routinely Propaganda is done routinely Especially there's nothing more powerful than religion to get people to act I think I Have my mother's Jewish and my father's was Roman Catholic. Okay from Irish extraction and so both Members I'm both both great grandparents came here under duress because they were being What would you call it? There was an active genocide on both sides being dead by other cultures. Okay, so on the one hand Obviously we know about the Holocaust. Okay, so they came the great grandparents came here to Avoid that and they made it on the other hand. There was an English genocide We just have to say it of the Irish It was called a famine that it wasn't fun. It was a staged thing and so Millions of Irish left Ireland on Coffin ships is what they called them because they usually wouldn't get here. Why happen to get here? Okay, so those that's the context that I'm coming from So in each case for one thing Irish weren't considered you know, there was a Catholics weren't considered they were considered to be terrible and there was a lot of anti Catholic rhetoric here in the United States Which is kind of strange because one of the in fact the most wealthy colonial family were the carols in Maryland and they were Catholic So when you look at the United States at our history and you see the separation of church and state Do you want to know where that came from that came from those guys? They convinced George Washington and Thomas Jefferson. I mean, they couldn't vote yet They had they had they have their names on the Constitution Is that not a strange contradiction So here you can see how you know propaganda works. There was Antichastic propaganda there was anti-Jewish propaganda And all of and a lot of it was that you know, these people weren't human. They weren't human beings Another thing I'd like to say is that when the Irish did come here And they were indentured a lot of times indentured servants, but that's a that's terminology Then what is an indentured servant? slave pretty much So in that sense religion can be used the Derogatory. Yeah, derogatory as a useful grouping mechanism of saying this is the other And you know, it's powerful too because behind it is a force of You know what people can tend to be sacred a sacred force, right? So you know, it's up to God to you know decide who's you know, so you have to go along with what God says of course Well, that's basically That's not the contact event. You know the contact event is usually some type of very specific legitimate event that a person has with something that is non-human or considered divine but when when religions become Narrativeized I would call it by different institutions. That's when you're in danger of getting propaganda You said Nietzsche one of your favorite philosophers. He said Famously one of the many famous things he said is that God is dead Yes, what do you think he meant? Do you think he was right? Okay, good. I love this question. No one asks me about Nietzsche And I love Nietzsche Okay, so um first actually I do think and I could be corrected and probably will be in all the comments Yeah, well first Nietzsche it's true wasn't the first to say God is dead. I think Hagel said it Okay, no one reads Hagel. He's like so Difficult to read that is impossible saying with hydrogrosy mentioned He yeah, he I love him, but yeah, he's really hard to read So Nietzsche's basically said God is dead and let me give you the context for him saying that He also said this he said there was only one Christian he died on the cross. Okay, so um He despised Christianity and he said that and and the people who practiced it absolutely Yeah, but again, he believed in Jesus and he believed Jesus was no He didn't believe he was a divinity believed Jesus was a good man and he died on the cross. Okay, so he believed in the Yeah, he absolutely did yeah, he did um and Nietzsche basically was making a historical statement about God is dead He said and he was right. He was basically saying that in this in the century and was he lived um And he died. I think in 1900 again. I could be Wrong about that. So I just want to say that. I believe he died in 1900. Okay, so so he's writing in the 1800s And he's basically saying Um god is dead and we killed him. Okay So he's making a historical statement that at that point in time with science just kind of getting better and industrialization happening um the idea of um this this Thing beyond What we know as material reality is dead So this the substrate of western civilization is dead. That's what Nietzsche Nietzsche is saying If that makes sense. Yes, and he's basically says with that comes the ubermensch Okay, which is the superhuman and he says there aren't many of them He says, but they're gonna come and he also talks about the philosophers of the future And he's speaking and writing to them is my belief So he's basically telling you and me because we're now the philosophers of his future. Yeah, he's basically telling us This is what's happening now and look what it has done He says now everything is is possible all manner of terrible evil because no one has the belief in god anymore the belief that there's Uh that there is an afterlife you asked about an afterlife So with this kind of belief in a morality comes this belief, you know You can have morals without god, okay people do but what Christianity is this idea that you will reap what you sow So if people don't believe that anymore what will happen? And so that's what he's basically saying is that the the basic anchor for western society is now gone Do you think he was right? Absolutely. Absolutely right But then again, what do you think if we burn him back to life and he read American Cosmic your book Um, and he wrote He tweeted about it right Ha Writing a review maybe for the I don't know what they post for New York Times. He'd be an editorial writer Um with a blue check mark on twitter Uh, what do you think he would say about this idea that you present that's a grander idea of religion and you know Like religiosity like this in your form. Yeah, yeah, wouldn't that kind of reverse the idea that god is dead Yeah, because it would bring up this idea of external intelligences that are not human Which is basically a lot of religions talk about that right there are bodhisattvas. There are Angels there are demons you know there are all these types of non human intelligences that Religion makes space for so what I'm basically saying in American Cosmic is these new things are within the realm of UFOs and uips. So we'd no, I think that well I think Nietzsche would say that that's a progressive adaptation of religion is what I would hope you would say Nietzsche however Is unpredictable, I think I couldn't predict him so I would say that it would be my hope that he would say This is an accurate representation of a move into a new type of religion And it's adaptive therefore progressive He'll probably be uncomfortable reading a book by brilliant female professor who happens also to be short I don't know if you read that no He said some pretty nasty things about short women Oh my god Yeah, Nietzsche he should be cancelled No, no, please don't cancel Nietzsche You have to take people in the context of their time Although I'm pretty sure in his time he was also a nasshole. He was But assholes are people too Okay, it's just bad ones You wrote the book American Cosmic UFOs religion technology What was the goal of writing this book? What maybe we'll mention it we have already mentioned it many times but in this little Space of a conversation Can you say maybe what is the key insight that you found that lingers with you to this day from the process the long process of Putting this book together sure Just like with my book on purgatory Um, I went into the research thinking that it would be something that it was entirely not it ended up being something completely different And I think that's good. I think that people who do research need to Are very excited actually when their research surprises them. So I was happily surprised By my purgatory book to learn that it was a place, you know, and and so um I went into American cosmic being a non-believer in UFOs entirely And I came out being agnostic okay Kind of believer So but agnostic sort of uh open to the mysteries of the world Yes, and I didn't think that first of all I knew that the government was it was Part of the Situation I just didn't know how much and so I learned that quickly and acclimated to it um accepted it and noted that Indeed Horatio The world is Much more mysterious than we think it is it's more mister there are more mysteries in this life than your philosophy provides for so as a sense American cosmic is about the mysteries of the modern Life is encapsulated by this the The realm of technology and the realm of alien intelligences Yes, I think that um I think that I I mean I'd have to go off record as a professor and talk personally as a person. I do think that um There are mysteries of which We have an inkling and if it's something as powerful as non-human intelligence Whether or not it's from another planet extraterrestrial or It happens to be from like another dimension or something else. I think that this is going to um Get the attention of institutions of power and indeed. I think that's what has happened and although probably He People have had interactions with these things that it appears to me historically Uh for a long time as long as humans have existed. I would imagine that indeed um This is something that's quite powerful and could change the belief structures of our entire Societies are a civilization basically. So it's the same way that you talk them the belief structures were strongly affected by religious beliefs throughout history. Yes in the same way this has the potential uh it it it serves as um a source of concern For the powerful because it can have very significant effects on the populace. Yes. Is there some broader understanding of how we should think about alien intelligences then um like little green men. Yes That um that you can maybe elaborate on and talk about Yes, this comes directly out of my research in Catholic history what I found was that Let's take for instance this idea of an angel. Okay, so we all think we know what an angel looks like Why well we've been told what an angel looks like we see what an angel looks like Throughout history people have painted angels and they all look pretty much the same um, but actually if you go to the primary sources on you know either in Hebrew or in Greek or you know in whatever language and in Latin and you look at Experiences that people have Talked about you know where they've written down their experiences about angels um Angels don't at all look like what we think they they don't look like little cherubs with wings. They don't look like tall You know strong Anthropomorphic, you know human looking things they don't they look really weird and Sometimes they don't look at all a humanoid um, they look like Strange spinning things right with like you know eyes and things like that they they communicate telepathically with us Okay, so what does that mean for the idea of Existressials are what we consider to be aliens like um I do think that They're first if we are if listen is i'm not the first to say this if we're in contact with non-human intelligence we're most likely in contact with its technology Because think about us Um, do we send human beings to Mars yet some people say yes, but let's put that aside So no, we don't we use our technology we send our rovers to Mars, okay? Okay? So If there's an extraterrestrial civilization is it sending Are they coming by themselves are they coming to cs or are they sending their technology? Most likely they either are technology or they are sending their technology. Yeah, there might be a great area between what is technology and what the aliens are Yeah, so put your saying like uh basically a robotic probe that would be the equivalent of us our human civilization created technology way more way more Uh advanced than what we could believe to be a probe all right It's kind of funny to think about like if uh whatever uh sort of uh extraterrestrial creations have visited earth that we're we're interacting with some like dumb crappy drones And we're like like We're like building these like myths and so on from like an experience with some like crappy drone made by some crappy startup somewhere correct When the actual intelligence is like something much grander um, yeah, that's that's the more likely The situation I just like to tell people I'm like no, it's probably a lot we're than you think yeah Oh boy so uh But what forms can it possibly take so yeah, okay, I really love this idea that um I tend to be humble in the face of all that we don't know and I tend to believe that the form alien life forms would take And the way they would communicate is much more likely to be of a form that we can't even comprehend or perhaps can't even perceive directly so like you know It could be in the space of you know, we don't understand most of how our mind works It could be in the space of whatever the heck consciousness is like maybe consciousness itself is communication Uh with aliens or like I don't know Uh, it could be just our own thoughts is actually the Alien life forms communicating like I don't know all that sounds crazy, but I'm saying like I'm just trying to come up with the craziest possible thing that doesn't make any sense that could very well be true and you Can't say it's not true because we don't understand basically anything about our mind. So it could be all of those things Uh, everything from all the hallucinations all the things that are explored through uh, through the different drugs that we've talked about in this podcast in general jorrogue and lots of talk about dmt and all those kind of hostogenic drugs all of it including love and fear all those things that could be aliens communicating with us memes on the internet that could be pretty sure humor is alien communication No, I don't know, but uh, is there some Way that's helpful for you to think about beyond the little green men? Oh, absolutely, and um, it accords exactly with how I think actually um, so I'll explain um I liked in american cosmic. I attained the status of full professor So I was like, okay, I can pretty much write this book like I want to do it and I did So I used a lot of quotes from cool artists like david bowie Okay, so david bowie opens the book, okay, and he basically says and so does nature by the way david bowie and Nietzsche boom two two awesome quotes right together. That's how you open it. No better opener. Yeah, do you remember the close? Yeah, of course, so the first that quote by david bowie and that's what I'm going to concentrate on in response to what you just said, which I think is absolutely correct um david bowie said the internet is an alien life form Okay, and if you've not seen david bowie's interview where he says that I highly recommend it He's so brilliant. Okay, so david bowie is actually quite brilliant about the idea of uff He's also brilliant about the idea of technology. Okay, and most people wouldn't think that but I mean He's pretty darn smart Okay, so all right, so I started to think about it and uh I also early on in my research met joc valet. Okay, so he's a technologist He has a PhD in information technology from computer science basically from north western And you got that back in the day, you know when I say back in the day. I'm not talking to thousand years ago I'm talking like in the 60s. Okay, so he's back when Computer science wasn't really even the field you can get a degree Has a PhD in it and he's French. He's from france. But he lives in Silicon Valley and he worked on arpanette Which is the proto internet? Uh, he mapped Mars. He's also an astronomer. I mean, he's just this all-around brilliant guy, right? And he's also interested in uffos And most people take those two interests of his as separate interests And I remember being at a very small conference and listening to him Of being in off course because he's an awe-inspiring person And then thinking wait a minute. Why do people To compartmentalize those two things about him. They're one in the same. Okay, so when we talk about UFOs and uap's and stuff We have to talk about digital technology and things like that now if we are going back to what I so if I were to say what If I were to believe in and I Like I said earlier, I was agnostic bordering on belief Most likely believer in these this extra-trestral or not extra-trestral. Let me put it another way non-human Intelligence that's communicating with us. I'm gonna tell you how I think they communicate with us And I go back to the Greeks again. Okay, and the Greeks had this idea of muses, you know the muses So okay, so there are these things called muses and we tend to think of them as metaphors, right? But what if they're not? whether actually Non-human intelligence trying to communicate with us, but we're so stupid We can't like understand or like so only people with like, you know in super amazing capacities like poetic creative You know intelligent mathematical whatever, you know, because they tend to do this symbolically They tend to communicate with us in symbols form and so music You know symbols we've got math that are you know, it's a symbolic language And so what so okay, so muses are probably a good idea for me of what this would be now would muses have Spaceships, you know or those things that we call physical counterparts to what they are Um, that's another question altogether, but if you know, I know why would I think this because if you look at the history of their our space programs Both Russian and American you're gonna find some pretty weird stuff pretty pretty weird history there Lex So you want to get it an idea go back to jikalski and read a little bit about what he has to say if you look back at the history of our space programs the viable space programs are both Russian and American and each has an amazingly Strange history because The founders of the calculations that got us up into space the rocket scientists basically We're doing some pretty weird rituals and doing religious things, right? They wouldn't necessarily like jack Parsons on our side Was out in the desert with people like Elrond Hubbard and doing really intense rituals Believing that they were opening stargates and things like that. Okay, it's awesome and they were really doing that Okay, so then you go to The Russian side and they had a very specific Non-dogmatic according to Catholics or Orthodox Christianity Idea of what Christianity was and they believed that they were interacting with angels Okay, non-human intelligences So if you look back and you see muses, you know You can contextualize them within this tradition And so when I started to talk to people who were actually in the space program and who were in these programs that now the government has said Oh, yeah, we do have those programs And they have the same belief structures They believe that they were also in contact with these non-human intelligences and they were getting what they called downloads of information and creating Sometimes with Tyler D in my book creating technologies that were real and they were selling them on NASDAQ for you know a lot of money like you know say a hundred million dollars or something like that undisclosed amounts But a lot and these things are viable technologies that we use now and and they make our lives better And we progress as a species because of them now that has nothing to do with the scientific method As much as I know as much as anybody's going to get angry at me for saying that but you know Sorry, there's restrained encounters that created our ability to go into space I don't know if they're real or not, but these people believe they were real right so there's a they have a power in Actually having an impact in this world in Inspiring humans to create technology which enables to do things we haven't been able to do before Yeah, and these I like how we we're putting like angels alien life forms aliens and technology all in the non-human intelligence camp which I really like that because This That's very true. It's this other source of wisdom intelligence Maybe a connection to the mysterious Yes, I was really surprised by it Can you speak a little bit more to the connection between aliens and technology That Jacques Vallet had in his own one individual mind That's very tempting to kind of separate as two separate endeavors Why did you come to believe that they are one and the same or at least part of the same Intellectual journey Thanks for asking that again because nobody asks me that question and It's central to my project So Jacques was a huge influence is a huge influence on me He taught me a lot I had he gave me access to some of his information that's That he keeps But a lot of his information is actually there out there for everyone to read He has an academia dot edu page and he just so he didn't have this unfortunately when I was doing my research and 2012 and 2013 so I had to go back and do microfish type stuff You know what I did was I began to read everything that he wrote and he actually gave me a lot of his books too And he told me I remember um he dropped me off from this is actually quite interesting If you allow me to tell you a little story please please okay, and it also includes ayahuasca So great every story includes ayahuasca is a great story Okay, so I was at a conference and it was a small conference Um a very interesting people in California on the Pacific Ocean and Jacques was there and This is actually I opens my book. This is the book. This is the I Go ice the preface to my book. I go on this ride. He takes me through Silicon Valley I've lived there right my grandparents grew up in the same place that he raised his children in Belmont and so um But we're there Robbie Graham who's a great u-fologist in his own right and um And film theorist I highly recommend to his work So we were together and he was taking us to San Francisco where I was gonna meet my brother He was going to take me home And so he took us on this long journey and he talked to us and as we got out of the car um, he gave me Several of his books and one in particular he gave me he said read this first That was like okay, I definitely will read that first Okay, so this is how the ayahuasca figures in so um, we were I didn't take it nor have I taken it okay, so we were at this place and um in California and Alex Gray and his wife were there and they were talking about Their experiences with psychedelics. You know, he's an amazing visionary artist Okay, so he he believes that there's this place that you can enter and he and his wife would enter this space With either you know ayahuasca or LSD or something like that And they would not talk to each other, but they would be having the same exact Experience so they would it was almost like having the same dream right okay, so somehow that whole event with Jacques There taught and them talking about their Experiences in these realms of which religious studies people are quite familiar by the way because visionary experiences are what we study So all of this seems super familiar to me and I recognize that immediately that Jacques But that it hit me like you know very obvious that UFOs and these experiences and technology all seemed They were all meshed together and I knew that I had to take them I knew I had to read everything Jacques ever wrote and the best stuff he's written by the way is the stuff his little essays That he wrote in the 1970s and there were pure viewed essays about the beginning of the internet and how a lot of it was based on basically like Neural connection with the internet like somehow psychic connection through the internet with others and things like that So the my the brain is a biological neural network. There's a This connection between vision neurons and so on and that's what ultimately is able to have memories and has cognitive ability and is able to perceive the world and generate ideas and those ideas are then spread on the internet even from the very early days to other humans So it gets injected or travels into the brains of other humans and that goes around in there and then Spits on other stuff and it goes back and forth. So it's it's nice to think of the network. That's in our mind individual mind as I mean Very much even deeply connected to the network that is the connection between humans through the internet and so in that sense Jacques saw the internet as this as this powerful As a source of power and wisdom that is beyond our own exactly that's external to us like a non like you know If you could call it autonomous AI right it's non human intelligence in a sense even though humans are a part of it Yes, we're invaded by it or you know whatever you want to call it Yeah Right, it's the chicken in the egg right so if I can go on that I want to experience it Oh, yes, yes, I'm not done with that. Yeah, so and this is so this is where I come to this idea that um We're in this space. We're in now a new space of religion of religiosity So what happens is then I and it's like a biosphere and I'll talk about that in a minute So we so I so Jacques takes us back we get to San Francisco and my brother who is your straight lace Person you know army guy and everything like that. I'm I get into his car and the first thing he tells me is I took ayahuasca And I was like what he goes it's gonna save humanity That's great. Yeah, that's I mentioned to you off. Why I talked to Matthew Johnson is a Hopkins professor on He's a really a scholar of most he's he's he's starting most drugs Is he's also a really deeply studied cocaine all those stuff on negative effects and He's focused on a lot of positive effects of the difference psychedelics. It's kind of fascinating So I'm very much interested in exploring The science of what these things do to the to the human mind and also personally exploring it Although it's like this weird gray area which he he's he's masterful at which is he's a professor at John Hopkins one of the most prestigious universities in the world and and doing large scale studies of the stuff and And until until he got a lot of money for these studies even in Hopkins itself. There's not much respect. Not even respect. It was like People just didn't want to talk about it as a as a legitimate field of inquiry. It's kind of fascinating how hesitant we are as a little human civilization to legitimize the exploration of the mysterious of whatever the definition of the mysterious is for that particular period of time so for us now there's like little groups of Things like I would say consciousness in the space of like computer science research is something that's still like I don't know Maybe let philosophers kick it around for a little longer and then certainly extraterrestrial life forms from In most Formulations of that problem space Is still the other it's still the source of the mysterious except maybe like seti Which is like how can we detect signals from far away alien intelligence as they will be able to perceive Yeah, it's uh and psychedelics is another one of those that's like we're starting to see okay Well, can we try to see if there's some Medical applications of like helping you get like he does studies of help you quit smoking or help you in some kind of treatment of some disease And he's sneaking into that. I mean it's like openly sneaking into it. It's doing studies on it of like How can you expand the mind with these Tools and what can the mind discover through psychedelics and so on and we're like slowly creeping into the space of being able to explore these mysterious questions But it's like it sucks that sometimes a lot of people have to die meaning sorry They have to age out Like it's like faculty have a and people have a fixed set of ideas and they stick by them In order for new ideas to come in then the Young folks have to be born with the pot with an open mind the possibility of those ideas and then they have to become old enough And get a's in school and whatever to To uh to then carry those ideas forward. So you know the acceptance of the Exploration and the mysterious takes time. It's kind of sad. It is sad I agree Maybe to go into my source of passion, which is artificial intelligence what's your sense about um the The possibility Like Pamela McCordick has this quote that I like a talk to her a couple years ago. I guess already in this podcast that That artificial intelligence began with the ancient wish to forge the gods So Do you think artificial intelligence may become the very kind of gods that Were at the center of our the religions of most of our history Yeah, there's a lot there so i'm going to start by addressing this idea of artificial intelligence being separate from human beings Okay, so that i don't think that's actually That might happen. Okay. I mean, it's already happened, but let's put it this way like you're talking about super artificial intelligence like autonomous conscious artificial intelligence Okay, yeah, something with artificial consciousness First of all, I think she's correct. Okay, but also There's also an awesome quote. Um, I'd also like to bring up this Uh writer of fiction actually um Ted Chang and his one of his essays he writes short essays one of them was the basis for the movie arrival Which if you haven't seen it, it's a really great movie about uh, UFOs uh and it has a very creative way of proposing an idea of how they might be able to communicate First of all, how they appear to us Second of all, how they may be communicating with us humans exactly Um, the author Ted Chang has a lot i recommend his His writings his short stories One is very short and it appeared as It appeared in nature about 20 years ago and it is called i think it's called getting eating the crumbs from the table or something like that And it's basically this short essay and i hate to do you know to do a spoiler here But if you don't want to know what it's about don't listen right now. Yes, spoiler yeah, okay, so this is what it's about so basically it's about human beings Uh becoming two different species, okay, and one of them is created. They're called metahumans and they start by Hacking themselves with tech. Okay, sound familiar So they do this and they become metahumans and Another species right and you know just kind of another fork Um such that Humans can barely understand them Because they're so far removed so in a sense Are they gods right no they're metahumans. They're super humans are enhanced humans. Okay, I see that Hopefully on the horizon frankly. I hope so not that we have two species But that we can use our technology or we can We can become So integrated with our technology that we can survive. Okay, we can survive The radiation in space we can't go places now because of the radiation in space Perhaps we can develop our bodies such that we can survive the radiation in space So there there's this idea of these metahumans now there's also this idea that Technology is just another form of humans. We've created it right and so maybe it is Benton surviving there by using us You know kind of as a meme or a team some people are calling them teams now these self generating They're replicating themselves through us. Okay, I see that also and I don't think that's terribly bad Maybe it's just the way that we are evolving. It doesn't mean that the You know we're evolving all the time like we're taller than we used to be you know, we have different Skills and you know, so I don't see that as as a bad thing I think a lot of people see it as if we're not how we are now It's a tragedy, but it's not a tragedy how we are now is actually a tragedy for most people alive Yeah, and that we might be evolving ways we can't possibly perceive like you said that The humans have created Twitter and Twitter may be changing us Yes, in ways that we can't even understand now currently like from a perspective If you look at the entirety of the network of Twitter that might be an organism That this now the the organism understands what's happening From its level of perception But we humans are just like the cells of the human body. We're interacting individually, but like we're not actually aware of the big picture That's happening and we naturally somehow or whatever the force that's creating the entirety of this whatever one One version of it is the evolutionary process like biological evolution Whatever force that is is just creating is greater and greater level of complexity and maybe somehow Not other kinds of non-human intelligence are involved that we're calling alien intelligence. Yes So just a step back and we'll come back to AI because I got to I love the topic, but um Through American Cosmic and in general you've interacted with much of the UFO community you mentioned uphologists By the way, is it uphologists or is it uphologists? It's uphologists. You follow? Yes, so what first of all what is a uphologist and second of all What have you learned about this community of uphologists or also as you refer to them as the Invisibles or the members of the invisible college Or just in general people who study UFOs from the different all all the different kinds of groups of study UFOs sure generally what I found is that They are okay, so people who are interested in UFOs from like being a kid you know and seen some cool movie like star wars or something And then they become interested and then they study it as best they can UFOs or uap's there are generally An honest group of people who are using their tools and there are generally two types of them um There are those who believe in nuts and bolts like the physical craft and they believe in that these are things from other planets Okay, so that's like the ET H hypothesis You know I'm sorry ET hypothesis ETH is what we call it. Yeah, sorry about that So this is like there's an actual spaceship like a physical like something akin but Much more advanced than the rockets we use now. Yeah, and they have advanced. Yeah Not necessarily biological, but something like biological organisms that travel on these Yes, so this would be like what to the stars academy is trying to decipher like how you know How do they do it? You know, maybe we could use that technology the propulsion and things like that They look at the rocket technology Okay, so there are those and then there are people who believe that it's more consciousness-based Okay, so these are two types of Uphologist who are known and these are people who we know about then I found that there are people who Are quote unquote I call them the invisibles because Jacques Vellig in the in the 70s he and I think actually Alan Hineck his colleague quoted this is a Francis Bacon thing by the way it goes back to the early modern time period when scientists could be killed for basically trying to go outside With the church or the government institution determined was Dogma and so they had to be really careful so they called he called the invisible college So Hineck took that term and Reused it or what do you call it? Repurposed it so he repurposed it so That they were still talking to each other though. So what I found to be the case was that there was a group of people who were scientists But were not on the internet, you know Ten people today and students of mine in particular and my own kids actually They think that you only exist if you're on the internet or something to really exist if it's on the internet That's of course untrue and so what I found was that there are most people who are the most powerful people of our society And are doing things are not on the internet. You're not going to find any trace of them So a lot of these people are What I call invisible people who are studying At least their work is invisible you might find them on the internet But you're going to find that they're part of the bowling league or something like that right you will not find that They are actually engaged in research about this topic, okay And so I called them the invisibles because I was surprised to find them And I thought well this is no longer the invisible college because these people are not even talking to each other And that's why I reference this movie fight clip in it you have an invisible, okay And his name is Tyler Durden and he's incredible. He does incredible things um He's like A person he should not exist right because he does so many things that are Amazing and so I found a person like that and I call and he's a real person He's partially on the internet, but nothing that he does Around that topic of UFOs is on the internet. So I decided to call him Tyler D after Tyler Durden And so these people I've termed the UFO fight club because they work together, but they don't know In fact his boss doesn't know what he does They don't talk to each other because you know the first rule of fight club Same as the second. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, you don't talk about no, you don't do it Why do you have a sense that um There's such a um, I don't want to say fear, but a principle of staying out of the limelight I think there's something real and I think that the use of it could be um dangerous for people Oh, sorry, you mean like something real like there's actual Techno I don't know what's the right terminology here to use it alien technology Ideas about technology that are being explored that are dangerous have made public that may be become dangerous of So I wouldn't cut you don't have to call alien alien technology You can call it ideas about alien technology because I don't know if it's actual alien technology or not I honestly don't know But I do know for a fact because it's a historical fact that jack Parsons and Constantine Chikoski who's Russian believed in these things and believed that they were downloading this information whether or not they were I don't I mean that they definitely created the rocket technologies. That's true How they did and whether their process was exactly what they said it was I don't know so this is the same thing today So we've got some powerful technologies going on here and you know Of course we have a military and we have a military for a reason every almost every government if you need a military has one And so they're going to Keep these the way they should be capped in my interpretation. I mean think about it Everybody accepts the fact that we have a military almost everybody does why are they so upset then that the military keeps secrets Yeah, well, that's that's the nature of things and we can get into that whole thing a a I tend to I've spoken with the ctl. Lockheed Martin on this um I Obviously read and think about war a lot. It's such a difficult question Because this space this particular space of technology There's a gray area that I think is evolving over time I think nuclear weapons change the game in terms of what should and shouldn't be secret I think there's already technology that will enable us to destroy each other And so there's some sense in which some technology should be made public this is the same discussion of um You know Between companies which part of your technology should you make public through like for example academic publications and all that kind of stuff Like how the google search engine works patreon calgary the more How the different deep learning like there's pretty vibrant machine learning research communities within google facebook and so on And they release a lot of different ideas. It's an interesting question like How dangerous is it to release some of the ideas? I think it's a gray area that's constantly Changing I do also think it's super interesting. I wonder if you could elaborate on a little bit that there's this gray area between What's actually real in terms of alien technology and the belief of it When held in the minds of really brilliant people that they ultimately may produce the same kind of result in terms of Being able to create new technologies that are human usable like Is there um in your mind? They're one and the same is like believing in alien craft and Actually being a possession of an alien craft. I don't think they're the same now belief is powerful. Okay um In new age communities, you know people think thoughts are things. Okay, that's been said You know thoughts are things you can make them happen kind of thing believing them enough It is true that if I believe I can run a five forty mile I'll do it. Okay, and I probably will do it and I've done it before actually um much younger, but I did it So but my coach is the one that instilled that belief in me right yeah and so But can I run like a one minute mile? No Okay, so I guess does that answer your question like there's only so far belief goes in generating Reality well, yeah, I mean, I guess that's what just having listed to Jacques Relay that it seemed like Reality is not was not as important for the scientific exploration of the concept of the alien technology I could be wrong, but this is what I think Jacques's getting at there are other ways to access places in reality Other than what we consider to be physical right that's what they're consciousness. Okay, so in Like I said, so religious studies is Among other things it's just it's looking at visionary experiences All right, so people do have visionary experiences. They did without drugs, you know, they did with drugs They do with drugs. They do many have them without drugs today and oftentimes those visionary experiences Um correspond to each other now. How do we how do we make sense of that? So you know, do these places actually exist? In a sense, I think they do and so I think that you know, like let's take that very famous case of a virgin Mary Operation in Fatima where I think there was like a lot of people thousands and thousands if not like I think 50,000 Or something like that a lot of people a gathered to see what's now called The miracle of Fatima, which was the spinning of the Sun Well a lot of people saw different things, but they all saw some kind of thing Okay, so they also saw different things, but it was As something happened, okay, so I guess the question is um What are these places where we access Non What I'd call like non-physical realities, okay, where we actually do get information We do get like who could say that Jack Parsons didn't get information from doing these rituals and accessing these We have to say that he actually did Because we see the results of physical results the same thing with Tyler and that's why I put Tyler in this camp with this tradition With Jack Parsons I say that Tyler is Is getting these what he calls downloads and you can see the results of them you physically He sells them on the nasty can make millions of dollars from them. He they help people. I've seen people who they've helped Okay, so Do you think psychedelics that I just mentioned earlier have a possibility of going to these kind of same kind of places of exploring ideas that are outside of our More commonplace understanding of the world Um in my yeah, I think so absolutely however I think we have to be really careful about Those because young people or people in general I should say Absolutely can get hurt by them. I mean, but we get hurt by alcohol, you know, we drive our cars and we get kill each other But psychedelics are really interesting because I know that within the history of of our country um We have used psychedelics and various capacities for our military in order to Try to stimulate ideas and access places and information that can't be accessed normally. This is all fact Yeah, I talked to Matt for like four hours. So we ran out of time being able to talk well I wanted to talk to him about mk. All-chern and um Tech Kaczynski. There's so many mysterious things there. There's like layers of What's known or what's not known as fascinating, but I think what is interesting is A psychedelics were used or were attempted to be used as tools of different kinds That's the point. So like we think of technology as tools Uh to enable us to do things and that same way that psychedelics Like many drugs could be used as tools some more effective than others Absolutely. I don't think what you I'm not sure where you can do effectively um with alcohol Although somebody I think somebody commented somewhere on social media that uh, I don't know why everyone gives It's so negative about alcohol because uh, I think the person said that um it's given me some of the most incredible it enabled me Uh to let go and have some of the most incredible experiences with friends in my life And it's true. We kind of sometimes say alcohol is dangerous It can make you do for but the reality is it's also A fascinating tool for letting go of Trying to be somebody maybe that you're not and allowing you to be yourself fully whatever crazy form that is And allow you to have really deep and interesting experiences with those you love so uh Yeah, even alcohol can be used as an effective tool for exploring experiences and becoming Uh, expanding your mind and becoming a better person so um What the hell was I talking about? Uh, so yeah, so psych so psychedelics and oh yeah, and m and m m k ultra is there something interesting to say in the In our you historically use of psychedelics. I mean think about it. When did we start doing that when did we start using those? That's true. It's quite a long time ago, right? But okay, but true, but when did our government start? Experimenting with them with us. Okay, our government is the United States government. Yeah Okay, so that happened in around the 1950s. Okay, after quote unquote the 1940s where we have 47 and we have you know This you know this Roswell type stuff going on. Okay, like crash sites and things like that. So I think that um I think there might be a correlation there. I don't know what it is. Okay, but I do think That's saying actually yeah, there's a lot of interesting things started around that time right? Yeah, yeah, and so Eldest Huxley would say we opened the doors of perception. Okay, and what flew in Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha haocalypse Beautifully put It'd be interesting to get your opinions on certain more concrete sightings that are Sort of monumental sightings with alien intelligences In the history in the recent history that at least I'm aware of I'm I'm not uh Very much aware of this history, but the most recent one I've spoken with David favor on this podcast I really like him as a person. He's a fun guy, but also he's gotten a chance to He's described as account of having experience with the what he and others now term the tic-tac UFO What do you think of that particular sighting which is captivated the imagination of many in particular because there's been videos released of it Yes of these UFOs, but I find the videos to be way too blurry and grainy to be of interest to me the personally to me the most fascinating thing is the first person to come from David and others I bought that experience, but what are your thoughts? Those videos have been out for a while actually much I think in their mid-2000s. They were out But what you have is you have kind of like this corroboration from a group and also the New York Times involvement in 2017 My opinion about the tic-tacs is that First I believe the people who have had the experiences. I know some of them like you know some of the radar people and things like that They'd saw them and they're not I don't believe they're making it up. Okay. I do think that this is being this Is being used as a spin okay, and I'm just gonna say that and the reason I think that is this is because at the time it was released I was still in touch with many people who were Among the UFO fight club and so they had intimate knowledge of these things and the first thing they said was Um, we have satellites that can read the news on your phone when you're reading it So we've got better footage than this and this is not good footage at all Therefore they believe that it was authentic footage that had been doctored up now Why I don't know why Um, so I so I honestly don't know if it's accurate or not. I mean I believe the people absolutely But was this something out there to fool these people perhaps I don't know um is it spun The people who I know who are part of the UFO fight club believe it was real Okay, and said this is badly done, but real okay, I see but so there's some kind of when you say spinning there's some parties involved Oh, yeah, there's a narrow line to leverage it. Yes, farm the for funds probably for for funds or financial interests. Yeah, I think so Nevertheless, it hasn't spired a conversation and just a lot of people in the world that There's something mysterious out there that uh, we're not fully informed about And I was certainly grateful that the New York Times ran the story right before my book came out Well, see, but there's the financial interest that to me as a person who Doesn't give a damn about money actually. I don't like money uh is um Except for when it's used in the in the context of a company to build cool things But like personally, I don't know. I find the financial interest side off-putting Um, especially when we're talking about the exploration some of the most like money is a silly creation of human beings I agree And it's it's uh used to provide temporary like The unfortunate thing with money is that it um helps you buy things that Too easily allow you to forget The important things in life and also to forget the difficult aspects of life to do the difficult intellectual work of being cognizant of your mortality of like fully engaging in life in Life of reason to of thinking deeply about the world all those kinds of things If you get like a nice car or something like that and just like I don't know all the different things you can do with money is you can make you forget that anyway As a there's a long way to say that yes, yes, it's very nice that doing cosine and nicely with the book but also it I think it I mean like I said I think it inspired quite a lot of people that you know, maybe there's a lot of things out there that were Like it reminded a lot of people there's things out there. We don't know about Lex I can agree with you on that, but can I push back on two things? Okay, all right the first one is that I was happy to receive money from the book because of the New York Times article That's absolutely false So I published my book with Oxford, which is an academic press and you don't get paid with an academic press Okay, so money was not it for me what it was was recognition that my research was being validated So you know because then people called me and said well, maybe it's more than interesting Okay, and they did okay the other thing about money is just as you say that Now I agree with you there I'm upset about money too. I think there should be universal health care A universal income all you know, I don't think people should be in poverty especially because we are so wealthy as a species frankly Okay, that said think about this if you are wish you don't have money You can't have a life of the mind either right 100% so I'm not espousing that like money is the devil I just think that there is money can be A drug or I will compare it to like food or something like that where like you really should have enough To nourish yourself. Yes, right and uh too much could and too much can be a huge problem So that that's where I come from with money and I'm just Where I'm fortunate enough to have the skills and the health to be able to earn a living in whatever way Like I wish of having being in the United States to being able to speak English So the very least I could work with McDonald's and my standards are I told you I mean mistake I told you a rogan that I've always had a few money and people are like oh Lexus always raised no no I was always broke what I mean by I've always had a few monies I My standard what it takes to have a few is those very little I'm just happy with it with very little But yes, it's true that money for many people And including for myself is just a different level for different people is freedom Yeah, so I'm really to think freedom to do put your pursue your passions It just so happens I am very fortunate that many of my passions Often come with a salary if I wished right everything like me I love programming So even just like working as a like basic level software engineer Will be a source of a lot of joy for me and that happens in this modern Modern world to come with a salary. So yeah, it's definitely true I just mean that it can be become a dangerous drug. So I'm glad I'm glad you Are in this pursuit that you are in for the love of knowledge and It's true Yeah, so people should definitely buy your book I won't be making money off of it. Oh, yeah, it's rocks. Yeah Absolutely, maybe my next book. Yes You yeah, your sense is there's something as there's some Groups of people that maybe trying to Leverage this for financial gains and you know probably good financial I mean they may have good reasons for this too like okay, let's take the study of UFOs Okay, maybe many people in government that decide who dull out the money. Let's put it that way They think UFOs aren't real So they're not going to give these programs money. So how do these programs make money? Um, they're gonna have to find a way to do it. So maybe That's how they do it. Okay, so I It's fascinating. This is the way to raise money for For doing the research. Yeah, I think so So let's take a step back to Roswell we talked about a little bit What's your sense about that whole time of Roswell and just area 51 and the sightings and Also the follow on mythology around those sightings Um, that's with us today. All right, so Where do I get started? Well, I mean it is a mythology here, right? The mythology of Roswell It's it's very religious like in the sense that there's a pilgrimage to Roswell people make And they go to there's a festival there as well like a religious festival You can get little kitschy stuff like you can get at a religious festival there So it's very much like a place of pilgrimage where a heraphony occurred and a heraphony is basically Contact with non-human intelligence. Okay, so non-human intelligence is thought to have contacted humans or crashed At this place in Roswell, New Mexico now what's fascinating is that I begin my book by going out to a crash site in New Mexico I have to get blindfolded with My well to tell you the truth the story is that I'm with Tyler who's An invisible and he wants to show me a place in New Mexico where a crash happened And he says that he thinks that I need to see physical evidence because I don't believe and so I said I'll go but I'm going to bring a friend of mine and he said no you have to go alone he goes It's a it's a place that is on Government-owned property and it's a no-fly zone and when you go you'll be blindfolded and I said I definitely need to bring a friend So he said well, who do you want to bring I just had met this University scientist who's very well known and I call him James in my book and I asked and I had a feeling James Would definitely want to do this and I asked James and he said I'll go tomorrow, okay? So I suggested this to Tyler and Tyler say absolutely not, you know And I thought I know he's gonna look up James and he's gonna say yes Because if anybody can figure out what this material is that we're gonna go look for it's gonna be James He has the instruments and so Tyler did in fact look him up and finally said okay, I got You can go so we both head out there and we get blindfolded and Tyler takes this out there Takes about 40 minutes Outside of a certain place in New Mexico. So in terms of Roswell. This is what I can say is that according to Tyler There were about seven crashes out in those 1940s in New Mexico in different various places We went to one of them according to Tyler at the time. I was completely an atheist with regard to anything that had to do with the UFOs So we're out there. We had configured metal detectors for these metals and we did find these okay and They've since been studied by very scientist material scientist so forth and I believe Jacques talked about Not those particular ones, but others on the Joe Rogan show Um, they're a not anomalies. So there are we Scientists don't I'm a I'm not a scientist. So I can't weigh in on Whether I just I just believe the people these people I believe because they're Well-known scientists. What do you mean they're not anomaly so the no they are non they are non anomalous Oh are anomalous in terms of the materials that are naturally occurring on earth yes Okay, so that so there's some kind of Inklings of evidence that That's something happened And Roswell in terms of crashes of alien technology Now what else is there to the mythology so there's some The crashes right yeah, I mean, that's kind of epic. Yeah, yeah and What else like what What are we supposed to take away from this right? Yeah, so it's weird Okay, so um, there's this okay, so in religious studies like I said we call it a heraphony Which is the meeting of a non-human intelligent thing whatever it is an angel a god whatever a goddess with Oran alien with humans and that's the place okay, so the place is new mexico so we so new mexico becomes folded into the mythology of this new religion is what I call a new type of religion um of the UFO and It becomes ground zero for this new mythology Just like mecca is the is the place where Muslims go they have to go right at least once in their lives. It's a pilgrimage place now So this is so in my book. That's how I tell it now. What about Roswell in the public imagination? um Obviously according to any Jacobson who's good, you know, she's a great author Investigative journalist. She's written about Roswell too I don't agree with all of what she comes up with but part of it is that there's a lot of military stuff going on there That is classified and there's a reason why you can't get in and nor would you want to right so um So there's a lot of experimentation going on there um I don't believe that it has to do with ets frankly But in the imaginations of americans Roswell is that place but I went to a different place and apparently there are several places in new mexico now strangely enough I travel back to new mexico at the very end chapter of my book, but it's not it's i don't i don't go there physically I go there through the story of a catholic Uh none he actually believes that she by located to new mexico uh in the In the 1600s so she yeah it was very strange and i was at the vatican at the space observatory when i made that connection that she probably went to the very Well, she believed she went to this very place that i had gone Can you uh can you elaborate in a little bit like what does it mean to go to that place So that yeah for her for her i mean so we're kind of um breaking down The barrier between what it means to be at a place time Right i agree with you This is the field of religious studies so and again i don't say it's true in my book I just say it's a very strange coincidence that I'm at the vatican observatory in fact i'd finished my book But while i was at the vatican observatory i was there with tyler and we were looking at the records the can't they're called the trial records But they're the canonization records of these two saints each was said to have done amazing things one was Joseph of kupertino who levitated Okay Where was is said to have levitated the other was Maria of agrida from spain their contemporaries in the 1600s Who was said to have been able to buy locate which is to be in two places at once? Okay, so this is a belief in catholicism that Certain very holy people can do these kinds of things like levitate Which by the way is also associated with UFO Abductions, you know people get levitated out of their beds and things like that So we were sent there um by a billionaire who was interested in levitation and by location And since i could get into the vatican and i knew the Director of the vatican observatory Both tyler and i were able to go to the secret archives and look at the canonization records and then go to Castle Gandalfo which is about an hour from the vatican where the first observatory the space observatory Of the vatican is the second one is in arizona and it has a much larger telescope So we went and we and brother guy gave me the keys to the archive I said look at anything you want i got to see a lot of stuff by sark carol say it by the way I know you talked about yeah, it was awesome So they have a whole section on extra trestial the search for extra trestial life And they don't by the way how awesome is that it was awesome Yeah, so we got to stay there. They have a scholars quarters. Yeah, and so they had two And so tyler stayed in one and i stayed in the other and Brother guy probably shouldn't have been so nice to me and given me the um the keys Because i i when i got home we were there for two weeks when i got home I got this frantic phone call from him and he basically said Diana he goes do you remember where you put the the original kepler and so i had this kepler right and so i misplaced it Luckily i remembered where it went i was like oh gosh i think goodness I found it but he'll probably change the rules of the vatican observatory after my visit So maria is um she's actually in the history of our country in that She first wrote a cosmography of What she said was the spinning earth and this was in the 1600s and she that's her first book and she wrote that and Then she said that she was transported on the wings of angels to the new world and she said that she met And a culture of people and she Basically told them about the faith of catholicism okay, and then what happened was that The people that she and she described the fauna she described the people and everything like that And so there were actually missionaries there and when they went to try to Convert some of the people who already lived there Apparently they already knew a bunch of stuff and they said how does you know all this stuff and they said This lady in blue came and told us and they said did it look like this and they showed them They obviously didn't have a photograph, but they had a picture of a Sister a nun and they say yeah, she wore similar clothes, but she was much younger, right? And these guys were you know i thought that was weird But when they went back to Spain They found that this woman had been doing that in her mind had been traveling I mean, I don't know what to make of it. There's so many things that are sort of forcing you to kind of Go outside of You know, I'm of many minds. I have very most of my days spent with very rigorous scientific kind of things And even engineering kind of things and then I'm also open-minded and just The the entirety of the idea of extraterrestrial life forces you to think outside of uh conventional boundaries of thought scientific current scientific thought Let's put it that way in your story I know So it's freaking you out. Yeah, that's okay What do you just another person that seems to be a key figure in this In the mythology of this is Bob Lazar it'd be Interesting maybe there's others you can tell me about but um uh Uh bob who's also been a jargon, but his story has been Told quite a bit and he's got i think he said that he Witnessed some of the work being done uh on The spacecraft that was in you know that was captured and so on in order to uh Try to reverse engineer some of the technology in terms of the propulsion So on what are your thoughts about his story how it fits into the mythology of this whole thing and uh broader you a phologist you phologist community Okay, so regarding bollazar With respect to his claims um again I have no way to adjudicate whether or not He actually you know Encounter this I do have friends you are and the people that I know who Know his story some know him um believe him And they have said to me that the most important thing that they think he has said In fact one of them I think he made it Made a meme out of it or something like that was basically he said Uh, maybe the public you know I regret making it public The public isn't ready for this kind of information and basically they've they Emphasize that to me and they emphasized it so much that they wanted me to know right? So That is somewhat creepy to me So I think okay this poor guy bollazar So many people you know this is what happens to people who have experiences like this their Questioned their reputations are put on the line in some instances Their their reputations are manipulated on purpose to make them look incredible To me as um Scientists it's just inspiring that It kind of gives this kind of I'm not even thinking of it is there an actual spacecraft being hidden somewhere and studied and so on I'm thinking of it like I don't know. It's a thing that gives you a spark of a dream, you know to As a reminder that we don't understand most of How this world works and then we can build Technologies that aren't here today that will allow us to understand much more And then it's kind of like almost like a feeling that it provides And then it inspires and makes you dream That's that's the way I see the bollazar story Missed like people ask me because I'm at MIT people ask me like the bollazar actually go to MIT and so on I don't know and I personally don't care Like it's uh that's not what's interesting to me about That story to me the myth is more interesting not interesting actually but inspiring yes Because inspiring you're suggesting that the myth inspires you to create reality. Yes. Yeah. I think that's that's true So even if it's like not real It doesn't I mean in some sense just like you said it doesn't in some sense it uh it doesn't So a lot of people know how much I love 2001 space Odyssey so I got all these emails asking like Uh, hey bro Uh, do you know what's up with the monoliths in like the middle of the desert or whatever it was I don't have haven't been actually paying attention. I apologize Uh, but um, you kind of mentioned offline that this was kind of cool and interesting What would he make of these monoliths and in general? Are you uh Are you a fan of 2001 space Odyssey where monoliths showed up? Do you have any thoughts about either the science fiction the mythology of it or the reality of it? Yes Okay No, okay, and please say more Ha ha right so first of all Kubrick's films are not ever easy for me because they're so weird right and I don't actually enjoy watching them But that is that yeah, it doesn't take away from their incredible brilliance though and their visionary Uh merit so As 2001 space Odyssey is incredibly Visionary and of course all those things that people say I don't have to restate them Um, in terms of what I've it's a subtext to my book by the way I I didn't mean it to be but it's almost it's it's almost a character in my book 2001 space Odyssey and When the monolith started to appear again Everything went crazy with my everything internet social media phone. What's up? What's going on? Right? Is this disclosure and I thought well, you know, I'll tell you one thing is it's it's List look at the timing of it. It's a cool. It isn't art You know, and then copy art and things like that It's actually happening at a really interesting time when all of us are forced to go online When all of us are for because of covid right? Yeah, we're completely now invaded by the screen or we're invading the screen Like we're living our infrastructure now is completely changed So the monolith basically if art is supposed to like show us life It certainly has if that's an art project somebody did an awesome job with it But apparently that monolith was there for a long time right? I mean that's the thing. It's been there for a couple years So they said okay, all right that said um If your audience is interested I think the best theory about the meaning of the monolith is um It's Robert Ager or Robert Ayer. I think it's Robert Ager um, he's got a website where he does analysis of films and it's called Collative learning or collative learning and he does the meaning of the monolith everyone should go look at that because I fully agree with them when I studied Meet different meetings of the monolith in 2000 when a space ought to see I was fascinated okay So what is this about? I his I accepted as soon as I listened to it so and watched it So basically he says that the monolith is okay. Can you pick up your your phone here? What does that look like? It looks awfully a lot like a monolith. Yeah, okay, so basically that's what he was saying was that Kubrick was basically The monolith was technology or the screen in particular and he basically was saying that the cinema screen We were being you know completely and if you think about it look at all this we live in a screen culture We have computer screens iPhone screensers, you know phone screens. We have TV screens everything is something you know And now that covid has come we're forced to go into these screens and we're forced to live a different material Existence than we did have lived before so in in my sense, I think that if it's an art project, it's a really good one for that So it's this I like that That meaning of it. It's a screen and the screen could take all All kinds of forms. I mean our perception system in a sense is a screen Between reality and our mind the screen of the computer is a screen The virtual reality worlds that we might be one day living in It would there will be an interface. I mean ultimately is about the interface. That's interesting With an interface to another another world of ideas It's also a material change It's a change in our mature. I mean when people talk about augmented reality I say we already live in augmented reality. Yeah, don't we because this isn't the this isn't our grandparents existence Yeah, I sometimes You know you have to pause and remind yourself how Weirdly different this reality isn't just even like I mean 30 years ago The internet changed so much and social media has changed so much about actually Just the space of our thinking Wikipedia Change so much about the uploading of our knowledge the way we interact with knowledge. I mean it uploaded Our long-term memory about facts onto a digital format so in the sense that expanded our mind That's kind of interesting I'd be curious to see if he has just one interpretation. I wonder if there he there's a lot of it With him. Yeah, so over the years he and I have corresponded And I told him I said look I'm gonna be using this in my book So I think you should read what I say and he was he of course wanted to see it So what do you think about your book? There you get it. It's three. Yeah. Oh, yeah, so He is a non-believer in alien intelligence and UFOs, but he And that's fine, but I I still agree with him that the meaning of the monolith was the screen, but that doesn't mean the screen isn't Like what David Bowie said, right? So it's not exclusive so I could still use his theory, but differ from the conclusions in terms of non-believer and believer there's um When you say believer you also are kind of implying this um uh The the idea that aliens have visited or had made direct contact with humans in some form Um, there's also the exploration and the idea of just alien intelligence intelligence is out there in the universe Yeah, you know the Drake equation that estimating how many Intelligence civilizations maybe out there how many have ever existed how many are able to communicate with us I mean when you just zoom out from our own little Selfish perspective of earth and look at the entirety let's say the Milky Way galaxy, but maybe even the universe Does the idea that their intelligence civilizations out there? Something that you're excited about or something that you're terrified about That's a good question. So basically I would say I'm not so keen on it um I think that our relationship with technology as it is and as it as I hope it will go will help us um survive Okay, um, I don't think We're equipped to do it as we stand now, but I think that if we can up our game or let's just put it this way If technology is an extension of ourselves, which it actually is it will help us Because it'll probably be smarter than us, okay It'll help us survive in the ways in which it determines best, okay, that said um if there are non-human intelligences Out there and they have more advanced, you know, obviously Technologies than us and they actually come um uh the history of human engagement with you know other cultures Has not gone well for cultures that are less aggressive You so you see what I'm saying like it's not a good idea Well, I wonder where we stand on the where humans stand in the full spectrum of aggression Well heck where are we now Lex? I mean we're not too great here. We're still Aggressing against each other. No, I know, but that that will give us a benefit, right like oh Or you're saying I thought Okay, I see I just have a sense that there may be a lot of Intelligence is out there. They're less aggressive Because they've evolved past it. We can't assume that No, I know we can't assume that but like if we can't assume it then I'm gonna assume the worst Well, that's uh Despite the fact that I am uh Russian and think that life is suffering. I tend to assume not the best, but I tend to assume that there is a best core to To creatures to people into creatures that ultimately wins out I think there's an evolutionary advantage to being good to other living creatures And so Ultimately, I think that if there's intelligence Civilizations out there that prosper sufficiently to be able to travel across the great spans of Space That uh they've evolved past silly aggression That uh it's more likely in my mind to be a deeply cooperative So like growth over destruction Like growth does not require destruction I think But if you see the universe as a ultimately a place where it's highly constrained and resources that are necessary for Traveling across space and time Then uh perhaps aggression is necessary in order to Aggress against others. They're desiring to get access to those resources. I don't know I tend to try to be optimistic on that front I think I'm emotionally optimistic and intellectually non optimistic Uh, yeah, I guess I'm that I'm there with you. I tend to believe that the uh happiness and deep fulfillment in life is found in that emotional place The intellectual places Really useful for building cool new technologies And ideas and so on but uh happiness is in the emotional place and there it pays off to be optimistic I think You said that technology might be able to save us. Yeah, that's also kind of optimistic too It might kill us Talking to you offline a little bit that there was a sense that you know That we humans are facing existential risks That uh, it's not obvious that we will survive for long. Do you have um Is there things that you worry about in terms of ways we may destroy ourselves or deeply damage The fabric of human civilization that technology may allow us to avoid or alleviate Yes, I think that any you can choose anything actually and It could destroy us. Okay, so you know pollution um, you know, here we're in a pandemic. Okay um a meteor okay, so we can use technology Or the thing is is that we we say we use technology, but actually that's not a correct way of putting it in my opinion um So there is a term used by others Uh coined by somebody I don't know and I'm sorry to not give credit or credits to But it's called technogenesis and it's this idea Hydrogar actually had this idea, but he didn't use that term and it's this idea that we co-evolve with technology that we don't actually use it Most people think it's like a tool we use. Okay, let's use technology to do this Well actually when we engage with technology we we actually engage with it and it engages back with us And we engage with it. So it's this co-evolution that's happening and in that sense um I think that As we create more autonomous intelligent AI it will help us survive because It you know if we co-evolve with it it will need us as much as we need it is my opinion um How that happens or if that have if that bears out to be true um We'll see but I don't think the idea that we use technology is is a correct way to put it I think that technology is something so strange the way it is today like digital technology I'm not talking about hammers or things like that those kinds of tools. Okay, is technology is so far removed from that and our environment is so now conditioned by our technology and the infrastructure we live within the material structure. I think that um It's going to it's not I don't think it's going to be a Frankenstein I think it's actually going you know like a Mary Shelley type idea of technology. I think it's actually going to be more Promethean in the sense of You know think about it. We create children and then we get old then we rely upon our children to help us. Okay Well, I feel like that about technology. We've created well. We've created it right and so it's kind of growing up now Uh or maybe it's in its teenage years We'll see What do you think about in terms of this co-evolution of um the work around brain computer interfaces and maybe uh neural link and and Elon seeing neural link in particular as uh It's long-term mission as a symbiosis with artificial intelligence so like giving a greater bandwidth channel of communication between Technology AI systems and the biological uh neural networks of our human mind What do you think about this idea of connecting directly to the brain Right in the AI systems. I mean, okay. I've I've listened to your podcast with Elan I've listened Elan before very until obviously super smart guy um I think this is already I mean not in the specific ways that he is doing it But I think we are already doing that. Okay, and I I can give you some examples um And there are really trivial examples, but they do make the point and this is one of them so Before he started this research on UFOs and UAPs and technology I actually was looking at the effects of technology and In in particular media on religion and what I did was I was lucky to be asked to be a consultant for various movies and One in particular I learned a lot from and that was the conjuring so that I was a History consultant for the conjuring it happens to be my field. It's Catholic studies, right? And you've got these people who are real people and they're you know exercising demons and things like that Okay, so I thought wow, this is a great example for me. You know, I didn't do it for the money It doesn't pay well, but I did it to learn right yeah, so I work closely with the screenwriters who I work with now all the time with I work with them all the time now And what I found was this I found that as the most interesting part of the creation of this movie was the editing process because they would use the it would go through editing And they would use test audiences and a lot of the test audiences Would be that you know, there's like these things where they test their flicker rates and things like that the i flicker rates And so and the and when it goes Really intense they did go to UC Irvine and they do this thing called cognitive consumption which is basically um or I'm sorry cognitive consumerism where they basically hook test audiences up to EKGs and they read their brains Yeah, and they figure out which scenes create the most arousal yeah, yeah, and so they cut out all the other scenes Okay, so what we're getting is we're getting like this drug when we go to the movies or when do video games or watch We're literally physiologically responding to our technologies So we're already there. We're already interfacing with them physiologically. So that's my example now the The kind of thing that he's doing a musk is doing with near a link I say go for it. That's awesome. I hope he does it, you know I'm fascinated. I wanted to happen Um, why do I want it to happen because I think that Well first it's inevitable that's it's going to happen I also want to point out that Jacques Vellet was trying to get this done back in the 60s and the 70s He was writing papers about in fact the Arpanette the pro pro to internet was called augmentation of the human intellect So we've been doing this for a while. Okay, so um props to a lot of musk But we've been thinking about this for a good time Um, we've even been visioning it. Okay, so there was a really interesting Jesuit priest. He was French Tell your day shardon. I don't know if you know who he is if not he's fascinating He was a he was actually a soldier Uh, before he became a priest And so he believed he also saw what he called a biosphere now this guy is talking in like the early 20th century like the 19 1719 you know that time period and so basically he he said and wrote about this thing called the news fear And he basically said there will be a point when we merge with our technology And it's going to be somewhat like some kind of a biosphere We have this atmosphere and then we have the stratosphere and this going to be this biosphere And we're all going to be hooked into it mentally So we'll be able to communicate in a way in which we don't communicate now So you know that sounds so similar to the singularity So after I've read him many many years ago, but when I read the Cursewiles book about the singularity To me it read just like um religious language like it read like you know because he They in fact it's so much like revelation to me when I read it that I even assigned it to my students in my classes I'm like this is this is it you know, this is like a really great book of the singularity, you know the coming singularity and This religious event because it seems like it when he writes about it. He says I felt it before I even understood it You know, he mean curse while curse while yeah, so what I mean what are your feelings about math and feelings thoughts feelings too about The idea of the singularity do you think it's ultimately the thing that echoes throughout the history of ideas is this like moment of revelation like this this almost mythological religious moment or is there something more Physical to this idea of concrete concrete about the idea of The come up point where our technology. There'll be like a phase shift between the the basic fabric of like humanity Of how we interact, you know how evolution brought us to be these biological interaction. They are technology Crosses some kind of line of capability that the world be more technology Than human to where it'll leave us behind sort of oh, yeah, I don't think it's gonna leave us behind. I think it's gonna take us along But it will be I mean, I guess the idea of the singularity first thought isn't the idea of the singularity is like We can't possibly predict what's on the other side of the singularity these are the senses like this is like The world will be fundamentally transformed. Yes. I hit okay, so right and then it was you know This was characterized in various movies like Lucy and stuff like that You know Lucy being the first human that right we so kind of replicating and this is gonna be the next iteration of humans is the singularity Um, I actually don't believe that um Frankly, however, and the reason I don't believe it is because we're material beings and technology has to have a host So we're not gonna, you know become something super abstract like there's just an impossible to do There's nothing like that. What people would be listening to this podcast a hundred years from now and laughing at it because They'll be all in this the interpersonal reality will be all the information Uh as opposed to material meaning connected to some kind of concept of physical Physical reality. I don't even know the right words to you see that's because there are none because there's no place From there's no view from nowhere. There's no non material Like we have thoughts, but they're connected to us right they're in our you know, they're somehow okay As far as as far as you know listen platonic forms, I think is about is as you know Close to what we're talking about is possible like this place where these things exist and then there's like a physical instantiation of it No, but see where The question is from the perspective of the platonic form. What does our physical world look like? You know, I'm saying like You know if say you're a creature existing in a virtual reality like if you grew up your whole life in a virtual reality game Like what is it and somebody in that virtual reality world tells you that there actually exists this physical world and in fact your own You think you're in this virtual world, but it's actually you're in a body And this is just your mind putting yourself and there's a piece of technology like Well, they how will they be able to think of that physical world? Would they would they sound exactly like you just sounded a minute ago saying like well That silly who cares if there's a physical world It's the the entirety of the perception and my memories and all of that is in this other realm of Of like information. It's just all just information. Why do I need some kind of weird meat bag to contain? So there's a great again. I always you know return to something for your audience to read or you There's a great very short article online for free by David Chalmers. Do you know him? He's the philosopher consciousness. Yeah, you don't mind this podcast. Yeah. Yeah, he's cool um I used to I was friends with his best friend for a while when when I was in grad school Um, he probably has some weird friends He's a philosopher okay So um, I like his fashion choice in his style to I'm gonna hang out with him, but it's a great yeah Okay, so he wrote this article which I use a lot. I love it because it's accessible to undergraduates And it's called matrix as metaphysics and basically it's it's an answer to external world skepticism Which is basically how do we know there's an external world right? How do we know that we're not in a matrix right now? And so um, basically He's using he's he's also he even references He uses a religious reference even he says you could think of the matrix for the movie as A new as the new um book of Genesis For our new world right and I thought yeah, that's absolutely correct because you know, we don't know And we don't we won't know for sure or for certain Therefore what we know is what is real to us And so he goes through these scenarios and within philosophies called there's uh It this is different from that, but it's like this brain in a vat right if you're a brain in a vat and some Not so kind scientist is like recreating this world for you just to see you know And you think you're this awesome rock star right and you're living this awesome existence But actually just this brain in this vat okay, but there's still a brain in a vat Okay, so his idea in um the matrix says metaphysics kind of takes out the brain in a vat like this I don't know if this is possible. So I've read critiques of this that you know what you're talking about is a non dualism like there's like um You know or it's not necessarily a non-dualism um I just I mean information in and of itself has to you have some kind of material component to it. I mean I it's that that that When taking it outside the realm of human beings because dualism is kind of talking about humans. Yeah in a sense It's just possible to me that there could be creatures that exist in a very different form Perhaps rely on very different set of materials. Yes, that that may may perhaps not even look like materials to us. Yes Which is why like information It could be even in computers The information that's Traveling inside a computer is connected to actual material Movement right, right? So like there it's it is ultimately connected to material movement But it's less and less about the material and more and more about the information So I just mean that there's it's possible that uh you think the singularity is basically like Sluffing off our material existence I can tell you that this has been the hope of philosophers and theologians forever Yeah, well, I don't I think we're living in a thing uh through a single area. I don't think I think this world just just like as you've said already um Has been already transformed significantly and keeps continually being transformed. Yeah And we're just riding this big beautiful wave of transformation and uh That's why it's both exciting and terrifying From a scientific perspective that like We're so better predicting the future and the future is always so Amazing in terms of the other things that has brought us. I mean, I don't know if it's always will be this exciting in terms of the rate of innovation But it seems to be increasing still as really exciting. It's exciting to Yes, it's terrifying because obviously we're building better and better tools for destroying ourselves But I on the optimistic side believe that we're also Can build better and better tools to defend against all the ways we could destroy ourselves And it's kind of this interesting race of innovation. Yeah Books are great. Of course the greatest book of all time to the greatest books of all time are yours, but besides those Uh what uh what Books Technical fiction or philosophical Um had an impact in your life or possibly think um others might want to read and get some insights from and what ideas did you pick up from them? Great. Okay, I really enjoy Nietzsche Okay, so anything by Nietzsche Frederick Nietzsche. He's a philosopher Um actually hated him when I first read him in my early 20s That's like the opposite of most people's experience right they usually love them And they're 20s and then they throw them to the curb later. Yeah. Yeah. I think he's totally misrepresented Um and misinterpreted he grew on you Well, I happened in one night so Let me just describe it because it's kind of funny. Yeah, it happened on New Year's So I had friends and when I was in my 20s and they were kept they kept telling me you have to read Nietzsche Have to read Nietzsche and I tried okay, but again, you know No, I didn't like who was not into How he described the philosophical concepts he was trying to get across so but they would they weren't giving up a very Persistent friends So one of them gave me um the gay science and I had it on my book stand and It was New Year's Eve and I'm actually not a big part. I'm actually an introvert I'm a geeky introvert. Okay, so I don't go out and party a lot It was near New Year's Eve even that couldn't get me out to go party So I just wanted to go to bed. Yeah And New Year's Eve hit and everybody went out and I was asleep and they woke me up And I was like darn they woke me up. I might as well read this book by Nietzsche Okay, so I picked it up and lo and behold I turned to a page that was exactly about it was called song dys Januaryus which is basically Saint January and it was about New Year's Eve And I thought whoa what a weird coincidence and it was a really really it was also super Catholic And it was a really beautiful little Aphorism it's actually a book of aphorisms which are kind of religious Right and so he bet it's religious The genre is religious let's put it that way, but he's not so basically he says today is the day When people are supposed to make these resolutions right and he says from here on out I will will never say no. I will only say yes. Okay. I look away. If something's horrible I'll just look away from it. I won't get angry at it And then he also says I will be like Saint January and Saint January is actually the saint Whose blood is in this place in Italy? I think it's in Italy or and And every year it turns it turns to blood again So it's like it's desiccated is you know, so it's this miracle. He says My blood is now It flows again and I was like, wow, that's really beautiful And I said and a strange coincidence because it just turned you know 12 So it's like near zeve I pick up the book. I read this aphorism I said strange coincidence that and then I turn the page and the page is about coincidences And I was like I shut it and I thought this is weird And I felt like there was a live I felt like the book was alive and each was speaking to me Yeah, I had a like experience and engagement with Nietzsche And so after that I couldn't put his stuff down. It was engaging fascinating everything So yeah, so that's one book the gay science Why did what did you pick up from from the gay science or from Nietzsche in jenny? Yeah, some ideas that yeah, the ideas basically that um truth He's got awesome one-liners You know, so truth is a woman So okay, what is what does he mean by that truth is a woman basically she's gonna lie to you She looks real attractive, but she's not gonna tell you the truth Oh Oh, Nietzsche Okay, so basically I'm not saying that that's true about women I'm obviously a woman so he's so basically what he's saying is that truth is not is like what I say Brother guy said it's a moving target. Okay, we started this whole conversation with what's real right? So I should have just gone straight to Nietzsche Have not you heard truth is a woman You know Okay, so truth is a woman All right say that and also and you know Foucault this other floss for a French floss or actually takes up this idea and creates his own Framework I'll call genealogy from it so the genealogy of morals so that we only believe certain things and we we sediment them Them into truth so we say it you know a truth told who said that was it Lenin or Stalin a truth told Enough times. I mean a lie told enough times becomes the truth So that's basically Nietzsche and right there, okay? So that's Nietzsche So Nietzsche also is a huge critic of Christianity um Which I'm actually Catholic. I'm a practicing Catholic so I appreciated his critique. I thought it was actually quite accurate and He's a critique of religion in general and and he's fascinating and also I find that his he talks about altered states of consciousness He calls them elevated states and he I think through his book you can actually experience elevated states So um yeah Nietzsche Thumbs up So what what other book yeah, okay, so Hana rent she is a philosopher that not a lot of people know about But she was a Jewish woman during the Holocaust and she was in turn In turn at bergen belsen which was Basically Auschwitz for women and she escaped She came to the United States and she had worked with Heidegger even though he's supposed to be Anti-Semitic and a Nazi and everything but they were lovers, okay? So she comes out and she she's at Columbia University And she teaches philosophy there and and she writes this she writes two books which I'll recommend one is called I command in Jerusalem where she attends the Nuremberg trials and she basically makes this really a stew observation about Evil and she says ikeman is one of the people who sent the Jews to the concentration camps who ran the trains, okay? And she said the thing about ikeman was that he didn't seem particularly evil actually he seemed to be quite Nice guy. She said what was interesting about it? Was he seemed incredibly thoughtless and stupid and she said and he used a lot of stereotypes like memes So she actually wrote about memes before we had them And now people just use memes and they're actually used against us even there's even a segments of warfare called memetic warfare All right, so memes are something that can sway a whole population of people So she wrote about memes before they were even in existence and that's ikeman and Jerusalem And I think she also has some really amazing things to say about evil is that When people remain thoughtless she has another book called the life of the mind which is gigantic and I don't Think anybody will read it But frankly, it's one of the best books I've ever read and I've read it many times And basically the life of the mind and the life of the mind she asks a very simple question She says why do people do bad things? Why are they evil and what she says is she wonders if it's she says that Bad people sleep well at night contrary to you know how the saying how do you sleep at night? Well, that's only because you're a good person that you're asking that question because you actually have a conscience and a conscience is this dual Kind of you fight with yourself about the consequences of your actions and she says Bad people don't seem to have a conscience So they actually sleep well at night and so she goes through a whole history of philosophy About evil and that's really a good one too, but I have um also I have to recommend this one too There's one more so I know I recommended two but just from the same philosopher Um my friend Jeffrey Criple. He's at Rice University and he's in my fields right uh religious studies He wrote he's written several books I mean he's written a heck of a lot of books. Let's put it that way But he's um his I think his best book or the one that impacted me the most is called authors of the impossible And his book is his writing is very much like Nietzsche's writing in the sense that He it's almost as if he reaches out of the pages and he grabs you He kind of slaps you around and says think about this, you know, and you can't help but be changed after you've read it and he's got a great chapter in there about Jacques Vellet Also, he colors a bunch of different thinkers and authors that are outs that somehow are What is it? Renegade a semester to revolution a semester. They're thinking the impossible Uh, there's a great one. He's written called mutants and mystics where he talks about the comic strips uh The um gosh, why can't I remember the name of the person he just died of Stan Lee He talks about the history of the comics by Stan Lee and they're all paranormal. They all start off super paranormal and it's fascinating Um on the topic of honor or rent yeah, honor or rent uh So I haven't read her work, but I've vaguely touched upon sort of like commentary of her work and it seems like some people think her work is dangerous in some aspect I don't know if you can comment on Why that is I just it feels like similar with ironrand or something like that yeah, where like this is I'll say not dangerous, but controversial. Yes, it is. Yes, they think it's controversial um This is the reason I believe um, I've heard of the controversy the controversy is that she didn't I she first of all Um, she is Jewish and she did escape a concentration camp and yet she's called Is she's been called anti-Jewish and I think part of that was that she basically was saying something That I believe that a lot of Normal people are like iKman and evil things are done by people who just follow the rules And they don't think about what they're doing and that's one of the most pernicious forms of evil of our time So we talked quite a bit about the definitions of religion And what are the different building blocks of religion? So one of the I don't think we touched on we did a little bit with the afterlife, but In the sense, I don't know if you're familiar with the Ernest Becker work and all the philosophies around there about the fear of death and How the fear of our mortality Awareness of our mortality and its fear is In In case of Ernest Becker Is a significant component in the psychology in the way we humans develop our understanding of the world so What are your thoughts in the context of religion or maybe in the context of your own mind about the role of death in life our fear of death in life And are you afraid of death? We cover everything in this Wow okay I so happened to have benefited perhaps From living with an older brother who seemingly had no fear of death while growing up and He did everything okay So he was he climbed mountains he was a rock climber. He jumped out of airplanes Of course he had to be a green beret and go into the special forces where that type of thing is a requirement right and so because of that I did a lot of things outside of my comfort zone And which probably I shouldn't have done and hope hope to goodness my kids don't do them. Yeah, okay Okay, so do you so I do I fear death? I think about death a lot actually um you may not know this about me, but in my field I was the head I was the co-chair of the death panel It's called the death panel There was like it's the panel to Think about death in religious studies Um, and I was that for many years So you've thought about it a bit a bit Let's see. I think that people are a little too confident I think about life in general that they're gonna kind of live all the time and not die I happen to I mean, I hate to say it. I'm super positive and most people would consider me to be Too happy almost right and so it's all out of then that I spend a lot of time thinking about death But I wonder if there's a connection there. Yeah, I'm happy to be alive Right that that that's kind of what the thinking about death does is it makes you appreciate the days that you do have Yeah, it's a it's a weird controversy. I tend to believe that um, the fact that this life ends gives each day um A significant amount of meaning So I don't know uh It seems like an important feature of life. It's not like a bug. It's it seems like a feature that it ends But it's a strange feature because I wish it like all the good stuff you wish it wouldn't end Well, you know, it's interesting Lex and I do point this out to my students because we cover in a lot of the basic studies courses I teach we cover all religions or as many as we can like the major religions and so take Hinduism for example Um, now this is an ancient religion, okay? So you and I are here talking about how we enjoy living and life and things like that Well, the goal of Hinduism is basically never to get reincarnated again is basically to not live Okay, and to get off samsara, which is the wheel of life and death. Yeah, so escape the whole yeah Exactly can think of that conditions are so different that you and I and my students are happy to be alive But they're back in the day, you know Thousands of years ago when they wrote when they actually didn't write it They spoke the Vedas which were the sacred traditions of India they wanted off They didn't want to come back Life was terrible That's what people don't have the adequate understanding of history that for the majority of people life is really hard Right and you and I are and your audience among the lucky Yeah, now we actually like like life We want to live Most of the time yeah, most of the time what what do you think uh the biggest since we're covering every single possible topic Let me ask the biggest one The unanswerable one from the perspective of alien intelligence or from the perspective of religious studies or from the perspective of just Diana What do you think is the meaning of this existence Of the life of ours. Yes. Okay, so all right So Well, of course, I have to My philosophical training as undergrad always makes me think about like What's the assumption in your your question the quite there's an assumption there. It's like there is a meaning Okay, that's the assumption meaning waiting me by life. Yeah, I need to find the terms No, no, but listen okay, I'll answer your question I'm just gonna say that there's this assumption that we should have meaning to life. Okay, well, maybe we shouldn't Maybe it's just all random. Okay, however, I believe that it's not and in my opinion on the meaning of life in my opinion is intrinsic I enjoy living I want to live sometimes. I don't enjoy living and when I don't enjoy living I change my circumstances So it's intrinsic and I think that certain things are intrinsic and like love love of your children is kind of um, well, it's actually physiological, but it's also intrinsic. It's beautiful You know, there's something about it that that is intrinsically um desirable So that I think the meaning of life is like that intrinsically desirable So it's something that just is born inside you based on um What makes you feel good? No, that's hedonism. That's So about what a wordy place love love love of your children Yeah, so basically um Love is your children by the way is not always easy because they do things that they shouldn't do you have to discipline them That's one of the worst things about parenthood to me is disciplining my children. I don't like to do that. I love them um So a lot of things that I do that I feel Are good are not easy. So there's an intrinsic sense that like okay, let's take um Animals okay, so we have dogs and cats okay, so you might not but I do have you know, I told you about them Can you can you uh share their names if I share their names? I will share their names okay So we have a cat and it has red fluffy hair and so we called it trump Well, when we got our dog we figured that it needed a companion so we called it Putin So we have trump and Putin. This is the greatest pet names of all time. I'm sorry this and Or maybe you'll be able to share a picture of your cat because this is awesome It is really cute. Yeah very photogenic uh I mean is this something that's uh, whether a lot uh what whether we're talking about love or The intrinsic meaning do you think that's something That's really special to humans or if there is intelligent Alien civilizations out there Do you think that's something that they possess as well? Maybe in different forms like whatever this thing that Meaning is this intro intrinsic drive that we have Do you think that's just a property of life of some level of complexity That we will see that everywhere in this universe in my opinion and this is just my opinion um, I I do think that it is but I also think that it can take different forms So if there is like a think of gravity right gravity kind of like makes stuff stick to it right it play a track stuff Well, what is love to you that does that too right so people who are we call them charismatic Charism it means love Charism means light and love so a charismatic person is a person who attracts people to them like the sun does right like you know so um So I think that whatever this property is that's intrinsic is a like gravity and most likely takes different forms in different types of life forms Yeah, I can't wait until like uh Alborinstein type of figure in the future will discover that love is in fact one of the Fundamental forces of physics that would be cool Hahaha Diana and this is one of the favorite conversations I've ever had. It's truly an honor to talk to you And uh, thank you so much for spending all this time with me absolutely. It's been fun. Thank you Thanks for listening to this conversation with Diana wash basalca and thank you to our sponsors Element electrolyte drink Grammily writing plug-in business wars podcast and cash app So the choice is health grammar knowledge or money Choose wisely my friends And if you wish click this sponsor links below to get a discount at the support this podcast And now let me leave you some words from Carl Sagan Somewhere something incredible is waiting to be known Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time You