 The following is a conversation with Richard Crape, founder of Numerai, which is a crowdsourced hedge fund, very much in the spirit of Wall Street bets, but where the trading is done not directly by humans, but by artificial intelligence systems submitted by those humans. It's a fascinating and extremely difficult machine learning competition, where the incentives of everybody is aligned. The code is kept and owned by the people who develop it. The data, anonymous data is very well organized and made freely available. I think this kind of idea has a chance to change the nature of stock trading, and even just money management in general by empowering people who are interested in trading stocks with the modern and quickly advancing tools of machine learning. Quick mention of our sponsors, audible audiobooks, child labs, machine learning company, blinkest app that summarizes books, and athletic greens all in one nutrition drink. Click the sponsor links to get discount and to support this podcast. As a side note, let me say that this whole set of events around game stop and Wall Street bets has been really inspiring to me as a demonstration that a distributed system, a large number of regular people are able to coordinate and collaborate in taking on the elite centralized power structures, especially when those elites are misbehaving. I believe that power in as many cases as possible should be distributed. And in this case, the internet as it is for many cases is the fundamental enabler of that power. And at the core, what the internet and its distributed nature represents is freedom. Of course, the thing about freedom is it enables chaos or progress or sometimes both. And that's kind of the point of the thing. Freedom is empowering, but ultimately unpredictable. And I think in the end freedom wins. If you enjoy this podcast, subscribe on YouTube, review it on Apple podcasts, follow on Spotify, support on Patreon or connect with me on Twitter, Alex Friedman. As usual, I'll do a few minutes to Vads now and no ads in the middle. I try to make these interesting, but I give you time stamps. So if you skip, please still check out the sponsors by clicking the links in the description. It's the best way to support this podcast. This episode is brought to you by Audible, an audiobook service that has given me hundreds of thousands of hours of education through listening to audiobooks. Many of the books I mentioned on this very podcast were ones I've listened to with Audible, which feels like cheating, but it's not the same book. Examples include American Cosmic, which is about UFOs. Surely you're joking, Mr. Feynman by the man himself, Richard Feynman, the Ascent of Money by Neil Ferguson, which is a great history about money. You're interfished by Neil Schubert, which is one of my favorite books on evolution. The news are by Stephen Lee Myers, which I think is the best, most objective work on Vladimir Putin that I've read to date. I've read quite a lot of biographies about him. And of course, the book that I've mentioned way too many times, the rise and fall of the third Reich by William Shire. I think it's over 50 hours long and one hell of a crazy ride through the darkest moments of human history. Next two weeks Audible is doing a special offer for listeners of this podcast, only 10 bucks, 9.95 a month for your first six months. If you visit audible.com slash Lex or text Lex to 500 500. I don't even know how that works or why you'd want to do that. Just go to audible.com slash Lex. That's way better, I think. But I might be coolest. If you like texting, I guess go ahead and text. They have thousands of titles to choose from. So visit audible.com slash Lex. Now they're considering supporting this podcast. So you know what to do if you want to help out. It's audible.com slash Lex. This episode is also brought to you by trial labs. A company that helps build AI based solutions for businesses of all sizes. I love these guys, especially after talking to them on the phone and checking out a bunch of their demos and blockposts. If you're a business or just curious about machine learning, check them out at trial labs.com slash Lex. They're working on price optimization, early detection of machine failures and all kinds of applications of computer vision. Their price automation and optimization work is probably their most impressive in terms of helping businesses make money. Also, they release open source code on GitHub like a computer vision tracker, for example. Tracking to me is a fascinating problem. It very much remains unsolved, especially in the application of deep learning to this problem. But we've seen a lot of progress in the past five years. Anyway, trial labs is legit. If you own a business and want to see how AI can help you, check them out at trial labs.com slash Lex. This episode is also supported by Blinkist, my favorite app for learning new things. Blinkist takes the key ideas from thousands of not fiction books and condenses them down into just 15 minutes that you can read or listen to. As part of that, I use Blinkist to try out a book that I may otherwise never have a chance to read. And in general, it's a great way to broaden your view of the idea landscape out there and find books that you may want to read more deeply. With Blinkist, you get unlimited access to read or listen to a massive library of condensed nonfiction books. I also use Blinkist's shortcuts to quickly catch up on podcast episodes I've missed. Right now, Blinkist has a special offer just for the listeners of this podcast. Go to Blinkist.com slash Lex to start your free seven day trial and get 25% off of a Blinkist premium membership at splinkist.com slash Lex. They want me to spell out Blinkist, but I'm sorry folks. If you don't know how to spell Blinkist, you're on your own in this world. The show is also sponsored by Athletic Greens. The all in one daily drink to support better health and peak performance. It replaced the multivitamin for me and went far beyond that with 75 vitamins and minerals. I do intermittent fasting of 16 to 24 hours every day and always break my fast with Athletic Greens. I honestly can't say enough good things about these guys. It's really one of my favorite products in this world. It helps me not worry whether I'm getting all the nutrients I need, especially since they keep iterating on their formula constantly improving it. I love that kind of obsessive pursuit of perfection. Also, I'm a huge fan of fish oil, I've taken it every day for many years now. Athletic Greens finally is now offering fish oil. And they're going to give listeners of this podcast free one month supply of wild caught a mega three fish oil. When you go to Athletic Greens.com slash Lex to claim the special offer. That's Athletic Greens.com for the drink and the fish oil. Trust me, it's worth it. You will love it. And now here's my conversation with Richard Crabbe. From your perspective, can you summarize the important events around this amazing saga that have been living through of Wall Street bets, the subreddit and GameStop. And in general, just what are your thoughts about it from a technical to the philosophical level? I think it's amazing. It's like my favorite story ever. Like when I was reading about it, I was like, this is the best. And it's also connected with my company, which we can talk about. But what I liked about it is like I like decentralized coordination. And looking at the mechanisms that these are Wall Street bets users use to hype each other up to get excited to prove that they bought the stock and they're holding. And then also to see that how big of an impact that that decentralized coordination had. It really was a big deal. Well, you're impressed by the distributed coordination, the collaboration amongst like, I don't know what the numbers are. I know numerous eyes looking at the data. After all of this is over and done, it'd be interesting to see like from a large scale distributed system perspective to see how everything played out. But just from your current perspective, what we know is it obvious to you that such incredible level of coordination could happen where a lot of people come together in a distributed sense. There's an emergent behavior that happens after that. No, it's not at all obvious. And one of the reasons is the lack of kind of like credibility to coordinate with someone you need to kind of make credible contracts or credible claims. So if you have a user name on our Wall Street bets like some of them are like deep fucking value is one of that. That's an actual user name by the way we're talking about. There's a website called Reddit and there's subreddits on it and a lot of people most the anonymous. I think for the most part anonymous can create user accounts and then can then just talk on form like style boards. You should know what Reddit is if you don't know what reddit is check it out. If you don't know what reddits maybe go to the sub sub Reddit first, a ww with q pictures of cats and dogs. That's my recommendation. Yeah, that would be a good start to Reddit when you when you get into it more go to our Wall Street bets. It gets dark quickly. We'll probably talk about that too. So yeah, so there's these users and there's no contracts like you're saying. No contracts. The user anonymous. But there are little things that that do help. So for example, if you've posted a really good investment idea in the past, that exists on Reddit as well. And it might have lots of upvotes and that's also kind of like giving credibility to your next to your next thing. And then they are also putting up screenshots like this. This is the these I. I here's the trades I've made and here's a screenshot now you could fake the screenshot. But but but still it seems like if you've got a lot of karma and you've had a good performance on the on the community. It somehow becomes credible enough for other people to be like, you know what? He actually probably did put a million dollars into this. And you know what? I can I can follow that trade easily. There's a bunch of people like that. So you kind of integrating all that information together yourself to see like, huh? There's something happening here. And then you jump it onto this little boat of like behavior. Like we should buy the stock or sell this stock and then another person jumps on another person jumps on. And all of a sudden you have just a huge number of people behaving in the same direction. It's like flock of whatever birds and what was strange with this one. It wasn't just let's all buy Tesla. We love Elon we love the Tesla. Let's let's all buy Tesla because that we've heard before right. Everybody likes Tesla. Now they do. So what they did with this in this case, they're buying a stock that was bad. They're buying it because it was bad. And that's really weird because that's a little bit to galaxy brain for for a decentralized community. How did they come up with it? How do they know that was the right one? And the reason they liked it is because it had really, really high short interest. It had been shorted more than its own float, I believe. And so they figured out that if they all bought this bad stock, they could short squeeze some hedge funds. And those hedge funds would have to capitulate and buy the stock at really, really high prices. And we should say that shorted means that these are a bunch of people. When you short a stock, you're betting on the, on your predicting the stock is going to go down and then you will make money if it does. And then what's the short squeeze? It's really that if you if you are a hedge fund and you take a big short position in a company, there's a certain level at which you can't sustain holding that position. There's no limit to how high a stock can go, but there is a limit to how low it can go, right? So if you short something, you have infinite loss potential. And if the stock doubles overnight like GameStop did, you're putting a lot of stress on that hedge fund. And that hedge fund manager might have to say, you know what? I have to get out of the trade. And the only way to get out is to buy the bad stock that they don't want. They believe will go down. So it's an interesting situation, particularly because it's not zero sum. If you say, let's, let's all get together and make a bubble in watermelons. You buy a bunch of watermelons, the price goes up, it comes down again. It's a zero sum game. If someone's already shorted a stock and you can make them short squeeze, it's actually a positive sum game. So yes, some editors will make a lot of money, some will lose a lot. But actually the whole group will make money. And that's really why it was such a clever thing for them to do. A couple do the fact that shorting, I mean, maybe you can push back, but to me always from an outsider's perspective seemed, I hope I'm not using too strong of a word, but it seemed almost unethical. Maybe not an ethical, maybe it's just the asshole things to do. It's okay. I'm speaking not from an economics or financial perspective. I'm speaking from just somebody who loves, I'm a fan of a lot of people. I love celebrating this a success of a lot of people. And this is like the stock market equivalent of like haters. I know that's not what it is. I know that there's efficient, you want to have an economy, efficient mechanism for punishing sort of over hyped, overvalued things. That's what shorting guess is designed for. But it just always felt like these people are just because they're not just betting on the loss of the company. It feels like they're also using their leverage and power to manipulate media or just to write articles or just to hate I knew on social media. And you get to see that with Elon Musk and so on. So so this is like the man. The so people like hedge funds that were shorting are like the sort of embodiment of the evil or just the bad guy, the overpowerful that's misusing their power. And here's the crowd, the people that are standing up and rising up. So it's not just that they were able to collaborate on Wall Street bets to sort of effectively make money for themselves. It's also that this is like a symbol of the people getting together and fighting the centralized elites, the powerful. And that, you know, I don't know what your thoughts are about that in general. At this stage, it feels like that's really exciting that people have power, just like regular people have power. At the same time, it's scary a little bit because you know, just studying history, people can be manipulated by charismatic leaders. And so like just like Elon right now is like manipulating, encouraging people to buy a dose coin or whatever, the like, there can be good charismatic leaders and there can be bad charismatic leaders. And so it's nerve wracking. It's a little bit scary, how much power subreddit can have to destroy somebody because right now we're celebrating they might be attacking or destroying somebody that ever be doesn't like. But what if they attack somebody that is actually good for this world? So that and that's kind of the the awesomeness and the price of freedom. It's like it could destroy the world or it can save the world. But at this stage, it feels like I don't know overall when you sit back, do you think this was just a positive wave of emergent behavior? Is it something negative about what happened? Well, yeah, the cool thing is they weren't doing anything. The the reddit people weren't doing anything exotic. It was a creative trade, but it wasn't exotic. It wasn't it was just buying the stock. Okay, maybe they bought some options too, but it was the hedge fund that was doing the exotic thing. So I like that. It was it's hard to say, well, you know, we've got together and we've put all pulled all our money together. And now there's a company out there that's worth more. What's wrong with that? But it doesn't talk about the motivations, which is and then we destroyed some hedge funds in the process. Is there something to be said about the humor and I don't know the edginess, sometimes viciousness of that subreddit? I haven't looked at it too much, but it feels like people can be quite aggressive on there. So is there. What is that? Is that what is that what freedom looks like? I think it does. Yeah, you definitely need to let people, the one of the things that people have compared it to is the Occupy Wall Street, which is let's say, you know, some very sincere liberals, 23 years old, whatever, and they go out with signs and they have some kind of case to make. But this isn't sincere, really. It's like a little bit more nihilistic, a little bit more yolo. And therefore a little bit more scary because he's scared of the who's scared of the Wall Street Occupy Wall Street people with the signs. Nobody, but these hedge funds really are scared. I was scared of the Wall Street meds people. I'm still scared of them. Yeah, the anonymity is a bit terrifying and exciting. Yeah. I mean, yeah, I don't know what to do. It's, you know, I've been following events in Russia, for example, it's like there's a struggle between centralized power and the distributed. I mean, that's the struggle of the history of human civilization, right? But this on the internet, just that you can multiply people like some of them don't have to be real. Like you can probably create bots. It starts getting me as a programmer. I start to think like, hmm, me is one person. How much chaos can I create by writing some bots? Yeah. And I'm sure I'm not the only one thinking that there's, I'm sure that the hundreds, thousands of good developers out there. Listening to this, thinking the same thing. And then as that develops further and further in the next decade or two, what impact does that have on financial markets on just destruction of reputations? Of just or politics, you know, the the big ring of left and right political discourse, the dynamics of that be manipulated by. You know, they people talk about like Russian bots or whatever. I were probably in a very early stage of that, right? Exactly. And this is a good example. Do you have a sense that most of Wall Street bets folks are actually individual people? Right, that's the feeling I have is there's just individual, maybe young investors just doing a little bit of an investment, but just on a large scale. Yeah, exactly. The reason I found out, I've known about Wall Street bets for a while, but the reason I found about GameStop was this. I met somebody at a party who told me about it and he was like 21 years old and he's like it's going to go up 100% in the next one day. We're talking about in last year. This was probably no, this was yeah, a few days ago. Oh, yeah, it was like maybe maybe two weeks ago or something. So it was it was already high GameStop, but it was just strange to me that there was someone telling me at a party. How to trade stocks who was like 21 years old. And and started to yeah, started to look into it and yeah, he and he did make he made it. Yeah, he made 140% in one day. He was right. And now he's supercharged. He's a little bit wealthier and now he's going to look wait for the next thing and this decentralized entity is just going to get bigger and bigger. And they're going to get a search for the next thing. So there's thousands of folks like him and they're going to probably search for the next thing to attack people that have power in this world that sit there. With power right now in government and in finance and the any kind of position are probably a little bit scared right now. And honestly, that's probably a little bit good. It's dangerous, but it's good. Yeah, it certainly makes you think twice about shorting. And certainly makes you think about putting a lot of money into a short. Like these funds put a lot into one or two names. And so it was very, very badly risk managed. Do you think shorting is, can you speak at a high level just for your own as a person? Is it good for the world? Is it good for markets? I do think that the two kinds of shorting evil shorting. And chill shorting. Evil shorting is what Melvin capital was doing. And it's like you put a huge position down. You get all your buddies to also short it and you start making press and and trying to bring this company down. And I don't think in some cases, you go out off to fraudulent companies. This company is a fraud. Maybe that's okay. But they weren't even saying games up. It's just saying it's a bad company and we're going to bring it to the ground, bring it to its knees. A quant fund like Numerai. We always have lots of positions and we never have a position that's like more than 1% of our fund. So we actually have right now 250 shorts. I don't know any of them except for one because it was one of the meme stocks. But yeah. But it we shorting them not to make them go we don't even want them to go down necessarily. That doesn't sound a bit strange. I say that but we just want them to to not go up as much as our lungs. Right. So by shorting a little bit, we can actually go long more in the things we do believe in. So when we were going long in Tesla, we could do it with more money than we had because we borrow from banks who would lend us money because we had longs and shorts because we didn't have market exposure. You have market risk. And so I think that's a good thing because that means you know we can short the oil companies and go long Tesla and make the future come forward faster. And I do think that's not a bad thing. So we talked about this incredible distributed system created by Wall Street Bets. And then there's a platform which is Robin Hood, which allows investors to efficiently as far you can correct me if I'm wrong. But you know there's those and there's others and this new Mariah that allow you to make it accessible for people to invest. But that said Robin Hood was in a centralized way applied its power to restrict trading on the stock that we're referring to. Do you have a thoughts on actually like all the things that happened. I don't know how much you were paying attention to sort of the shadiness around the whole thing. Do you think it was forced to do it? Was there something shady going on? What are your thoughts in general? Well, I think I want to see the alternate history. Like I want to see the counterfactual history of them not doing that. Not doing that. How bad would it have gotten for hedge funds? How much more damage could have been done if the momentum of these short squeezes could continue? What happens when there are short squeezes even if they're in a few stocks? They affect kind of all the other shorts too. And suddenly brokers are saying things like you need to put a more collateral. So we had a short. It wasn't game stop luckily. It was Blackberry. And it went up like 100% in a day. It was one of these meme stocks, super bad company. The AI's don't like it. The AI's think it's going down. What's a meme stock? A meme stock is kind of a new term for these stocks that catch mimetic momentum on Reddit. And so the meme stocks were game stop the biggest one. Game stock. Elon calls it AMC. And Blackberry was one. Nokia was one. So these are high short interest stocks as well. So they use targeted stocks that some people say, isn't it adorable that these these people are investing money in these companies that are nostalgic? It's like you're going to the AMC movie theater. It's like nostalgic. It's like no. It's not why they're doing it. They had a lot of short interest. That was the main thing. And so they were highest chance of short squeeze. In saying I would love to see an alternate history. Do you have a sense that that what is your prediction of what that history would have looked like? Well, you wouldn't have needed very many more days of that kind of chaos to to hurt hedge funds. I think it's underrated how how damaging it could have been. Because when your shorts go up your collateral requirements for them go up. Similar to Robin Hood, like we have a prime broker that says said to us, you need to put up, you know, like $40 per per $100 of short exposure. And then the next day, there's actually you have to put up, you know, all of it 100% and we would like what? But if that happens that if that happens to all the short, all the commonly held hedge fund shorts, because they were all kind of holding the same things. If that happens, not only do you have to cover the short, which means you're buying the bad companies. You need to sell your good companies in order to cover the short. Right. So suddenly, like all the good companies, all the ones that the hedge funds like are coming down and all the all the ones that the hedge funds hate are going up in a cascading way. So I believe that if you could have had a few more days of game stock doubling, AMC doubling, you would have had more and more hedge fund deleveraging. But so hedge funds, I mean, they get a lot of shit, but they do you have a sense that they do some good for the world? I mean, ultimately, so okay, first of all, Wall Street bets itself is a kind of distributed hedge fund. Numerize a kind of hedge fund. So like hedge funds is a very broad category. I mean, like if some of those were destroyed, would that be good for the world? Or is it would there be coupled with the the destroying the evil shorting? Would there be just a lot of pain in terms of investment in good companies? Yeah. I think I like to tell people if they hate hedge funds is I don't think you want to rerun American economic history without hedge funds. So on master, they're good. Yeah, they're good. Yeah, you really wouldn't want to because hedge funds are kind of like picking up they're making liquidity, right? In stocks. And so if you like if you love venture capitalists, they're investing in new technology. So good. You have to also kind of like hedge funds because they're the reason venture capitalists exist because their companies can have a liquidity event when they go to the public markets. So it's kind of essential that we have them. There are many different kinds of them. I believe we could maybe get away with only having an AI hedge fund. But we don't necessarily need these evil billions type hedge funds that make the media and try to kill companies. But we definitely need hedge funds. Maybe from your perspective, because you run such an organization and Vlad, the CEO of Robin Hood, sort of had to make decisions really quickly, probably had to wake up in the middle of the night kind of thing. You know, and he also had a conversation with Elon Musk on clubhouse, which I just sign up for. It was a fascinating one of the great journalistic performances of our time with the Elon Musk. A little surprise for Elon. How hilarious would it be if he gets a poll? And then his Wikipedia be like journalist and part of the entrepreneur. Is this magnetism business? As you know, I don't know if you can comment on any aspects of that. But like if you were Vlad, how would you do things differently? What are your just thoughts about his interaction with Elon? How he should have played it differently? Like, I guess there's a lot of aspects of this interaction. One is about transparency. Like how much do you want to tell people about really what went down? There's NDAs potentially involved. How much in private do you want to push back and say no, fuck you to centralize power, whatever the phone calls you're getting, which I'm sure he's getting some kind of phone calls that might not be contractual. Like it's not contracts that are forcing him, but he was being what do you call it? Like pressured to behave in certain kinds of ways from all kinds of directions. Like what would you take from this whole situation? I was very excited to see Vlad response. It's pretty cool to have him talk to Elon and one of the things that struck me in the first like few seconds of Vlad speaking was like, I was like, is Vlad like a boomer? Like the here we are. He seemed like a 55 year old man talking to a 20 year old. Yeah. Elon was like the 20 year old and he's like the 55 year old man. You can see why Citadel or NMR buddies, right? Like you can't you can see why it's like this is a nice. I'm not talking about things like he's like he's got a lyrical respectable professional attitude. Well, he he also tried to do like a jockey thing like. No, we're not being ages here. Boomer, but like you like a like a 60 year old CEO bank of America. We try to make a joke for the kids. That's what Vlad said. Yeah. I was like, what is this? This guy's like, what is he 30? Yeah. And I'm like, this is weird. Yeah. But I think maybe that's also what I like about Elon's kind of influence on American business. It's like he's super like anti the professional. Right. Like why why say why say you know 100 words about nothing? And so I liked how he was cutting in and saying, Vlad, what do you mean spill the beans, bro? Yeah. So you don't have to be courteous. It's like the first principles thinking it's like what that hell happened. Yes. And let's just talk like normal people. The problem of course is, you know, for Elon, it's cost them. What is it? tens of millions of dollars is tweeting like that. But perhaps it's a worthy price to pay because ultimately there's something magical about just being real and honest and just going off the cuff and making mistakes and paying for them. But just being real and then moments like this, that was an opportunity for Vlad to be that. And it felt like he wasn't. Do you think they're do you think we'll ever find out what really went down if there was something shady underneath it all? Yeah, I mean, it would be sad if nothing shady happened. Right. But his presence made it shady. Sometimes I feel like that would mark Zuckerberg the CEO Facebook. Sometimes I feel like yeah, there's a lot of shitty things that Facebook is doing. But sometimes I think he makes you look worse by the way he presents himself about those things. Like I honestly think that a large amount of people at Facebook just have a huge unstable chaotic system and they're all not all but a mass are trying to do good with this chaotic system. But the presentation is like it sounds like there's a lot of back room conversations that are trying to manipulate people. And there's there's something about the realness that Elon has that it feels like CEO should have and Vlad had that opportunity. I think Mark Zuckerberg had that too when he was younger. And somebody said you got to be more professional man. You can't say, you know, law to an interview. And then suddenly he became like this distance person that was hot. I'd like you'd rather have to make mistakes, but be honest. Then be like professional never make mistakes. Yeah, one of the difficult hires I think is like marketing people or like PR people is you have to hire people to get the fact that you can say law on an interview. Or I you know take risks as opposed to what the PR I thought to quite a few big CEOs and the people around them are trying to constantly minimize risk of like what if he says the wrong thing? What if she says the wrong thing? It's like what the be careful. It's constantly like, oh, like I don't know. And there's this nervous energy that builds up over time with larger, larger teams where the whole thing. Like I visited YouTube, for example, everybody I talked to YouTube incredible engineering and incredible system, but everybody's scared. Like let's be, let's be honest about this like madness that we have going on of huge amounts of video that we can't possibly ever handle. There's a bunch of hate on YouTube. There's this chaos of comments, a bunch of conspiracy theories, some of which might be true. And then just like this mess that we're dealing with and it's exciting. It's beautiful. It's a place where like democratizes education, all that kind of stuff. And instead they're all like sitting in like trying to be very polite and saying like, well, we're just want to improve the health of our platform. Like, yeah, all right, man, let's just be real. Let's let's let's both advertise how amazing this freaking thing is. But also to say like, we don't know what we're doing. We have all these Nazis posting videos on YouTube. We don't we don't know how to like handle it and just being real like that. I suppose this is just a skill. Maybe it can't be taught. But over time, the whatever the dynamics of the company is, it does seem like Zuckerberg and others get worn down. They just get tired. Yeah. They get tired of not being real of not being real, which is sad. So let's talk about Numerai, which is an incredible company system idea. I think, but good place to start. What is Numerai and how does it work? So Numerai is the first hedge fund that gives away all of its data. So this is like probably the last thing a hedge fund would do, right? Why would we give away a data? It's like giving away your edge. But the reason we do it is because we're looking for people to model our data. And the way we do it is by obfuscating the data. So when you get when you look at Numerai's data that you can download for free, it just looks like like a million rows of numbers between zero and one. And you have no idea what the columns mean. But you do know that if you're good at machine learning or have done regressions before, you know that I can still find patents on in this data, even though I don't know. I don't know what the features mean. And the data itself is a time series data. And even though it's obfuscated, anonymized, what is the source data like approximately? What are we talking about? So we are buying data from lots of different data vendors and they would also never want us to share that data. So we have strict contracts with them. So we only can, but it's the kind of data you could never buy yourself unless you had maybe a million dollars a year of budget to buy data. So what's happened with the hedge fund industry is you have a lot of talented people who used to be able to trade and still can trade. But now they have such a data disadvantage. It would never make sense for them to to trade themselves. But Numerai by giving away this obfuscated data, we can give them a really, really high quality data set that would otherwise be very expensive. And they can use whatever new machine learning technique they want to find patterns in that data that we can use in our hedge fund. And so how much of a variety is there in underlying data? We're talking about Apoges from using the wrong terms, but one is just like the stock price. The other, there's like options and all that kind of stuff like the, what are they called? Order books or whatever. Like is there maybe other totally unrelated to directly to the stock market data? Like, like natural language as well, all that kind of stuff. Yeah, we were really focused on stock data that's specific to stocks. So things like you can have like every stock has like a PE ratio. For some stocks, it's not as meaningful, but every stock has that. Every stock has one year momentum. How much they went up in the last year. Those are very common factors, but we try to get lots and lots of those factors that we have for many, many years, like 15, 20 years history. And, and then the setup of the problem is common in, in quant code, like cross sectional global equity. You know what? Really trying to say I want, I believe the stock will go up. You're trying to say the like relative position of this stock in feature space makes it not a bad buy in a portfolio. So it captures some period of time and you're trying to find the patterns, the dynamics captured by the data of that period of time in order to make short term predictions about what's going to happen. Yeah, so our predictions also not that short. We're not really caring about things like order books and tick data, not high frequency at all. We're actually holding things for quite a bit longer. So prediction time horizon is about one month. We end up holding stocks for maybe like three or four months. So I kind of believe that's a little bit more like investing than then kind of plumbing. Like to go long a stock that's mispriced on one exchange and shorter on another exchange. That's just arbitrage. But what we're trying to do is really know, know, know something more about the longer term future of the stock. Yeah, so from the pattern from these like periods of time series data, you're trying to understand something fundamental about the stock, not like about deep value about like with the big in the context of the market is underpriced over price, all that kind of stuff. So like this is about investing. It's not about like just like you said, high frequency trading, which I think is a fascinating open question for machine learning perspective. But just to like sort of build on that. So you've anonymized the data and now you're given away the data and then now anyone can try to build algorithms that make investing decisions on top of that data or predictions on the top of that data. Exactly. And so that that's what is it. So what does that look like? What's the goal that what are the underlying principles of that? So the first thing is, you know, we could obviously model that data in house, right? We can make an XG boost model on the data. And that would be quite good too. But what we're trying to do is by by opening it up and letting anybody participate. We can do quite a lot better than if we modeled it ourselves. And a lot better on the stock market doesn't need to be very much like it really matters. The difference between if you can make 10 and 12% in an equity market neutral hedge fund. Because the whole usually you're charging two percent fees. So if you can do two percent better, that's like all your fees work. It's worth it. So we're trying to make sure that we always have the best possible model as new machine learning libraries come out new new techniques come out. They get automatically synthesized. Like if there's a great paper on supervised learning, someone on numera will figure out how to use it on numeraized data. And is there an ensemble of models going on? Or is it always or is it more towards kind of like one or two or three like best performing models? So the way we decide on how to wait all of the predictions together is by how much the users are staking on them. Yeah. How much of the cryptocurrency that they're putting behind their models. So they're saying, I believe in my model. You can trust me because I'm going to put skin in the game. And so we can take the stake weighted predictions from all our users. Add those together, average those together. And that's a much better model than any one model in the in the sum because unsombling a lot of models together is kind of the key thing you need to do in investing to. Yeah. So you're putting there's the kind of duality from the user from the perspective of machine learning engineer. Where you're is both a competition just a really interesting difficult machine learning problem. And it's a way to invest algorithmically. So like here and but the way to invest algorithmically also is a way to put skin in the game that communicates to you that you're the quality of the algorithm and also forces you to really be serious about the models that you build. So it's like everything just works nicely together. Like I guess one way to say that is the interests are aligned. Okay. So it's just like poker is not not fun when it's like for very low stakes. The higher the stakes, the more the dynamics of the system starts playing out correctly. Like as a small side note, is there something you can say about which kind looking at the big broad view of machine learning today or AI. What kind of algorithms seem to do good in these kinds of competitions at this time? Is there some universal thing you can say like neural network suck. Recurring neural network suck, transformer suck or they're awesome. Like old school sort of more basic kind of classifiers are better. Is there is some kind of conclusion so far that you can say there is the definitely. Something pretty nice about tree models like like XG boost and they just seem to work pretty nicely on this type of data. So out of the box, if you're trying to come a hundredth in the competition in the tournament, maybe you try to use that. But what's particularly interesting about the problem that not many people understand, you're familiar with machine learning. This typically will surprise you when you model our data. So one of the things that you look at in finance is you don't want to be too exposed to any one risk. Like even if the best sector in the world to invest in over the last 10 years was tech, you would not does not mean you should put all of your money into tech. So the if you train a model, it would say put all your money into tech. It's super good. But what you want to do is actually be very careful of how much of this exposure you have to certain features. So on numera what a lot of people figure out is actually if you train a model on this kind of data, you want to somehow neutralize or minimize exposure to these to certain features, which is unusual because if if you did train stop light or stop street detection on computer vision, the your favorite feature, let's say you could and you have an auto encoder and it's figuring out, okay, it's going to be red and it's going to be white. That's the last thing you want to be, you want to reduce your exposure to. Why would you reduce your exposure to the thing that's helping you your model the most? And that's actually this counterintuitive thing you have to do with machine learning on financial data. So reducing it's reducing your exposure would help you generalize the things that are so basically a financial data. Has a large amount of patterns that appeared in the past and also a large amount of patterns that have not appeared in the past. And so like in that sense, you have to reduce the exposure to red lights to to the color red. That's interesting, but how much of this is art and how much of it is science from your perspective so far in terms of as you start to climb from the 100th position to the 95th in the competition. Yeah, well, if you do make yourself super exposed to one or two features, you can have a lot of volatility when you're playing numeric. You could maybe very rapidly rise to be high if you were getting lucky. Yes. And that's bit like the stock market. Sure, take on massive risk exposure, put all your money into one stock and you might make 100%. But it doesn't in the long run work out very well. And so the best users are trying to stay high for as long as possible and not not necessarily try to be first for a little bit. So for me, a developer, machine learning researcher, how do I like to participate in this competition and how do others. I'm sure there'll be a lot of others interested in participating in this competition. What are, let's see, there's like a million questions, but like first one is, how do I get started? Well, you can go to numer.ai, sign up, download the data. And on the data is pretty small. In the data pack, you download, there's like an example script, Python script that just builds a XG boost model very quickly from the data. And so in a very short time, you can have an example model. Is that a particular structure? Like what is this model then submitted somewhere? So there needs to be some kind of structure that communicates with some kind of API. Like how does the whole, yeah, how does your model once you build wants to create a little little baby Frankenstein? How does it then live in its? We want you to keep your baby Frankenstein at home and take care of it. We don't want it. Okay. So we never upload your model to us. You always only giving us predictions. So we never see the code that wrote your model, which is pretty cool. That our whole hedge fund is built from models where we've never ever seen the code. But it's important for the users because it's their IP, but they want to give it to us. That's brilliant. So they've got it themselves, but they can basically almost like license the predictions from that model to us. That's the product. Yeah. So think about it. What some users do is they set up a compute servant. We call it numerous compute. It's like a little AWS kind of image and you can automate this process. So we can ping you. We can be like, we need more predictions now and then you send it to us. Okay. Cool. So that's is that describes somewhere like what the preferred is the AWS or whether another cloud platform. Is there mean is there sort of specific technical things you want to say that comes to mind that is a good path for getting started. So download the data, maybe play around. See if you can modify the basic algorithm provided in the example. And then you what set up a little server on the AWS that then runs this model and takes pings and then makes predictions. And so how does your own money actually come into play doing the stake of cryptocurrency? Yeah. So you don't have to stake. You can start without staking and many users might try for months without staking anything at all to see if their model works on the real life data. Right. And there's not over a fit. But then you can get numerous rare many different ways. You can buy it on you can buy some on coin base. You can buy some on uniswap. You can buy some on Binance. So what did you say this is how do you pronounce it? So this is the new Mariah cryptocurrency. Yeah. NMR NMR. What's you just say NMR? It is it is technically called new Mariah. New Mariah. I like it. Yeah. But NMR is simple. At NMR. NMR. Okay. So and you can buy it basically anywhere. Yeah. So it's a bit strange because sometimes people are like, is this like pay to play? Right. And it's like so or it's like a yeah. You need to put some money down to show us you believe in your model. But weirdly, we're not selling you the like you can't buy the cryptocurrency from us. Right. It's like it's also we never if you if you do badly, we destroy your cryptocurrency. Okay. That's not good, right? You don't want it to be destroyed. But what's good about it is it's also not coming to us. Right. So it's not like we win when you lose or something like that. Like we're the house. Like we're definitely on the same team. Yes. You're helping us make a hedge fund that's never been done before. Yeah. So again, interests are aligned. There's no there's no tension there at all, which is really fascinating. Given away everything and then the IP is owned by the sort of the code. You never share the code. That's fascinating. So since I have you here and you said hundreds, I didn't ask out of how many. So we'll just. But if I if I then once you get started and you find this interesting. How do you then win or do well? But also how do you potentially try to win if this is something you want to take on seriously? From the machine learning perspective, not from a financial perspective. Yeah, I think the first of all you want to talk to the community. People are pretty open. We give out really interesting scripts and ideas for things you might want to try. And but you're also going to need a lot of compute probably. And so some of the best users are, you know, actually the very first time someone won on Numerite. I would I wrote them a personal email. Like, you know, you won some money. We're so excited to give you $300. And then they said, I spent way more on the computer. But this is fundamentally a machine learning problem. First, I think is this is one of the exciting things. I don't know for in how many ways you can approach this. But really this is less about kind of no offense, but like finance people, finance minded people. They're also I'm sure great people. But it feels like from the community that I've experienced. These are people who see finances of fascinating problem space, the source of data, but ultimately they're machine learning people or AI people, which is a very different kind of flavor of community. And I mean, I should say to that. I'd love to participate in this and I will participate in this. And I'd love to hear from other people if you're listening to this. If you're a machine learning person, you should participate in it and tell me. Give me some hints how I can do well at this thing because this boomer. I'm not sure I still got it, but because some of it is a it's like a Kaggle competitions. Like some of it is certainly set of ideas like research ideas, like fundamental innovation. But I'm sure some of it is like deeply understanding, getting like an intuition about the data. And then like a lot of it will be like figuring out like what works like tricks. I mean, you could argue most of deep learning research is just tricks on top of tricks. But there's a some of it is just the art of getting to know how to work in a really difficult machine learning problem. And I think what's important, the important difference with something like a Kaggle competition, where they'll set up this kind of toy problem. And then they will be out of sample tests like, hey, you did well out of sample. And this is like, okay, cool. But what's cool with Nimera is you're the out of sample is the real life stock market. We we don't even know like we don't know the onset of the problem. We don't like you'll have to find out life. And so we've had users who've like submitted every week for like four years. Because it's kind of a interest. It's a we say it's the hardest data science problem on the planet, right? And it's that sense maybe sounds like maybe it's a bit too much for like a marketing thing. But it's the hardest because it's the stock market. It's like literally there are like billions of dollars at stake. And like no one's like letting it be inefficient on purpose. So if you can find something that works on Nimera, you really have something that that is like working on the real stock market. Yeah, because there's like humans involved in the stock market. I mean, that's, you know, you could argue there might be harder data sets. I may be predicting the weather, all those kinds of things. But the fundamental statement here is which I like. I was thinking like, is this really the hardest data science problem? You start thinking about that. But ultimately also boils down to a problem where the data is accessible. It's made accessible made really easy and efficient at like submitting algorithms. So it's not just, you know, it's not about the data being out there like the weather. It's about making the data super accessible, making the ability to community around it. Like this is what image net did. Exactly. Like it's not just there's always images. The point is you aggregate them together. You give it a little title. This is community and that that was one of the hardest right for a time. And most important data science problems in the world. Because it was accessible because it was made sort of like there was mechanisms by which like standards and mechanisms by which to judge your performance, all those kinds of things and numerizer, actually step up from that. Is there something more you can say about why from your perspective, it's the hardest problem in the world. I mean, you said it's connected to the market. So if you can find a pattern in the market, that's a really difficult thing to do because a lot of people are trying to do it. Exactly. But there's also the biggest one is it's non stationary time series. We've tried to regularize the data so you can find patterns by doing certain things to the features and the target. But ultimately you're in a space where you don't there's no guarantees that the out of sample distributions will conform to any of the training data. And and every single era which we call on the website like every single era in the data, which is like sort of showing you the order of the time. It's it's even the training data is has the same same dislocations and. So yeah it's and then so and then there's you know yeah there's so many things that might. Might you might want to try this this like there's unlimited possible number of models right. And so by by having it be open we can at least search that space. It's zooming back out to the philosophical you said that numerize very much like Wall Street best is there I think it'd be interesting to dig in why you think so I think you're speaking to the distributed nature of the two. And the power of the people nature of the two and so maybe can you speak to those similarities and the differences in in which way is Numerai more powerful in which way is Wall Street best more powerful. Yeah this is why the Wall Street best story so interesting to me because it's like feels like we're connected yeah and looking at how just looking at the form of Wall Street best it's I was talking earlier about how how can you make credible claims your anonymous okay well maybe you can take a screenshot. How I will maybe you can upvote someone maybe you can have karma on reddit and those kinds of things make this emerging thing possible number I. It didn't work at all when we started it didn't work at all why people made multiple accounts they made really random models and hope they get lucky and some of them did yes. Staking was our like solution to could we could we make it so that we could trust we could know which model people believed in the most and we could wait models that had high stake more. And effectively coordinate this group of people to be like well actually there's no incentive to creating bought accounts anymore either I stake my accounts. In which case I should believe in them because I could lose my stake or I don't and that's a very powerful thing that having a negative incentive and a positive incentive can make can make things a lot better and staking is like this is this really nice like key thing about blockchains like something special you can do where. They don't even trusting us with their stake in some ways they're trusting the blockchain right so the incentives like you say it's about making these perfect incentives so that you can have coordination to solve one problem and nowadays I I sleep easy. Because I have less money in my own hedge fund. Then our users are staking on their models that's powerful in some sense from a human psychology perspective it's fascinating that the Wall Street bets worked at all right that the amidst that chaos emerging behavior like behavior they made sense emerged. It will be fascinating to think if numerous style staking could then be transferred to places like Reddit you know and not necessarily for financial investments but like I wish sometimes people would you know would have to stake something in the comments they make on the internet. Yeah, that's that's the problem that an in-mity is like an in-mity is freedom and power that you don't have to you can speak your mind but it's too easy to just be shitty. Exactly. And so this I mean you're making me realize from like a profoundly philosophical aspect, numerized staking is a really clean way to solve this problem. It's a really beautiful way of course it only with numeric currently works for a very particular problem right not for human interaction on the internet but that's fascinating. Yeah, there's nothing for to stop people in fact we've opened source like the code we use for staking in a protocol we call a razor and any if Reddit wanted to they could even use that code to do have have enabled staking on our Wall Street bets. And they're actually researching now they've had some Ethereum grants on how could they have more crypto stuff in there in Ethereum because wouldn't that be interesting like imagine you could instead of seeing a screenshot like guys I promise I will not sell my game stop we're just going to go huge we're not going to sell at all. And here is a smart contract which no one in the world including me can undo that says my I have staked millions against this claim. That's powerful and then what could you do and of course I don't have to be millions it could be just very small amount but then just a huge number of users doing that kind of stake exactly. That you know that could change the internet it would change and the man Wall Street it would not they would never have been able to they would still be short squeezing one day after the next every single hedge fund collapsing. If we look into the future do you think it's possible that numeric style infrastructure or AI systems backed by humans are doing the trading is what the entirety of the stock market is or the entirety the common market. Is run by basically this army of AI systems with high level humans or provision. Yeah the thing is that some of them could be could be bad actors some of the humans no well in these systems could be tricky so actually I once met a hedge fund manager this is kind of interesting he said very famous one and he said we can see sometimes we can see things in the market where we know we can make money but it will mesh it up we know we can make money but it will mess things up and we choose not to do those things and on the one hand maybe this is like oh you're being super arrogant like of course you can't do this but maybe he can and maybe he really isn't doing things he knows he could do but would change you know be pretty bad. Would the reddit army have that kind of morality or concern for what they're doing probably not based on what we've seen the madness of crowds there be like one person that says hey maybe and then they get trampled over that's that's the terrifying thing actually this. A lot of people have written about this is somehow that like little voice that's human morality gets silenced when we get in a group since our chanting yeah and that's terrifying but like I think maybe I misunderstood I thought that you're saying AI systems can be dangerous but you just describe how humans can be dangerous so which is safer. So I mean one thing is numera so Wall Street bets these kinds of like these kinds of attacks like it's not possible to model numera as data and then come up with the idea from the model let short screen game start right it's not even framed in that way it's not like possible to have that idea. So but it is possible for like kind of a bunch of humans so I think there's it's numera I could get very powerful without it being dangerous but Wall Street bets needs to get a little bit more powerful and it'll be pretty dangerous. Yeah well I mean so this is a good place to kind of think about numera data today and numera signals and what that looks like in 10 20 30 50 100 years you know like right now I guess maybe you can correct me but this the data that we're working with is like a window it's a you know anonymized. Anonymized off you skated window into a particular aspect time period of the market and you know you can expand that more and more and more and more potentially you can imagine in different dimensions to where it encapsulates all the things that where you could. Include kind of human to human communication that was available for like to buy a game stop for example on on Wall Street bets so maybe the step back can you speak to what is numera signals and what are the different data sets that are involved. So with numeric signals you're still providing predictions to us but you can do it from your own data sets so numerates all you have to model our data to come up with predictions numeric signals is whatever data you can find out there you can turn it into a signal and give it to us so it's a way for us to import signals on data we don't yet have. And and that's why it's particularly valuable because it's going to be signals you're only rewarded for signals that are orthogonal to our core signal so you have to be doing something uncorrelated and so strange alternative data tends to have that property there isn't too many other signals that are correlated with with you know what's happening on Wall Street bets that's not going to be like correlated with the price. So earnings ratio right and we have some users as of recently as of like a week ago there was a user that created I think he's in India he created a signal that is scraped from Wall Street bets and now we have that signal as one of our signals in thousands that we use at numera and the structure of the signal is similar so it's just numbers and time series data. It's exactly and it's just like it's kind of a you're providing a ranking of stocks so you just say give it a one means you like the stock zero means you don't like the stock and you provide that for five thousand stocks in the world and they somehow converted the natural language that's in the Wall Street that they've come exactly so there's then they made they open source the scolab notebook you can go see it and look at it and so yeah it's taking that making a sentiment score and then turning it into a rank of. It's like this stock sucks or the stock is awesome and then converting that's that's fast just looking at that data be a fast thing so on the signal side what's the vision this long term what do you see that becoming so we want to manage all the money in the world that's numerized mission and to get that we need to have all the data and have all of the talent like there's no way for the first principles if you had really good modeling and really good data that you would lose right it's just a question of how much do you need to get to get really good so numera already has some really nice data that we give out this year we are 10 Xing that and I actually think we'll 10 X them out of data we have a numera every year. For at least the next 10 years. Wow so it's going to get very big the data we give out and signals is more data people with any other random data set can turn that into a signal and give it to us and in some sense that kind of data is the edge cases the weirdness is the so you're focused on like the bulk yeah the main data and then there's just like weirdness from all over the place that just can enter through this back door of the exactly and the it's it's also a little bit shorter term so the signals are set about a seven day time horizon and the on numera it's like a 30 day so it's often for faster spec situations you're written about a master plan and you've mentioned which I love in similar sort of style of big style thinking you would like numera to manage all of the world's money. So how do we get there from from yesterday to several years from now like what's what is the plan so you've already started to allure to get all the data and get it yeah all the talent humans models exactly I mean the point thing to note there is what would that mean right and I think the biggest thing it means is like if there was one hedge fund. You would have not so much talent wasted on all the other hedge funds like it's super weird how the industry works it's like one hedge fund gets a data source and higher p hd and another hedge fund has to buy the same data source and higher p hd and suddenly a third of American p hd's are working at hedge funds and we're not even on Mars. And like so in some ways numera it's all about freeing up people who work at hedge funds to go work for Elon. Yeah and also the people who are working on numera problem it feels like a lot of the knowledge there is also transferable to other domains exactly it's our top one of our top users is a he works at NASA Jet Propulsion Lab yeah and he's he's like amazing I went to go visit him there. And it's like he's got like new Mara posters and he's like it's like it looks like you know the movies like it looks like Apollo 11 or whatever yeah the point is he didn't quit his job to join full time he's working on getting us to Jupiter's moon that's his mission that your rope a clip a mission actually literally what you're saying literally we he smart enough that we really want his intelligence to reach the stock market because the stock market's a good thing hedge funds are a good thing. There's a lot of things of hedge funds especially. But we don't want him to quit his job so he can just do a new man around the weekends that's what he does he just made a model and it just automatically submits to us and he's like one of our best users. You mentioned briefly that stock markets are good. For my sort of outside perspective. sense? Do you think trading stocks is closer to gambling or is it closer to investing? Sometimes it feels like it's gambling as opposed to betting on companies to succeed. And this is maybe connected to our discussion of shorting in general, but from your sense, do you think about it? Is it fundamentally still investing? I do think, I mean, it's a good question. It's, I've also seen lately, like people say, this is like speculation. Is there too much speculation in the market? And it's like, but all the trades are speculative. Like all the trades have a horizon, like people want them to work. So I would say that there's certainly a lot of aspects of gambling math that proplies to investing. Like one thing you don't do in gambling is put all your money in one bet. You have bank role management, and it's a key part of it. And small alterations to your bank role management might be better than improvements to your skill. So there, and then there are things we care about in our fund, like we want to make a lot of independent bets. We talk about it, like we want to make a lot of independent bets because that's going to be a higher sharp than if you have a lot of bets that depend on each other, like all in one sector. But yeah, I mean, the point the point is that you want the prices of the stocks to be reflective of how of their value. Oh, the underlying value. Yeah, like you shouldn't have there be like a hedge fund that's able to say, well, I've looked at some data and all of this stuff super mispriced. Like that's super bad for society. If it's if it looks like that to someone. I guess the underlying question then is, do you see that the market often like drifts away from the underlying value of companies and it becomes a game in itself? Like would these, whatever they're called, like derivatives, like the you know, options and shorting and all that kind of stuff. It's like layers of game on top of the actual like what you said, which is like the basic thing that the Wall Street bets was doing, which is like just buying stocks. Yeah, there are a lot of games that people play that are in the derivatives market. And I think a lot of the stuff people dislike when they look at the history of what's happened. They hate like credit default swaps or it's collateralized debt obligations. Like these are the these are like kind of like enemies of 2008. And then the long-term capital management thing it was like, it was like that 30 times leverage or something just that no one like you could just go to a gas station and ask anybody at the gas station, is it a good idea to have 30 times leverage? And they just say no. It's like a common sense just like went out the window. So the yeah, I don't I don't respect long-term capital management. Okay, but Numerine doesn't actually use any derivatives unless you call shorting derivative. We just we do put money into companies. We and the that does help the companies we're investing in. It's just in the little ways. We we really did buy Tesla and it and it did and we would you know, we were not we played some role in that's it's success. Super small make no mistake. But still I think that's important. Can I ask you a pot head question which is what is money man? So if we just kind of zoom out and look at because let's talk to you about cryptocurrency which perhaps could be the future of money. In general, how do you think about money? He said, Numerine, the division, the goal is to to run to manage the world's money. What is money in your view? I don't have a good answer to that but it's definitely in my personal life it's become more and more warped and you start to care about the real thing like what's really going on here. Elon has talks about things like this like what's what is the company really it's like so a bunch of people who like kind of show up to work together and like they solve a problem and they might be a stock out there that that's trading that represents what they're doing but it's it's not the real thing. And being involved in crypto like I was early I put in crowdsale of Ethereum and and all these other things and different crypto hedge funds and things that I've invested in and it's like it's just it's just kind of like it feels like how I used to think about money stuff is just like totally warped because you yeah you kind of you stop caring about like the price and you just care about like the product. So but the product you mean like the different mechanisms that money has exchanged I mean money is ultimately a kind of little you know on one is the store of wealth but it's it's also a mechanism of exchanging wealth but that like what what wealth means becomes a totally different thing especially with the cryptocurrency to where it's almost like these little contracts is the little agreements these transactions between human beings that represent something that's bigger and just like cash being exchanged 7.11 it feels like yeah maybe I answer what is finance like you it's what are you doing when you can when you have the ability to to take out a loan you can bring a whole new future into being with finance if you couldn't get a student loan to get a college degree you couldn't get a college degree like if you didn't have the money but now like weirdly you can get it with and like yeah or you have this like loan which is like so now you can bring you can bring a different future into the world and that's how I when I was saying earlier about if you rerun American history economic history without these these these things like you know a lot of takeout loans you know a lot to have have derivatives you know a lot of have money it would just it just doesn't really work and it's a really magic thing how how how how much you can do with finance but kind of bringing the future forward finance is empowering it's who sometimes forget this but it enables innovation it enables big risk takers and bold builders that ultimately make this well better you said you were early in on cryptocurrency can you give your high level overview of just your thoughts about the past president future of cryptocurrency um yeah some my friends told me about Bitcoin and I I was interested in and equities a lot and I was like well it has no net present value it has no future cash flows Bitcoin pays no dividends so I really couldn't get my head around it and like that this could be valuable um and then I but I did so I didn't feel like I was early in cryptocurrency in fact because I was like it was like 2014 it felt like a long time after Bitcoin um and then but then I I really liked some of the things that's if Ethereum was doing it seemed like a super visionary thing like I was reading something that was um that was just going to change the world when I was reading the white paper um and I liked the different constructs you could have inside of a Ethereum that you couldn't have on Bitcoin like smart contracts and all the exactly yeah and and even the they were yeah even spoke about different uh yeah different constructions you could have yeah that's a cool dance between Bitcoin and Ethereum of it's in the space of ideas feels so young they got wonder what cryptocurrencies will look like in the future like if Bitcoin or Ethereum 2.0 or some version will stick around or any of those like who's going to win out or if there's even a concept of winning out at all is there a cryptocurrency that you're especially find interesting that uh technically financially philosophically think is something to keep in your eye on? Well I don't really I'm not looking to like invest in cryptocurrencies anymore um but I I they are I mean the they're many are almost identical I mean there's not there wasn't too much difference um between even Ethereum and Bitcoin in some ways right but they are some that I like the privacy ones I mean I was like I like Zcash for it's like coolness it's actually um it's it's like a different kind of invention compared to some of the other things okay can you speak through just briefly to privacy what is there some mechanisms of preserving some privacy of the so I guess everything is public yeah uh the problem yeah none of the transactions are private yeah and so you know even like I have some of my I have some numerator and you can just see it in fact you can go to website and says like you can go to like ethoscan and it'll say like numera i founder and I'm like how the hell you guys know it so they can reverse and then you know whatever that's called yeah and so they can see me move it too they can see me oh why is he moving it yeah um so uh so but yeah Zcash then they also when you can make private transactions you can also play different games yes um and it's unclear it's like what's quite cool about Zcash is I wonder what games are being played there I wonder no uh so from uh from a deeply analytical perspective uh can you describe why dogecoin is going to win which it surely will like it it very likely will take over the world and once we expand out into the universe will take over the universe uh are in a more serious note like what are your thoughts on the recent success of dogecoin where you're spoken to sort of the the meme stocks the mimetics of the whole thing that it feels like the joke can become the reality like the the meme the joke has power in this world yes fassay exactly it's uh it's it's it's like why is it correlated with Elon tweeting about it it's not just Elon alone tweeting right it's like Elon tweeting and that becomes a catalyst for everybody on the internet kind of like spreading the joke right exactly the joke of it so it's it's the the initial spark of the fire for wall street bets type of situation yeah and that's fascinating because jokes seem to spread faster than other mechanisms like funny shit it's very effective at uh captivating the uh like the discourse on the internet yeah and i think you can have um like though i like the one meme like doge i haven't heard that name in a long time yeah um like i think back to that meme often that's like funny yeah and every time i think back to it there's a little probability that i might buy some tohs kind right and so i'm actually just have millions of people who have had all these great jokes told them and every now then they reminisce all that wasn't that was really funny and then they're like let me buy some uh wouldn't that be interesting if like the entirety if you travel in time like multiple centuries where the entirety of the communication of the human species is like humor like it's all just jokes like we're high on probably some really advanced drugs and we're all just laughing nonstop it's a weird like dystopian future of just humor Elon has made me realize uh how like good it feels to just not take shit seriously every once in a while and just relieve like the pressure of the world at the same time the reason i don't always like when people finish their senses with law is like that you don't when you don't take anything seriously when everything becomes a joke then it feels like uh that way of thinking feels like it will destroy the world it's like i i often think it like will memes save the world of destroy because i think both are possible directions yeah i think this is a big problem i mean america i always felt that about america a lot of people are telling jokes kind of all the time and they're kind of good at it um and you take someone aside and america and you're like i really want to have a sincere conversation it's like hard to even keep this rate phase yeah because um everything is so there's so much levity what so it's complicated i like how sincere actually like your twitter can be like i'm in love with the world yeah i get so much shit for it but like i'm i'm never gonna stop because i realize like do you have to be able to sometimes just be real and be positive and just be uh say the cliche things which ultimately those things actually capture some fundamental truths about life yeah but it's it's a dance and i think Elon does a good job of that now from an engineering perspective of being able to joke but everyone's you know what mostly to pull back and be like here's real problems let's solve them and so on and then be able to jump back to a joke so it's uh it's ultimately i think i i guess a skill that we uh have to learn i uh but i guess your advice is to invest everything uh anyone listening owns into dorshkoin that's what i heard from this extract yeah exactly yeah i'll hedge fund is unavailable just go straight to dorshkoin you're running a successful company it's just interesting because my mind has been in that space of uh potentially being one of the millions other entrepreneurs uh what's your advice on uh how to build a successful startup how to build a successful company i think that one thing i i do like and i it might be a particular thing about america but like there is something about like playing tell people what you really want to happen in the world like don't stop it's not it's not gonna make it um like if you're asking someone to invest in your company don't say i think uh maybe one day we might make a million dollars um when you actually believe something else you actually believe you're actually more optimistic but you're toning down your optimism because you want to appear um like low risk but actually it's super high risk if your company becomes mediocre because no one wants to work in mediocre company no one wants to invest in the your company um so you should play the real game um and obviously this doesn't apply to all businesses but if you play a venture back startup kind of game like play for keeps play to win to go big um and it's very hard to do that i've always feel like um i yeah i start you can start narrowing narrowing your focus because ten people are telling you you know you got to care about this boring thing that won't matter five years from now and you should push back and do the real play the real game should be bold so both i mean this uh there's an interesting duality there so there's the way you speak to other people about like your plans and what you are like privately just in your own mind and maybe it's connected with what you're saying about yes sincerity as well like if you if you appear to be sincerely optimistic about something that's big or crazy it's putting yourself up to be kind of like ridiculed or something yeah and so if you say my mission my mission is to um yeah go to Mars it's just so bonkers that uh it's hard to say it is but uh one powerful thing just like you said is if you say it and you believe it then actually amazing people uh come and work with you exactly it's not just skill but the the dreams there's something about optimism that uh like that fire that you have when you're optimistic of actually having the hope of building something totally cool something totally new that when those people get in a room together like they can actually do it yeah uh yeah there there's yeah there's that's uh and also makes life really fun when you're in that room so all that together uh with ultimately i don't know that's what makes this crazy ride of a startup really uh look fun and Elon's an example of a person who succeeded at that there's not many other inspiring figures which is sad i used to be a Google and there's uh there's something that happens that sometimes when the company grows bigger and bigger and bigger and bigger where that kind of ambition kind of quides down a little bit yeah you know a Google had this ambition still does of making the world's information accessible to everyone and i remember i don't know that's beautiful i still love that dream of that you know these to scan books but just in every way possible make there was information accessible same with wikipedia every time i open up wikipedia um i'm just all inspired by how awesome humans are man at creating this together i don't know what the meetings are over there but it's they it's just beautiful like what they've created is is incredible and i'd love to be able to be part of something like that and you're right for that you have to be bold and there's and strange to me also i think you're right that there's how many boring companies they are right something i just talked about especially in fintech it's like why am i excited about this is it's so lame like what is this isn't even like important even if you succeed this is going to be like terrible yeah this is not good um and it's just strange how people can kind of get fake enthusiastic about like boring ideas yeah when there's so many bigger ideas that um yeah i mean you read these things like this company raises money and it's just like that's a lot of money for the worst idea i've ever heard some ideas are really big so like i worked out autonomous vehicles quite a bit and there's so many ways in which you can present that idea to yourself to the team you work with just yeah like to yourself when you're quietly looking in the mirror in the morning uh that's really boring or really exciting like if you're really ambitious with autonomous vehicles there it changes the nature of like human robot interaction it's changed the nature of how we move forget money forget all that stuff it it changes like everything about robotics and AI machine learning it changes everything about manufacture i mean the cars the transportation is so fundamentally connected to cars and if that changes it changes the fabric of society of movies of everything and uh and if you go bold and take risks and go be willing to go bankrupt with your company uh as opposed to cautiously you could you could really change the world and so sad for me to see all these autonomous companies autonomous vehicle companies they're like really more focused about fundraising and kind of like smoke and mirrors are really afraid the the entirety of their marketing is grounded in fear and presenting enough smoke to where they keep raising funds so they can cautiously use technology of previous decade or previous two decades to kind of test vehicles here and there as opposed to do crazy things in bold and go huge at scale to huge data collection i mean um yeah so that's just an example like the idea can be big but if you don't allow yourself to take that idea and think really big with it uh then you're not gonna make anything happen yeah you're absolutely right in that so you've been connected in your work uh with a bunch of amazing people how much you interact with investors i get that whole process is an entire mystery to me is there some people that just have influence on the trajectory of your thinking completely or is it just this collective energy that they behind the company yeah i mean i i came here and i i i was amazed how yeah people would i was only here for a few months and i met some incredible investors but and i almost run out of money and uh once they invested i was like i am not gonna let you down and i was like okay i'm gonna send them like an email update every like three minutes yeah and then they don't care at all so they kind of want to look i don't know like so as for some i like it when it's just like they're always available to talk but um a lot of building a business especially a high tech business um there's a little for them to add right there's little for them to add on product there's a lot for them to add on like business development and if we are doing product research which is for us research into the market research into how to make a great hedge fund and we do that for years there's not much to to tell the investors so they're basically is like i believe in you there's something i like to cut out your jib i there's something in your idea in your ambition in your plans that i like and it's almost like a pat on the back i was like go go get them kid yeah it is a bit like that and that's cool uh that's a good way to do it i'm glad they do it that way um like the one in meeting i had which was like really good with this was meeting how it morgan uh who's uh actually a co-founder of renaissance technologies in the like 1980s and worked with jim simons and um he he he he was in the room and i was meeting some other guy and he was in the room and i was explaining uh how quantitative finance works i was like so you know that you they use mathematical models and then he was like yeah i i started renaissance i i know i've been about this and then i was like oh my god um so yeah but then and then i think he kind of said well yeah he said well because i was talking he was working at first round capital as a partner and they kind of said they didn't want to invest um and then i wrote a blog post describing the idea and i was like i really think you guys should invest and then they end up oh what you're saying you convinced them all that that might be good yeah because they're like we don't really invest in hedge funds and i was like you don't see like what i'm doing this is something different company not a hedge fund right yeah and you're as brilliant it's what when it caught my eye there's something special there so i i really do hope you succeed in the obviously it's a risky thing you're taking on the ambition of it the size of it but i do hope you succeed you mentioned jim simons um he comes up in another world of mine really often and on the he's just a brilliant guy on the mathematics side as a mathematician but he's also brilliant finance hedge fund manager guy um have you gotten a chance to interact with him at all have you learned anything from him on the math on the finance on the philosophy life side things um i've played poker with him it was pretty cool it was like um actually in the show billions they kind of do a little thing about this poker tournament thing with all the hedge fund managers and that's a real life thing um and they have a lot of like world series of bracelet what's there's poker place list holders but it's kind of jim's thing um and um i met him there and uh yeah it was kind of brief but i was just like he's like oh how do you why are you here and i was like oh how it sent me you know he's like go go play this tournament meet some of the other players and then um was it Texas hold them yeah that Texas hold them tournament yeah like do you play poker yourself or was it yeah i do i mean it was crazy and the on my right was the CEO who's the current CEO of renaissance peter brown um and peter muller who's a hedge fund manager pdt and yeah i mean it was just like and then you know just everyone and then all these brace world series like people that know from like tv um and robot mercer who's fucking crazy uh he's the guy who who donated the most money to trump um and he's just like it's a lot of personality character yeah jeez it's crazy um so it's quite cool how yeah like the it was really fun and then i'm i managed to knock out peter muller i have a uh i got a little trophy for knocking him out because he was a previous champion in fact i think he's won the most i think he's won three times super smart guy but uh but but i will say jim outlasted me in the tournament and they're all extremely good at poker yeah um but they're also so it was a ten thousand dollar buy-in um and i was like this is kind of expensive uh but it all goes to charity jim's math charity but then the way they play they have like rebise and like they all do a shit ton of rebise this is for charity yeah so um immediately they're like going all in and i'm like man like so i end up you know adding more as well uh so the state like you couldn't play at all without doing math yeah the stakes are high so but you're you're connected to a lot of these folks they're kind of titans of just uh uh of economics and tech in general do you feel burden from this you're a young guy i did feel a bit out place there like um the company was quite new and um they also don't speak about things right so it's not not like going to meet a famous rocket engineer who will tell you how to make a rocket they do not want to tell you anything about how to make a hedge fund it's like all secretive and that part i didn't like um and they were also kind of making fun of me a little bit like they would say uh like they'd call me like i don't know the bitcoin kid or yeah um and then they would say even things like uh member peter yeah said to me something like i don't think a i is gonna have a big role in finance um and i was like hearing this from the CEO of renaissance was like weird to hear because i was like of course it will and he's like but but he can see he's i can see it having a really big impact on things like self-driving cars right but finance it's too noisy and whatever and so i don't think it's like the perfect application and i was like that was interesting to hear because it's like and that i think it was that same day that um libra i think it is the poker playing AI started to beat like the human yeah so it's kind of funny hearing them like say oh i'm not sure AI could ever get attack that problem yes and then that very day it's attacking the problem of the game we're playing well there's a kind of a magic magic to um somebody who's exceptionally successful looking at you giving your respect but also saying that what you're doing is not going to succeed in a sense like they're not really saying it but i tend to believe for my interactions with people that it's a kind of prod to say like prove me wrong yeah that's ultimately that's that's how those guys talk they they see good talent and they're like um yeah and i think they're also saying it's not going to succeed quickly in some way they're like this is going to take a long time um and maybe maybe that's good to know um and certainly AI in in trading that's one of the most so uh philosophically interesting questions about artificial intelligence and the nature of money because it's like how much can you extract in terms of patterns from all of these millions of humans interacting using this methodology of money it's like one of the open questions in the artificial intelligence in that sense you converting into a data set is one of the biggest gifts to uh the research community to the whole anyone who loves data science and AI this is uh this is kind of fascinating i'd love to see where this goes actually i think i say sometimes long before a g i destroys the world a narrow intelligence will win all the money in the stock market way like just a narrow yeah um and i want to i don't know if i'm going to be the one who invents that so i'm building numera to make sure that that narrow a i you know uses our data so you're giving a platform to where millions of people can participate and uh do build that narrow AI themselves people love it when i ask this kind of question about books about ideas and philosophers and so on i was wondering if you had books or ideas, philosophers, thinkers that had an influence on your life when you were growing up or just uh today that you would recommend that people check out blog posts uh podcast videos all that kind of stuff is there something that just kind of had an impact on you that you can't recommend uh super kind of obvious one uh that um i really what i was reading zero to one while coming up with numera i was like i was like halfway through the book um and i really do like a lot of the ideas there and it's it's also about kind of thinking big and um uh i and also it's like peculiar little book it's like why like there's a little picture of the hipster versus uniboma and it's it's a weird little book so i like and there's kind of like some depth then it turns out a book on uh if you're thinking of doing a startup yeah that's a good book uh book i like a lot is um maybe my favorite book is david doich's beginning of infinity um i just found that so so optimistic it puts you everything you read in science it like makes the world feel like kind of colder because like it's like you know we're just just coming from evolution and uh coming from nothing has nothing should be this way or whatever and humans are not very powerful we're just like scum on the earth and the way david doich sees things and argues he argues them with the same rigger that the cynics often years and then has a much better conclusion um that's uh you know it's some of the statements of things like you know anything that doesn't violate the laws of physics um can be solved like so ultimately arriving in a hopeful uh like a hopeful yeah without being like a hippie you mentioned kind of advice for startups is there in general whether you do a startup or not do you have a device for young people today you're like an example of somebody who's paved their own path and we're uh i would say exceptionally successful is there advice somebody who's like 20 today 18 on a grad or thinking about going to college or in college and so on that you would give them i think uh i often tell young people don't start companies is it not don't start a company unless you're prepared to make it your life's work like that a really good way of of of putting it and a lot of people think well you know um this semester i'm going to take a semester off and in that one semester i'm going to start a company and sell it or whatever right and it's just like what are you talking about it doesn't really work that way you should be like super into the idea so into it that you want to spend a really long time on it um is that more about psychology or actually time allocation like is it literally the fact that you need to give a hundred percent for potentially years for it to succeed or is it more about just the mindset that that's required yeah i mean i think well i think yeah you don't want to have certainly don't want to have a plan to sell the company um like quickly or or something what's like or it's like a company that has a very it's like a big fashion component like it'll only work now it's like an app for something um so yeah i that's that's a big one and then i also think something i thought about recently is i had a job as a quant at a fund uh for about two and a half years and part of me thinks if i had spent another two years there i would have learned a lot more um and had even more knowledge to to be where new to basically accelerate how long numerous i took so the idea that you can sit in an air conditioned room and get free food or even sit at home now in your underwear and make a huge amount of money and learn whatever you want and get it's just crazy it's such a good deal yeah oh that's interesting that's the case for i was terrified of that like a google i thought i would become really comfortable in that air conditioned room and that i was afraid the quant situation is i mean will you present this is really brilliant that it's exceptionally valuable the lessons you learn because you get to get paid while you learn from others if you see that if you see jobs in in the space of your passion that way that it's just an education it's like the best kind of education but of course you have from my perspective you have to be really careful on that to get comfortable again in a relationship then you buy a house or whatever the hell it is and and then you get you know and then you convince yourself like well i have to pay these fees for the car for the house of a blah blah and then and there's momentum and all of a sudden you're in your deathbed and there's grandchildren and uh you drink your whiskey and complaining about kids these days so i you know that i'm afraid of that momentum but you're right like there's something special about the education you get working at these companies yeah and i i remember on my desk i had the like a bunch of papers on quant finance a bunch of papers on optimization and then the paper on on ethereum just on my desk as well and the white paper and it's like it's amazing how my how kind of and you can learn about so that that i also thought i think this like idea of like learning about intersections of things i don't think there are too many people that know like as much about crypto and quant finance and machine learning as i do and that's a really nice set of three things to know stuff about and that was because i had like free time in my job okay let me ask the perfectly impractical but the most important question what's the meaning of all the things you're trying to do so many amazing things why what's the meaning of this life of yours or ours i don't know humans yeah so i have yet had said people say asking what meaning of life is is like asking the wrong question or something the question is wrong yeah no that usually people get too nervous to be able to say that because it's like your question sucks i don't think there's an answer it's like the searching for it it's like sometimes asking it it's like sometimes sitting back and looking up at the stars and being like huh i wonder if there's aliens up there if there's there's a useful like a palette cleanser aspect to it because it kind of wakes you up to like all the little busy hurried day-to-day activities all the meetings all the things you're like a part of we're just like ants a part of a system a part of another system and and then when this asking this bigger question allows you to kind of zoom out and think about it but there's ultimately i think it's an impossible thing for a limited capacity like cognitive capacity to to capture but it's fun to listen to somebody who's exceptionally successful exceptionally busy now who's also young like you to ask these kinds of questions about like death you know do you consider your own mortality kind of thing and and life whether that enters your mind because it often doesn't it gets it kind of almost gets in the way yeah it's amazing how many things you can like that are trivial that could occupy a lot of your mind until something until something bad happens or something flips you and then you start thinking about the people you love that in your life then you start thinking about like holy shit this right ends exactly yeah i i i i just had covid and i had it quite bad it wasn't what wasn't really bad it was just like i also got a simultaneous like lung infection so i had like almost like bronchitis or whatever i don't even i don't understand that stuff but it felt i started and then you forced to be isolated right and so it's actually kind of nice it because it's very moat it's very depressing yeah and then i've heard stories of i think it's tron parker he had like all these diseases as a child yeah and he had to like just stay in bed for years and then he like made napster it's like pretty cool um so yeah i had about 15 days of this recently just last month and it it feels like it did shock me into a new kind of energy and ambition where there are moments when you were just like terrified at the combination of loneliness and like you know the thing about covid is like there's some degree of uncertainty like it feels like it's a new thing a new monster that's arrived on this earth and so you know dealing with it alone a lot of people are dying it's like wondering like yeah you do wonder i mean for sure and then these there are the even new strains in South Africa which is where i was and maybe i maybe the new strain had some interaction with my yeah jeans and i'm just gonna die but ultimately it was liberating so i loved it oh i loved i loved that i got out of it okay because it also affects your mind you get confu you get confusion and kind of a lot of fatigue and you can't do usual tricks of cycling yourself out of it so you know sometimes it's like oh man i feel tired okay i'm just gonna go have coffee and then i'll be fine it's like now it's like i feel tired coffee i don't even want to get out of bed to get coffee because i feel so tired and then you have to confront uh there's no like quick fix cure and you're trapped at home with that so now you have this little thing that happened to you those reminder that you're mortal and you get to care that flag in in uh in in trying to create something special in this world right with numer i listen uh this was like one of my favorite conversation because you were you're the way you think about this world of money and just this world in general is so clear and you're able to uh explain it so eloquently which is really fun really appreciate you talking to it thank you thank you thanks for listening to this conversation with Richard Crabe and thank you to our sponsors audible audio books trial labs machine learning company link is to app that summarizes books and athletic greens all in one nutrition drink click the sponsor links to get discount at the support this podcast and now let me leave you some words from Warren Buffett games are won by players who focus on the playing field not by those whose eyes are glued to the scoreboard thank you for listening and hope to see you next time you