 The following is a conversation with Lieutenant Ryan Graves, former Navy fighter pilot, including roles as a combat lead, landing signals officer, and rescue mission commander. He and people in his quadrant detected UFOs on multiple occasions, and he has been one of the few people willing to speak publicly about these experiences, and about the importance of investigating these sightings, especially for national security reasons. Ryan has a degree in mechanical and aerospace engineering from WPI, and an interest in career roles in advanced technology development, including multi-aging collaborative autonomy, machine learning assisted air-to-air combat, manned and unmanned teaming technologies, and most recently development of materials through quantum simulation. Now, a quick few seconds mention of each sponsor. Check them out in the description, it's the best way to support this podcast. We got Give Well for charity, notion for startups, magic spoon for breakfast, and especially PN for privacy. Choose wisely my friends. And now onto the full ad reads, as always no ads in the middle. I try to make this interesting, but if you skipped them please still check out our sponsors, I enjoy their stuff, maybe you will too. This show is brought to you by Give Well. The research charitable organizations and only recommend highest impact evidence-backed charities over $50,000 have used Give Well to donate more than $750 million. There's a movement called Effective Altruism that asks the question, if I want to help the world, how do I do so optimally, most effectively? I think there's even a deeper way to ask that question, which is beyond money, beyond your productivity, but maybe what kind of person do you want to become? What kind of person, if you materialize, will make the world a better place? I think it starts there, and everything else is built on top of that. Go to GiveWell.org, pick Podcasts and select Alex Freeman Podcasts at checkout. This show is also brought to you by Notion, a note-taking and team collaboration tool. It combines note-taking, document sharing, wikis, project management, and much more in one space that's simple, powerful and beautifully designed. Everybody I've asked about what is their favorite note-taking app, the All-Stay Notion. I want to let you know that it's also useful for startups, for the collaboration side of things. Productivity is not just about individual productivity, it's also about team productivity. But this does make me think about the day in the life of Ben Franklin. I don't remember when, but in college, I believe it was his autobiography that we read. But there's a question at the beginning of the day, which is, what good shall I do this day? And then the evening question at the end of the day, which is, what good have I done today? Such an interesting way to frame productivity. Really be useful. The running a special offer for startups, you can get up to $1,000 off the team plan, which is almost one year free for a team of 10. Got a Notion.com slash startups. This episode is also brought to you by Magic Spoon. Low-carb, keto-friendly cereal. It has 0 grams of sugar, 13 to 14 grams of protein, only 4 net grams of carbs, and 140 calories in each serving. You can build your own box, or you can get a variety pack with many available flavors, the best of which, if you were to take my advice friends, is Coco. My favorite flavor and the flavor of champions. It reminds me of childhood when diet or what is good for me was not a concept I understood very well. All I knew is when I came to this country that sugar tasted good, and cereal was a gigantic source of sugar. Now, you can have all the same kind of enjoyment, but without all the negative aspects of sugar. Magic Spoon gives you a 100% happen as guarantee, which is the only place in life you can possibly get such a guarantee. Get a discount on your order if you go to MagicSploon.com slash Lex and use CodeLux. This show is brought to you by ExpressVPN. I use them to protect my privacy on the internet. I've used them for many years. There's a few pieces of software that have accompanied me, like an old friend, through the years. Now, the design, the interface has changed over the years, but the basic function has not. There was always a big sexy button. I believe for a long time it was a right button. Now there's different shades of button. But there's one button, and it does a simple thing. You pick a location, you press on, and it works. It's fast, works on any operating system, including the best operating system there ever was, which is Linux, all the different flavors and distributions of Linux. My favorite is Obon Tomate. If you were to ask, which is a sub-flavor of Obon to Linux, but there's many, many, many others. Anyway, I recommend you join me in this battle for privacy on this too big world we'll call the internet. Go to www.expressVPN.com slash LexPod and you will get an extra three months free. This is a Lex Freeman podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Ryan Graves. What did you think of the new TopGround movie? How accurate was it? Let's start there. I thought the flying was really accurate. I thought the type of flying they did and how they approached the actual mission. Of course, had a lot of liberties. But one thing that seems to be hard to capture on these types of things are the chess game that's going on while that type of flying is happening. The chess game between like in a dogfight, between the pilots and the enemy or between the different pilots. I'll even speak to just that particular mission they flew there. And for that particular mission, it's kind of a chess game with yourself to get everything in place. So what kind of flight they flew is called a high threat scenario, which means they have to ingress low due to the surface of the air threats, the integrated air defense systems that are nearby. And they have to ingress low and pop up like you see in the movie. In that particular movie, that was a pre-plan strike. They knew exactly where they were going. But there's a scenario where we have to operate in that type of environment and we don't know exactly where we're going to strike or we're going to be adapting to real-time targets. And so in that scenario, you would have one of those fighters down low like that operating as a mission commander, as a forward air controller. He's out there calling shots, joining on those other players in order to ensure they're pointed at the right target. So that's a bit of the chess game that he'll be playing. Can you actually describe for people who haven't seen the movie what the mission actually is? Yeah. What's involved in the mission? So in this particular mission, it's kind of what we would call a pre-plan strike. So there's a known location that's in a heavily defended area. In the air crew, in this case, I believe with four F-18s on the initial package, their job was to ingress very low down a canyon to stay out of the radar window of the surface to air threats. What does ingress mean? Ingress means that they're going to be pushing from a start location towards the target or the objective. So there's an ingress portion of the mission and an egress portion of the mission. Oh, okay. Like the entrance and the exit type of thing. But it changes our mindset tactically quite a bit, right? Because when we're entering someplace, we have the option to enter. But when we go drop a bomb on location, we're exiting. We don't have that luxury. We don't have that option. So it actually changes our tactics and our aggression level. Got it. And so they were flying low to the ground and then there's a surface to air missiles that forced them to have to fly low. Is that a realistic thing? It is realistic. So driving those aircraft in the clutter, all radar systems, or most I should say, are essentially line of sight. And so they're going to be limited by the horizon or any clutter out there. And even a number of radars, if they are located up high and looking down towards that aircraft, the clutter, all the objects such as trees and canyons, can have effect on radar systems. And so it can be a type of camouflage. So that's the camouflage for the radar. But what about the surface to air missile? Is that a legitimate way to avoid missiles is fly so low. Like fly I guess below their level? As far as I know, you can fly under any radar right now. We don't have necessarily radars that can look through anything. So there is always going to be the ability to mask yourself. But with a larger number of assets and distributed communication networks, where those radars that are looking, makes all the difference. And I said they are ingressing pass and I as and that's an integrated air defense system. And that linking of air defense systems is what makes it so hard, so complicated. Is that the sensors and the weapons are disassociated from each other. So that if you took out the target that was shooting at you, it still has the ability to intercept you from another radar location. So it's distributed and it's stronger that way. You mean the surface to air missiles? Like it's a distributed system and that if you take out one, they're still able to sort of integrate information about your location and strike at you. Correct. And there's a lot of complication that can go, you know, want to be started thinking about distributed systems like that and the ability to self-heal and repair and adapt to losses. It's an interesting area. Are you responsible for thinking about that when you're flying an airplane? To some degree. And we ingress to an area like that. We're presented with information about targets, air to air or air to surface or surface to air, I should say. And we can essentially see where essentially the danger zone, if you will, is located. And so essentially we would stay out of that. And so having a full picture of the environment is extremely important because, you know, at the end of the day, if we go in that circle, we can die pretty quickly. So it's absolutely crucial. So those regions that have higher and lower danger based on your understanding of the actual, whatever the surface to air and missiles systems are. So you can kind of know that's interesting. I want to how automated that could be, too, especially when you don't know. It seems like in the movie they knew the location of everything. Imagine that's less known in most cases. And also a lot of those systems might be a little bit more ghetto if I can use that technical term. Like I've gotten ad hoc maybe. It's the, I don't know. But you know, having just recently visited Ukraine and seen a lot of aspects of the way that wars fought, there's a lot of improvised type of systems. So you take high, high tech like advanced technology, but the way you deploy it and the way you organize it is very improvised and ad hoc and is responding to the uncertainty, the dynamic environment. And so from an enemy perspective or whoever is trying to deal with that kind of system, it's hard to figure it out because it's like me. I played tennis for a long time and it's always easier to play. This is true for all sports. Play tennis against a good tennis player versus a crappy tennis player because the crappy tennis player is full of uncertainty. And that's really difficult to deal with. It seemed like in the movie the systems were really well organized and so you could plan. And there's a very nice ravine that went right down the middle of them. That's how movies work, isn't it? Yeah. Absolutely agree. So what you say is a very good point. And if we were to take a chunk of airspace and break it up into little bits, there'd be places that are better to fly or less good to fly. And we are seeing that now with what they call man-to-man teaming. We see tactical aircraft or some type of aircraft or platform that's being automated. And it's not being automated in traditional sense where people think aircrew are flying them around and conduct missions. But it's very high level objective orientated mission planning that allows the aircrew to act more as a mission commander versus having to just pick the right assets or fly them around and manipulate them somewhat physically. So actually going back to the chest thing, can you elaborate on what you mean playing a game of chess with yourself? What's when you're flying that mission, what exactly do you mean by that? Well, there's a few people you're usually fighting against in the air. There's the bad guys and then there's physics and mother nature, right? So when we're down at about a hundred feet, it's a chess game to stay alive for the pilot and it's a chess game for the wizzo to process the information he needs and then communicate it to all those other aircraft that we're flying around to assure that they're putting their weapons on the right target. What's the wizzo? Wizzo is a weapon systems officer. He's a backsteader who is not a pilot, but they're responsible for radar manipulation and communications and weapons appointments of certain natures. So the chess game is against physics against the enemy time. Time? What about your own psychology, fear? Uncertainty. No. There's no time for that type of self-reflection while we're flying. I want to get to that, but I don't want to forget the point that you made about increased randomness being a tactical advantage. As we, as you mentioned, you can introduce autonomy in there and when you bring autonomy in there and my expectation would be as we bring different abilities and machine learning as we gather more data, we're going to be able to bring the tactical environment around that jet. The war space that it goes into will almost be at a stochastic level from the enemy's perspective, where it will almost seem like every tactical environment that go in will be random and yet very deadly because the system is providing a new tactical solution essentially for that particular scenario. Instead of just training to particular tactics that have to be repeatable and trainable and lethal, right? But not necessarily the most lethal because they have to be trainable. If we can introduce AI into that and to have a level of randomness or at least appearance of randomness do the complexity, I would share a stochastic tactical advantage because even our own blue fighters wouldn't be able to engage in that fight because it would be unsafe essentially for anything else. I think that's where we have to drive to because otherwise, as always, it's chicken and mouse cat game about who's tactics and who knows what. But if knowledge is no longer a factor, it's going to make things a lot different. That's really interesting. So out of the many things that are part of your expertise, your journey, you're also working on autonomous and semi-autonomous systems, the use of AI and machine learning and man-to-man teaming all that kind of stuff. We'll talk about it. But you're saying, when people think about the use of AI in war, in military systems, they think about computer vision for perception or processing of sensor information in order to extract from it actionable knowledge kind of thing. But you're saying you could also use it to generate randomness that's difficult to work with in a game theoretic way. It's difficult for human operators to respond to. Exactly. That's really interesting. Okay. Back to Tom Cruise and Tom Gland. What about the dog fighting? What aspects of that were accurate? So dog fighting is kind of an interesting conversation because it's not the most tactically relevant skill set nowadays by traditional standards because the ranges with which we engage and play weapons are very significant. And so if we're in a scenario or in a dog fight like that, a lot of things have probably gone wrong, right? And that's kind of how this mission was set up, right? So it was a no-win type scenario most likely. And so for a dog fight, the aircraft size and the ranges and the turn radius make it so it's not very theatrical, right? The aircraft looks small and while it's intense with the systems I have and the sensors and what I'm feeling and all that, if I, you know, we've done it and we've done it, right? We take video of that and it's just like a blue sky and you see a little dot out there. So not very interesting. And so anytime it really looks interesting in dog fight arena, that's most likely a fiction because we really only get close for, you know, a millisecond as we're jipping past each other at the merge. You're breaking my heart, right? I know. You're breaking my heart. No, I understand. You can go and have fun, but you know, in a dog fight specifically. Maybe that was more common in the earlier awards the world were doing before that. Where the, is it due to the sort of the range and the effectiveness of the weapon systems involved? Correct. And the accuracy of the targeting systems at range. But there's also a train of thought that hasn't necessarily been tested out yet, which is with the advent of advanced electronic warfare, EW and or unmanned assets, the battle space may get so complex and missiles may essentially just get dropped out of the sky or wasted such that you're going to be in close with either IR missiles or guns. If it's a no kidding, you know, must defend type scenario. First of all, what's electronic warfare? You know, it's basically trying to get control of electromagnetic spectrum for the interest of whatever operation is going on. So in the tactical environment, a lot of that is trying to deceive the radar or can we deceive the missile or just, you know, stop their guide and things of that nature. Man, it's a battle on the space of information of digital information. Yeah. Well, F-22 and F-35, right? F-22 is a big expensive aircraft and it was made to be a great fighter. But F-35 is not as great of a fighter, but it's an electronic warfare and mission commander platform of the future where information is what's going to win the war instead of the best dogfighter. And so it's interesting dichotomy there. What's the best there a plane ever made? Fighter jet ever made. I know the aviators in the audience are going to hate my answer because they're going to want that sexy, you know, muskly F-14 Tomcat type fighter or maybe P-51 type aircraft, but the F-35 is maybe not the best dogfighter, but it doesn't have to get in a dogfight, right? It's like how you'd be the best knife fighter, not getting a knife fight sometimes. Locky Martin F-35 Lightning II looks pretty sexy. There's two real strengths you can have as a fighter. You can have the ability to kind of out muscle your fighter, your opponent, and beat him on G's and power and rate around on him. And then there's the other side of that which is you can be overly maneuverable. You can bleed energy quickly. And that's what the F-13 was good at because it had to be heavier to land on the aircraft carry. We had to give it extra bulk. But it also needs special mechanisms to slow down enough to land on aircraft carry. So it made it very maneuverable. And what that leads to a lot of times the ability to get maybe the first shot in a fight, which is very good. But if you do make that sharp turn, you're going to bleed a lot of your energy away and be more susceptible for follow-on shots if that one is less susceptible. So there's just kind of aggression on aggression, game you can play depending on the type of aircraft you're fighting. Where does the F-35 land on that spectrum? The F-35 land somewhere behind the F-22s. So there'll probably be a row of F-22s or F-18s and F-35 will be out back. But it'll be enabling a lot of the warfare that's happening in front of you. Is it one of the more expensive planes because of all the stuff on it? It certainly is. And the movie they have Tom Cruise fly it over Mach 10. So maybe can you say, what are the different speeds? Accelerations feel like Mach 1, 2, 3 or hypersonic. Have you ever flown hypersonic? No. Is it get, how tough does it get? I'll just going to call out the BS of ejecting at Mach 10 just for the record because in the movie, there's been I think at least one ejection that was supersonic. And I'll just say it was not pretty, but he survived. So there's a math to be some interesting mechanisms to eject especially at Mach 10, but I'll digress on that for the moment. Yeah, that seemed very strange. And he just walked away from it. Anyway, so he seemed to shoveled. Okay, it's Tom Cruise. It's Chuck Norris or something. Indestructible. Indestructible. So it doesn't age. And I said, what's interesting to say about the experience of as you go up, does it get more and more difficult? And the end of the day, crossing the soundbearers much like crossing the speed limit on the highway. You don't really notice anything. To cross that, at least in F18 because we have a lot more weight than most fighters, is typically we'll do that in a descent and we'll do that full afterburner, just dumping gas into the engine. And so that'll get us over the fastest I think I've got with about 1.28. But what's interesting, people realize is that if I take that throttle in an afterburner and I just bring it back and just bring it back to mill, which is full power, just not afterburner, the deacceleration is so strong through their friction that it throws you forward in your straps. Almost, I would say maybe 70% of strong almost has trapped on the boat. It's pretty strong. So it's almost like reverse car crashes for the deacceleration. So acceleration is usually kind of slow and you don't feel anything, of course, when you're crossing through it, but the deacceleration is pretty violent. The deacceleration is violent, huh? Okay. But is there a fundamental difference between like Mach 1 and hypersonic, Mach 5 and so on? Does it require like super special training? And is that something that's used often in warfare or is that not really that- No, hypersonic human flight. If it exists, it's not something that's employed tactically in any sense right now that I'm aware of. So, you know, and I think of hypersonic technology, I think of missiles and weapon systems and delivery platform. I don't think of fighter aircraft necessarily. I can think of bomber or reconnaissance aircraft perhaps, but those would be more efficient and very long, long range. So I imagine acceleration would be kind of gentle, honestly. The thing you experience is the acceleration, not the actual speed. There's been just a small tangent, a lot of discussion about hypersonic nuclear weapons, like missiles from Russia bragging about that. Is this something that's significant concern or is it just the way to flex about different kinds of weapons systems? Hypersonics, I do think pose a challenge for our detection systems because there are, you know, there are design considerations in these sensor systems as always, right? When you build them and the technology progresses to a point where maybe it's not feasible to use that technology, you know, there's a problem. But with the, you know, the all domain and kind of cross domain data link and capabilities we have, it's less of, you know, it's more of an integrated picture, I'll say. And so the hypersonics are really what it is is how fast can we detect and destroy problem. And we're just shortening the time available to do that. We call something like that the kill chain, right? It's from locating a target and identifying it and, you know, essentially authorizing its destruction by whatever means employing and then actually following up to ensure that you did what you said you were going to do in some sense, right? Does it need another reattach, something in that nature? And so there's an old dog fighting framework you could call it. It's called the Udalupe that kind of made its way in the engineering of business now, but the old observed orientate side act was initially a fighter mechanism in order to get inside that kill chain of your opponent and break it up so that he can't process his kill chain on you. And so hypersonics are way of shortening those windows of opportunity to react to that. I wanted to do like how much do you have to shorten it in order for the defense systems not to work anymore? It seems like it's fair. You know, I am both often horrified by the thought of nuclear war, but at the same time wonder what that looks like. When I dream of extreme competence in defense systems, I imagine that not a single nuclear weapon can reach the United States by missile with the defense systems or defense systems. But then again, I also understand that these are extremely complicated systems, the amount of integration required. And because you're not using them, there could be, you know, there's like an intern somewhere that like forgot to update the code, the four turn code that like is going to be make the different because you don't have the opportunity to really thoroughly test, which is really scary. Of course, the systems are probably incredible if they could be tested, but because they can't be really thoroughly tested in actual, in an actual attack, I wonder. I guess one assumption there would be that these hypersonic missiles would only be launched in the case of attack. It would be interesting if there were other hypersonic objects that we could use to flex those systems. Another thing that actually happened, I just have a million questions I want to ask you, it's fascinating to me. There's a bird strike on the plane. Does that happen often? Yeah, it's a serious issue. It damaged the engine and they made it seem like it's a serious, exactly a serious issue. I've hit birds. I know someone that took a turkey vulture to the face through the cockpit, right? Shattered the cockpit, knocked them out. I think that, actually, I don't know personally about the story. I know from the command I was at. And I believe the backseat are at the punch out and punched them both out because it was unconscious, you know, on the front seat from the bird. It can kill you from hitting you. It's like a bowling ball going 250 miles an hour. It can take out an engine very easily. Every airport I've flown at in the Navy, I've had to check the bird condition, if you will, to see how many birds we've had the cancel flights because there's too many of them around the airport. Some airports even have bird radars, military airports. Is there systems that monitor the bird condition? There is. There's actual radar systems and you can go in the certain bases you have to call up and they'll tell you what it is for the day or for that hour. And other ones have it in their weather report that goes out with a radio. What are some technological solutions to this? Or is this just because it's a low probability event? There's no real solution for it. I would say it's not a low probability event. This is happening a lot. I mean, although the hits themselves aren't necessarily that common or I'll say a catastrophic hit, either a near miss or a hit or the pilot having to actively maneuver to avoid it is pretty common. And in fact, it seems stressful. It is. It's so common in fact that we know that you never want to go over or you never want to go under a bird if you see in front of you. You always want to try to go over it because what they'll do immediately if they see you is in your startle missiles, they'll bring their wings in and just drop straight down to try to get out of the path. It's interesting. I didn't know they did that. So if you, if you try to go under them, they're going to be dropping into you. So you typically want to try to go above them. Is this something you can train for or no? Is this one of those things you have to really experience? It's a skill set that you somewhat train for in the duties of being a fighter pilot in a sense, right? Being able to react to your environment very quickly and make decisions quickly. So is that one of the more absurd things challenges you have to deal with in flying? Is there other things sort of maybe weather conditions, like harsh weather conditions? Is there something that we maybe don't often think about in terms of the challenges of flying? Birds in a way aren't a ridiculous threat for us. It's a safety threat that anything physical in the air is something that we really have to be careful about. Whether we're flying formation off of the aircraft right next to us or whether it's a turkey vulture at 2,000 feet or a flock of 5,000 birds like at the runway, we have to wave off. Although there are low probability a lot of bases will have actual environmental protectant agency employees that are responsible for safely removing migratory birds or different animals that may be in the runways or flying about. Wow. I didn't know what a turkey vulture is and it really does look like a mixed between a vulture and a turkey. And look kind of dumb, no offense to turkey vultures. In that movie, who is the enemy nation? Was it, I mean, I think I guess the ones flying is Iran or is it Russia? I didn't think they were implying any particular nation state, frankly. I think they did a somewhat decent job of having some ambiguous fifth generation fighters, the location and the stockpile. I get like how the story kind of insinuates certain things, but they seem to do a good job of not having anything directly pointed to another nation, which I thought was the good move. I enjoy these type of movies as a navigator and as an American, right? Because it's a feel good movie. But we shouldn't be celebrating going to war with any particular country. China, Russia, wherever may have these weapons. It's fun to watch, but it would be an incredibly serious event to be employing these weapons. Yeah, we'll talk about war in general. Because yeah, the movie is kind of celebrating the human side of things and also the incredible technology involved, but there's also the cost of war and the seriousness of war and the suffering involved with war, not just in the fighting, but in the death of civilians and all those kinds of things. Well, you were a Navy pilot. Let's talk a little bit more seriously about this. When you were twice deployed in the Middle East, flying the F-A-18F super hornet, can you briefly tell the story of your career as a Navy pilot? Sure. So I joined the Navy in 2009, right after college. I went to the off-served boot camp, off-served piano school. I applied as a pilot and I got another pilot. That was the advantage of going that way is that I essentially choose what I wanted and if I got in great, if not, I didn't get stuck doing something else. So you knew you wanted to be a pilot. I joined. I went through my initial training. I went through primary flight training that all aviators go through. I did well enough that one of the first lessons I teach in the Navy is that you can have a great career in a Navy and you can see the world and do what you want, but at the end of the day, it's all about the needs of the Navy and what they need. So they may not have the platform you like or you may not necessarily get to choose your own adventure here. I was lucky enough that there was one jet slot in my class and I was lucky enough fortunate enough to get it. So it was a jet slot. So yeah, what that means is that I was assigned, actually, a tailhook at that point, which meant I would go trained to fly aircraft at land on aircraft carriers. And there's essentially three aircraft that do that at the time. Is that 18? And the E2 and the C2. It's kind of like the male truck for the boat. E2 is one of the big radar dish on top and then there's all the F18s. So E2's comms, the C2 male truck. Yeah. C2, big, big. So it's big. They literally bring the door and they're the ones that bring supplies to the ship via air and people. Sorry if I missed it. Is there a plane? Is there an helicopter? It's a plane. Okay. All right. And the F18 is a fighter jet. Okay. So I selected tailhook, which meant I could get one of those other ones. 80% or so are jets. So I was in a good spot at that point. And that's when I went to Merdy, Mississippi to fly my first jet, which was the T-45 Gauzehawk. Cool. So what kind of plane is that? Is that that's what you were doing your training on? That's the jet aircraft you get in before you actually go to the F18. It is carrier capable. So go to the boat for the first time in a during the day. Drop fake bombs. Do dog fighting low levels, formation flying day and night? Well, it's a pretty plane. Yeah. And it looks like a cone so that no one hits it. Okay. So it's usually not used for fighting. It's used for training. It's used for training. How to fight? Got it. So what was that like? Was that the first time you were sort of really getting into it? Yeah. That was really interesting because before that it was a 600 horsepower prop plane. Going from that to the T-45 is one of the biggest jumps in power and Navy machine operation. How much horsepower does the T-45 have approximately? 15,000 or so? So it's a huge jump from 600 horsepower about so it's a big, big leap. But it's a jet. So it performs differently. It's faster. What that means is not just because it's faster, your whole mind needs to be faster. Everything happens faster in the air now. Those comms happen faster. Your landing gear has to come up faster. Everything just happens faster in a jet. So it's a big jump. And I never get going on my first flight in that aircraft. It was a formation flight for someone else. And I was just in the back watching and there was instructor in the flight. And so what that means is instructor is in a single aircraft and then there's three or four other aircraft and they're learning how to do joins and learning how to fly information. And as a new student in the back, it's amazing, right? Because photo op time and all this, like I'm seeing aircraft close for the first time, it's awesome. And on the way back, we couldn't get our landing gear down ironically. So to make a long story short, because it's overall not that exciting, we couldn't get the gear down. We actually went to go do a control injection to the target area that is about 15, 20 miles to the north of the base. Wait, did you just say that's not that exciting? Well, because that to me is pretty exciting. So first of all, I mean, that must be terrifying, like early on in your career, I haven't seen those things that, yeah, like how often does that kind of thing happen? Decent, more on you would think. More on you would think. There was no significant panic. This is like this understood. This is what has to be done in this case. I think I was probably just too dumb to realize this, so you can't solve it because as a new student, not really appreciating just what is ahead of me if we are rejecting. But at the time, it was just like wrote, right? Because I was back there and then I went from a observer mode to a, I'm going to provide you the help that I can provide you as a member of this career mode. And so it was less about on this 20 mile trip and thinking about my, how vulnerable I am. We're going through checklist. We're talking to people. We're getting ready. No, it wasn't, it wasn't fearful. In the whole time we were doing one of these to try to get the, what's one of the gear down. So we're unloading the jet and then loading it back to try to get the gear out with the stick. And it came down, it came down halfway there just on and so. So it came back around and we did like a safety trap in case there was a problem with the gear. That was my first flight, you know, a little bit of serendipity, but I'm going to fast forward a bit and I went back to the squadron as a instructor about five or six years later. And I was an aviation safety officer at this point, which may not as responsible for investigating mishaps. And a student went in and he went in the back seat of a form flight. Just like the one I went on, and he went out and he ended up objecting on that flight. Zach, same type of flight. They went out and they had a runaway trim scenario. That caused the aircraft to just invert itself almost 180 degrees at about 600 feet over the ground and they punched out just slightly outside the ejection window at about 300, 400 feet or so, but they were completely fine. So you know, and then about two months later we had another ejection, about three months after that we had another ejection. So unfortunately, you know, it can be more common than people think. What does it feel like to get ejected? Thankfully, I don't know. I can describe it to you. I can tell you what it's like from what I've heard, but I truly think it's one of those things that you just don't understand until it happens. It's like instantaneous about 250 Gs, which is only possible because the inertia in our blood. All right. So you can actually get like 250, 300 Gs for like a few milliseconds and then it backs off to like 40 or 50 Gs to get you away from the vehicle itself. And so, you know, you may lose consciousness if you do, you know, who knows where you wake up. You know, you can be in a tree. You could still be falling. You can be in the water. So the physics of that is fascinating. How do you eject safely? Do you know the story about how that was tested at all? I don't know the full story, but there was no. I guess nobody knows the full story. It's probably a lot of shady stuff going on. But anyway, you mean like in the early early days or? They soak up flight dock up to a rocket sled and just see how much their body could take it. And he turned a lot of his body into in the mush in the process of getting that science done by saved a lot of life. People used to be tougher back in the day. That's how science used to be done. So how did your training continue? So how to take me further through your career? Has you worked towards graduating towards the F18s? So in VT9 where I was a student, there's two phases. There's an intermediate and an advanced. Intermediate is getting very comfortable with the aircraft. And at that point, you truly hear, all right, you're going jets now or you're going to go one of the other aircraft that land on aircraft carrier. I was told I was going to jets at that point. And then we go into same squadron, same aircraft, same instructors, but it's called advanced now. And now we're learning how to dog fight for the first time. We're doing what we call tactical formation, which is just like aggressive position-keeping. We are doing dog fighting and low levels and all sorts of great stuff. So it's really that first introduction to the tactical environment and really putting to use on the jet and on your body and maneuvering. Is that like tactical formation is collaborating with other fighter jets, the part of that? It is. So flying in a, that's what it means by formation. So literally having an awareness, is this done for you or are you as a human supposed to understand like where you are in the formation, how to maintain formation, all that kind of stuff? Yeah, it's done autonomously or manually. There's a great autonomy point on that as I've thought about. But what we do, it's all manual. So I'm looking at his wing and I'm looking at different visual checkpoints that form like a triangle, right? Like an equal-out triangle essentially. And then as that triangle, you know, is no longer equal, I can tell my relative position against that aircraft. I got through it. And so that's what I'm staring at for sometimes hours on in, you know, several feet away doing what these from in the weather, that's all it is. So you get, it's almost like, is it peripheral vision or is it your... No, we're staring directly at it. The peripheral is coming on my, on my, that's interesting stuff, right? My sensor is in my, my instrument. And so he is my gyroscope at that point, right? Well, you're flying, not looking straight. Correct. I'm flying like this for hours. It can hurt your neck. We don't like doing this as much. And I don't think it's just me, right? It's a weird thing where when you're like this, it's actually a harder to fly formations slightly than here because being in line of your hand movements and of the aircraft somehow has an effect on our ability to be more precise and comfortable as strange. Yeah. So, but so there's a symmetry to the formation usually. So one of the people on the other side really don't like being on that side is it, is it, is it, does it, who gets like the short straw? How do you decide which side of the formation you are? The good question too, because there's, there's kind of rank in some sense. So if it's a four person formation, right, you have the division lead, who's qualified to lead a whole division, but maybe the other ones aren't. And he has a dash two. And that's his wingman essentially. And then in a division, there's two other aircraft. And then you have another senior flight leader, that's the dash three position. And then you have dash four, the last one. And if you were all lined up on one side, like fingertip, one, two, three, four, that dash four guys can be at the end of that whip. So if you're flying formation, each one's making movements relative to the lead. Dash four is kind of, you know, at the end of that error, you know, and so his movements are kind of like a whip. It's very difficult to fly in that position and close. Can you elaborate this because of the error, the error dynamics? So what's a whip? If this is a flight lead, and this is dash two, flight lead is rock steady and just doing this thing. Yeah, flight two is going to be working that triangle moving a little bit, right? Oh, yeah. And he has this small error bubble that he's doing his best to stay. And then, but dash three is flying off dash two. And so his error bubble is dash two's plus his own. Okay. So it gets more and more stressful as you get farther out. And this will go, yeah. Okay. Well, what's the experience of that staring for a long periods of time and trying to maintain formation? How stressful is that? Because like, you know, we're doing that when we drive staying in lane. And that becomes, after you get pretty good at it, it becomes somewhat, it's still stressful. Which actually surprised me, stressful. When you look at like lane keeping systems, they actually relieve that stress somehow. And it's actually creates a much more pleasant experience while you're still able to maintain situation awareness and like stay awake, which is really interesting. Like, I don't think people realize how stressful it is to lane keep when they drive. So this is even more stressful. So are you, do you, do you think about that? Or is this, yeah, I guess how stressful is it? From a psychology perspective? It's very stressful. When, so I thought students have to do this as well. And so at our feet, we have two rudders. And if I'm flying off a flight lead over here, what you'll find a lot of times is you'll be flying, or like if I'm the instructor in the student's flying, I'll start to notice that he's having a harder and harder time keeping position. What I'll notice typically is he's locked out his leg. The lock out the leg that's closest to the aircraft they're flying against and push on the rudder so consciously because their whole body is trying to get away from the aircraft because they're so uncomfortable being close to it. And so I'll tell them I can fix their form with just a couple words. I'll say wiggle your toes and they'll wiggle their toes and they'll loosen all the muscles in their legs. They've been locked up and their formation flannel will get a lot better. And so, you know, there is a lot of stress associated with that. There's some interesting psychological or visual issues such as vertigo as you're flying. So if you're flying with him and then you fly right into a cloud, right, that's one that's very stressful because you have to be very close in order to maintain visual and you might be on the thunderstorm. Right. And so you have to be very tight. You might start raining and then he's turning. But you might not even know that. You might not even be able to see that turn. And so all of a sudden you might look while you're in a turn thinking you were straight at level and you look just maybe back at your instruments very quick and you realize you're like in a 30 degree turn and you're a whole concept of where you are in the world start getting very confused and you immediately get this sense of it's weird. Like I look at the HUD and it feels all my sense of telling me it's spinning but it's not. And so I have to trust my instruments even though it feels like it's spinning. And the same thing can happen when you're flying formation off of someone and it can be very very dangerous and disorientating. But the point is just try to regain awareness by trusting the instruments. Like, like distrust all your human senses and just use the instruments to rebuild situation and awareness. Not in this particular case because our situation awareness is based, it's predicated off of our flight late. So in a sense I'm just trusting his movements. And so he's my gyroscope. But you're absolutely right. And if I was by myself I would trust my instruments but I can't just stop flying form and trust my instruments because now I'm going to hit him. Oh yeah, you have to pay attention to him. So he's my reference. So the instruments are not helping you significantly with his positioning. Not. It's all a complete manual. So is there a future where some of that is autonomous? Yeah. And I've thought about automating that flight regime. But when I started thinking about it, I realized that all the formation keeping that we do is designed to enhance the aviators ability to maintain sight. So we fly very tight formations so that we can go in weather and to reduce groups of traffic coming into the boat. We fly in one particular position so that all of the flight crew can look down the line and see the flight lead. So everything has to do with the two air crew visually maintaining sight of each other and defending each other, right? In a combat spread. I might be looking, I might be three miles away from him flying formation directly beam and looking around to make sure nothing's there. So as I'm looking into automating this process, I thought, well, sure, it's easy to get a bunch of aircraft to fly information off each other, right? It's trivial, but why? What is the best formation? Why are they doing that? And that opened up a much more interesting regime of operations and flight mechanics. And that's when we get back to kind of stochastic mindset where we can bring in aircraft close to do some type of normal flying or reduce congestion around airports. But when we consider flying in a formation and tactical environment, we can be much more effective with non-traditional formation keeping or perhaps no formation keeping perhaps. So autonomy used for formation keeping, not for convenience, but for the introduction of randomness that's hard to- Like a real-time mission plan, right? And then that's where you also have some human modification. So it's like manned, unmanned teaming enters that picture. So you use some of the human intuition and adjustment of this formation. The formation itself has some uncertainty. And it's such an interesting dance. I think that is the most fascinating application of artificial intelligence is when it's human AI collaboration that semi-autonomous dance that you see in these semi-autonomous vehicle systems in terms of cars being driving, but also in the safety, critical situation of aeroplane, of a fighter jet, especially when you're flying fast. I mean, in a split second you have to make all these kinds of decisions. And it feels like an AI system can do as much harm as it can help. And so to get that right is a really fascinating challenge. One of the challenges too isn't just the algorithms of the autonomy itself, but how it senses the environment, that of course is going to be what all these decisions are based off of. And that's a challenge in this type of environment. Well, I got to ask, so F18, what's it like to fly a fighter jet as best? I mean, what do you, is beautiful, powerful? What do you love about the experience of flying? For me, you know, and I think I'm an outlier a bit. And it wasn't necessarily the flying itself, right? It wasn't necessarily the soaring over the clouds and, you know, looking down at the earth from upside down. You know, I came to love that. And but it wasn't necessarily the passion that drove me there. I just had no exposure to that. The exposure I had was reading and going in the woods and science fiction and all that. And so, you know, it seemed to kind of drive me towards that, was just a desire to really be operating as close to what I thought was the edge of technology or science. And that's the path that I chose to try to get close to that. I thought that being in a fighter jet and, you know, all the tools and the technology and the knowledge and the challenges and the, you know, failures and victories that would come with that just seemed like something that I wanted to be a part of. And it wasn't necessarily about the flying, but it was about the challenge. And like I said, as a person from a small town, you know, a small high school being able to get my hands, you know, or even just near something of such technological significance was kind of powering for me. And that's kind of what bore the love of flight from there, you know, becoming, you know, having some level of mastery in that aircraft, it really feels like in this extension of your body. And once I got there, then, then the kind of the love of flying kind of followed. So you sort of won as the man mastery over the machine. And second is the machine is like the greatest thing that humans have ever created arguably. The, the like things that lucky Martin and others have built. I mean, the engineering and that, you know, it's, however you feel about war, she's one of the sad things about human civilization is, um, war inspires the engineering of tools that are incredible. And it's like, maybe without war, if we look at human history, we would not build some of the incredible things we built. So in order to win wars, to stop wars, we build these incredible systems that perhaps propagate war. And that's another discussion I'll ask you about. But this, do you, this is like, um, this is a chance to experience the greatest engineering humans have ever been able to do. Like similar, I suppose that astronauts feel like when they're flying. I wanted to be an astronaut. I wanted to take that route. Uh, I was going to apply to test pilot school. Um, it, it just didn't work out for me. Uh, I ended up having a broken foot during my window. But long story short, I ended up after my time in my fleet squadron and we can get back to the rest of the time life we want. But, uh, I went to be an instructor pilot, um, instead, right? And then, you know, I, I was talking about this with a squadron mate earlier today about how, you know, I certainly wouldn't be talking with Lex today if I ended up going to test pilot school. I, you know, I never would have, I never would have had the, I would have made, uh, maybe recklessness. I don't know. But the, the willingness to have a conversation about UAP while I was, you know, I, that led me to the decision to get out once I went there. And it, it, it gave kind of enabled me to talk about UAP more publicly. Uh, and if I stayed in the Navy, and then I don't think that that would have happened, I wouldn't have been able to. If I went that route, well, as a small tangent, do you hope to travel to Mars one day? Do you think you'll step foot on Mars one day? If you asked me that five years ago, I would have said, yes, I want to. In fact, I would like to die on Mars. Um, now, today, now I have some hesitations. And I have some hesitations because I'm hopeful and optimistic. And I think that, you know, I think that we are truly like on the brink of a, of a very wide technological revolution that's going to kind of move us how we used to move information and data in, in this last century, we're going to be manipulating and managing matter in that next century. And so I think that, I think our reach as human, as humans, they're going to get a lot wider, a lot faster than people may realize, or at least, way, are you getting, like, super ambitious beyond Mars? Is that what you're saying? Well, I mean, like Mars seems kind of boring. But I want to go beyond that. Is that what do you mean of the reach of humanity across all kinds of technologies? Or do you mean literally cross space? Across space, you know, so, you know, we're going to be, I think that as artificial intelligence and machine learning start broaching further into the, the topic of science, the area of science, and we start working through new physics. We start working through, or I should say past the Einsteinian frameworks, um, as we kind of get better idea of what space time is or isn't. We may have, we may find, you know, answers that we didn't know that we were looking for. And we may have more opportunity. And I'm not saying this is something I'm, you know, betting the farm on, of course, but maybe, maybe that's a road I want to explore on Earth instead of, uh, on Mars. Maybe there's technology that can be brought to bear with new science and a harder engineering that is a road that doesn't go past Mars to get outside the solar system. So there are different ways to explore the universe than the traditional rocket systems. Uh, if we can continue sort of your journey, um, you said that you were attracted to the, the incredibly advanced technologies of the F-18s and just the fighter jets in general. Um, let me ask another question, which seems incredibly difficult to do, which is landing on a carrier or taking off from a carrier and landing on a carrier. So what's that like? What are the challenges of that taking off pretty easy? It's procedurally somewhat complex where there's a lot of moving parts almost like a clock, you know, you're almost in a pocket watch. So it's a sense and you're a part of the machinery. And so long as you press the right buttons and do the right things and you're going shooting off the front. So there's like a checklist to fall and there's several people involved in that checklist and you just got to follow the checklist correctly. Essentially. Yep. But you'll know how to screw it up. Uh, but landing on the back of the boat is a whole different animal. Um, there's a lot more variables. Um, there's essentially one or two people responsible for the success of that. Um, the landing signal officer who actually represents a team of specially trained aviators who are responsible for helping that aviator land on the boat. And, uh, the pilot himself. And it, it is a hard task to actually fly precisely enough to be good at it. So to fly, quote, quote, the perfect pass, you essentially have to fly your head through a one foot by one foot box. That's essentially the target you're shooting for. Um, plus or minus probably about five knots on airspeed, although we don't really judge it by airspeed. It's something called angle of attack. Uh, but generally, you know, pretty tight parameters there. Um, and you can do everything perfect and still fail. Right. So when we go to touchdown, we immediately bring the power up and we rotate as if we are doing, uh, as if we are bouncing off the deck. And if we catch it and we slow down, uh, and then someone tells us to bring the power back, which we do, we don't do it on our own, uh, cause it's such a violent experience. Um, um, think you're trapped or not or something breaks and you bring your throttle back. And that's a very serious thing. It happened to best of us. You know, I'll admit, I've done it once when I first got to the squadron. Um, it's called ease guns, the land. Uh, and so, you know, I came in the boat and I brought the power, I cracked the power back a little bit before I've been told to or that my aircraft had finished settling in and I was a big faux pas, right? So especially as a new guy. So, um, it's, it's a very serious business. There's a lot of eyes on you and there's a lot of ways to screw it up. But the physical, you know, rush of like having a great pass and then like, there's just the like the crash of into the boat and all that, the physical sensation from it. You know, when everything's going great, you know, at the top of the world, it's a great feeling. How much of it is feel? How much of it is, um, instruments, how much is other people just doing the work for you catching you as long as you do everything, right? There's a few systems we use. One is called the ball and the ball is external to our aircraft and it's B-A-L-L. Correct. Ball, like ball. Okay. It's a, it's an eye floss landing system, uh, which stands for something really long convoluted. But essentially it's a mirror with lights on it. And you see the light at a different cell based on your position relative to an ideal glide slope. Yeah. So if you're right on it, you're right in the middle and if you're below your low. And as I add power and maneuver the aircraft, that ball, you know, I see that ball rise. I see that ball low. It's a lagging indicator, though, right? And your jet is a lagging engine too, right? It takes time to school with the engine. So that adds to the complexity. You have to think ahead of it, um, you know, so you don't want to, um, you can't just bring the power up and leave it there. You have to bring the power up, touch it and bring it back. And oh, by the way, your landing area is moving not just away from you, but also on an angle, right? Because we have an angle deck. And so you're constantly doing one of these to correct yourself as you go. That's stressful. And even every time you do one of those, yeah, maybe it's a 30 degree angle bank, right? I'm losing lift, right? Yeah. And I have to compensate with power each time I do that. So I'm doing another one. Because you have to maintain, um, the same level you're always lowering, like, it's a constant rate of descent that's increasing from about 200 feet per minute to about 650. And every time you do this, that's messing with that. Mm-hmm. Okay. So you have to compensate. And you're doing that manually. Do that manually. All right. And then of course, as you come down that glide slope, uh, it becomes more and more narrow. And you have to, of course, um, modulate your inputs such that they're small and small because they have a bigger and bigger effect as you get closer and, um, and what happens to when you get in close is that right before you cross over, if this is the boat right here, your table, right before you kind of get your wings over the boat itself, this big wind from the main tower of the boat is where it dips down. So the wind actually goes down and it's called the verbal and it'll actually pull their craft down and increase your rate of descent. Mm-hmm. So at that particular point, you need to, you know, increase your power and try to compensate against that. And then you have a third variable that's trying to screw you up on your way down. What's the most difficult conditions in which you have to land or you've seen somebody have to land? Because I think you were also, um, a signal officer as well. That was, yeah. That was the head landing signal officer for, for my squadron. So you've probably seen some tough landings. I have. I've seen a ramp strike, which is when a part of the aircraft hits before, um, the landing area, which is basically the roundout of the boat. That is before the landing area. So they basically struck the back of the boat coming in. Yeah. It was just their hook. So it wasn't their craft. Um, and they were fine. That one was kind of ugly. Um, but it like rips that part of their craft. Absolutely. And then you land on your belly. Is that kind of thing? In this particular case, it hit and then it gave and essentially dragged the hook on the, on the surface after that. And so he was able to grab a wire at that point. What is that kind of thing happen? Just a miscalculation by the pilot or is it, uh, what are the conditions? I wouldn't even call it a miscalculation. I mean, I'm going to put the blame on the pilot because he's the only one in the cockpit. But then the day he's reacting to the situations he's dealing with. And so it may be errors or he may be doing the best with, you know, the conditions that he's been given on that particular one. He just got too high rated sense. Very common. And that's what you see it with new pilots. You see it with older pilots, right? New ones and complacent ones. What you see is they'll, um, try to make the ball go right where they want it in close. They think they can beat the game a little bit. And they try to, and so we have sayings we teach, we teach pilots, you know, as a landing signal officer, we tell them like, don't recenter a high ball in close. It's one of the rules to live by. And so when the ball is up high, don't try to bring it back in close to like the center point when you're, when you're in close because what you're doing, you bring the power off and you get a crash right down. And that's what happens, right? Because you got the verbal pulling you down. You might be correcting, which is decreasing your lift. And then you have that type of maneuver. How are you supposed to do all of this in harsh weather conditions? So that's the one I wanted to tell you about. That's the hardest one. And what you hear is if you hear 99 taxi lights on, that's really shitty. 99 taxi lights on. What's that mean? So everyone put your taxi lights on because you're about to land on the boat and you don't see the boat. Whether it's so bad that the landing signal officer on the boat can't see you either and you can't see the boat and you won't be able to see it when you touch down. That was called that a zero, zero landing. And you turn on the taxi lights so that the LSO who has a radio in his hand that looks like a phone from 1980 is talking directly to the pilot and he's looking at that little light in the rain and he's telling him you're high, you're low power, things like that. Come right back to the left and literally talking him down to land on the boat right there. And the pilot, usually it comes out of surprise to the pilot to land it because he's just listening to the voice. Can't see the ball. Can't see the boat. So then you just hit the boat crash. I mean crash. We're going about 1600 feet per minute to set at that point. So you're still you're going super fast. So all this is happening fast. You don't know, you don't know what at the moment it's going to hit. So you're just going into the darkness and just waiting for it to hit. It's not dark though. A lot of times it's white into the light. You're going into into the light. And then there's a voice from an 80s phone. I got it. This is terrible. But so that you still you still have to so this kind of thing happens. You still have to land. Sometimes you just don't have a place to divert. But you know, in a sense we're trained for that because we do the night landings as well. And I think you'll find this interesting, but I always found that the night landings where in these particular cases, you're usually lined up behind the boat, maybe 10, 15 miles. Whereas the other ones, it's like a tight circle, the landing pattern. So we can potentially see the boat way out there. If the lights were on, which they're not, but we can maybe see like the string of air craft in front of us. But what's interesting is that it can take a while. I can tell you might be 15 miles out and your lights are turned down as dim as possible. You have a cloud deck, maybe at six or seven thousand feet so that the starlight, there's no moon. But let's say the starlight's blocked out, right? Because just the starlight alone, no moon. You can see the boat. You can see the water. But when that goes away, it's like closing your eyes, right? You can't tell anything. You can be upside down. It could be in any position. And for me, it was almost a meditative process that I had to snap myself back out of when I was on like a long straightaway. And then I would see the light pop up in the sea of darkness, right? No lights anywhere. Can't even see the horizon. And I just see a light out there. My insurers were telling me, and they're turned down as far as I can go, right? So I can barely see them. So my eyes can adjust. And I'm just staring at this light in the distance. And it's just very meditative and stahum behind you. And then at like four miles, you know, almost like, oh, light is a little bit bigger. And you almost kind of have to snap back to it and be like, I need to like kind of like look around a little bit and engage my brain and like, back to my body and like, yeah, do this. Because you're going to have to actually land. Well, is there just, you said, you don't necessarily feel the romantic notion of the whole thing. Is there some aspects of flying where you look up and maybe you see the stars, the stars? Or yeah, that kind of thing that you just like, holy crap, how did humans accomplish all of this? Like am I actually flying right now? I used to have those moments on the boat when I was catching planes land. I would, I would, they would trap and it would be nighttime. And it's just all this chaos in the middle of the ocean and nothing. And I would have these moments where I'd be like, how the hell did I end up here? You know, there's one moment in time. Next to a aircraft landing on a boat in the middle of the ocean, you know, where did my life, you know, how did my life go to end up here? How interesting. But what I did start to enjoy was the night vision goggles and putting those on and looking up at the stars flying around, especially over the ocean. What do they look like? It's just so many. There's just so many stars that, you know, you normally can't see. They're shooting stars all the time. Almost every flight you'd see them with the goggles on. So it was a great pleasure to take advantage of the lack of light pollution in some cases, especially on deployment that go grabs on the goggles that night, go out some quiet spot in the ship that no one can see me and just kind of look around, you know. Yeah, it's humbling. Quick break, breath and break. That wouldn't mind a quick, quick stretch of legs. You got a few cool patches. I do. So this is a VFA 11 Red Ripper's patch, typically going actually on our arm. So this is actually what we call the Boreshead or Arnold. So this is actually the Boreshead from the Gordon's Gin bottle. So yeah, in 1918, we were in London or the UK somewhere and we apparently partied with the owner and founder of Gordon's Gin. We had a great time and there's a sign letter in our ready room that says we can use the logo and perpetuity. Oh, man. Yeah. So I'd like to give you that patch. I'll drink quite a bit of gourd. So this is good. And I'd like to give you that coin from our squadron. The Red Ripper's. That's a badass name. Thank you, brother. You're welcome. So let's jump around a little bit. But let me ask you about this one set of experiences that you had and people in your squadron had. So you and a few people in the squadron either detected UFOs on your instruments or saw them directly. Tell me the full story of these UFO sightings and the smallest technical details because I love those. I'll do my best. So we returned from, and when I say we, I mean, not my squadron, but VFA 11, the Red Rippers. I was a somewhat junior pilot at the time. I joined them on deployment in 2012 where they had been already out there for about six months or so operating in the vicinity of Afghanistan. I joined them and then we flew back and still as a relatively new guy, we came back and we entered what's considered a maintenance phase where we slow down the tactical flying a bit, kind of recuperate, do some maintenance on the aircraft. And our particular model of the F18, the lot number, was plummed for the particular things that were needed to upgrade the radar from what's known as the ABG 73 to the ABG 79. And the ABG 73 is a mechanically scanned array radar. It's a, you know, perfectly fine radar, but the ASA radar is kind of a, you know, magnitude, jump and capability, kind of an analog digital kind of mindset. So it's a leap to digital ABG 73. I mean, are these things on a carrier? Like what are we talking about here? This is our biggest radar. Yeah. So this is actually the radars in the F18 itself. Okay. So when you say they were chosen, this is to test the upgrade to the new, the 79, ABG 79. Unless of a test and more of just, hey, it's your turn to get the upgrade. Like we're all going to these better radars. They were building ones off the line with the new radar, but we were this weird transitionary squadron to middle that transition from the older ones to the new ones. But it's not particularly rare to fly with different types of radar because in the, in we call the fleet replacement squadron, essentially the training ground for the F18, you have all sorts of F18s with different radars. So you are used to having multiple ones, but in the actual deployable combat squadron, we upgraded. And when we upgraded, we saw that there were objects on the radar that we were seeing the next day in this, with this new radar that weren't there with the old radar. And these were sometimes, you know, the same day you might go in two flights. The one in the morning might be with the older radar, the one evening with the new radar. And you'd see the objects with the, with the new radar. And that's not overly surprising in some sense. They are more sensitive. Perhaps they're not filtering out everything they should be yet or perhaps there's some other type of error. Maybe it needs to be calibrated. Whatever. But we were relatively new and we were somewhat used to there being software problems with these types of things occasionally, just like anything else. And so, okay, maybe this is a radar software malfunction. We're getting some false tracks as we call them. What were you seeing? And so what we would see are representations of the objects. So this is off of our radar. We're not seeing a visual image here. This is kind of like a, what's being displayed to us almost like in a gaming fashion, right? Like the icon, right? So the icon is showing us, hey, something like that. Something is there. And here's the parameters I can understand about it. So this is in the cockpit. There's a display that's showing some visualization with the radar's detecting. Correct. And there's two different ways to do that. The first one is like the actual data, like the radar where I am, it's showing me the data kind of as if it's in front of me and I'm selecting those contacts. And there's another screen called the situational awareness page. And that's kind of a God's I view that brings all that data into one spot. And so I'm going to talk about this from the essay page from the situational awareness page, first to individual radar ones, because it's easier. But sorry, sorry to linger on that. So the individual displays are like first person. And then the essay is when you say God's I view is like from the top, the integration of all that information as if it's looking down onto the earth. Yes. Is that a good way to summarize it? It is. But for the aviator, it's slightly different because those two radar displays I talked about are at the bottom of that display is it's kind of representative of where I am. And so I see what's in front of me. God. Whereas the situational awareness page, the aircraft is located in the center of that. And then all around me, you know, based off of the data link and wherever I'm getting information from, I can see that whole where it pays. I can see all the situation. So I'm going to kind of talk about this from the situational awareness page, which is a top down view, just a kind of frame of mind, instead of jumping around. And so what we would see out there is we'd see these indications that something would be there and they would have a track file, that track file, that thing that represents the object has a line coming out of it. And that represents, it's called the target aspect indicator. And there's some tracking from the radar. Correct. So it's showing you where the object is going. This is all pretty cool that the radar can do all this. So the radar locks in on different objects and the tracks and over time. That's coming from the radar. That's like built in feature. Mm-hmm. Okay. Cool. We don't have to necessarily pull things into our tracker in some sense, right? It's all out there and then we can kind of choose the highlight on stuff or to kind of focus in on it more so. But the information should all be out there. And so we'd see that target aspect indicator, that line on a typical aircraft, you know, it kind of looked like this. It'd be coming out and it'd go steady and if they turn, you know, it'd be like, you see them turn, right? Like it's not magic. But this object, they would, the target aspect would kind of be like all over the place. Like kind of randomly in the 360 degrees, you know, from that top down view, that line would be in a place. So kind of, you know, is it unable to determine the target aspect? Is it stationary, you know, and that's just how it puts it out and it's not used to seeing it? So I'm not saying that's necessarily super weird, but it would differ than what we were used to seeing because we weren't used to seeing stationary objects out there very much. And what was also interesting is that these weren't just stationary on a zero-wind day, right? These are stationary at 20,000 feet, 15,000 feet, 500 feet, you know, with the wind blowing, you know? And so much like the sea, you know, when we're up there fighting, it affects everything. We consider the wind when we're, you know, shooting missiles, when we're flying or fuel considerations. It's like operating, you know, in that volume of air like the ocean, everything is going with the current. And so anything that doesn't go with the current, you know, is immediately kind of identifiable and strange. And that's why these were initially strangers because they would be stationary against the wind. So if you had something like a good drone in a windy conditions, what would that look like? Would it, it would have knocked them off a stationary? Would it sort of float about kind of thing? No, I think what the drone technology we have today could stay within a pretty tight location. Well, I meant like DJI drone, not like, I'm saying like generically speaking. I would, not a military drone. No, I have a DJI drone myself, even. And you know, maybe not 100 knots, but if that thing's in 30 or 40 or not winds, you know, the amount of distance it's going to be kind of doing one of these, like that change is not something I wanted to detect from maybe many miles away. Interesting. So it could look very stationary. But that wasn't necessarily, you know, what's interesting about this story is that there's not like the one smoking gun, right? And you have to kind of look at everything. And that's what I don't like about the Department of Defense and just generally people's take on this is that everything is kind of based around a single image, you know, or that one case. But a lot of the interestingness comes from the duration or the time it's been out there, how they're interacting relative to other objects out there. And you don't get that information when you just look at a frame for a second, you know, everyone kind of bites off on the shiny object. But so you yourself, from your particular slice of things you've experienced and seen directly or indirectly, you've kind of built up an intuition about what the things that were being seen. I want to go that far. I've just been able to, you know, eliminate some variables because of how long of observatives. So like you said, yes, kind of drones stay in a particular position against the wind like that. Certainly. But I don't think it can do that and then go point eight mock for four hours after that, you know. And so when you, when you look at outside of that once that moment in time, then it eliminates a lot of the potential things it could be at least from my perspective. So what kind of stuff did you see in the instruments? We'd see them flying in patterns, kind of racetrack patterns or circular patterns or just going kind of straight east. I occasionally see them supersonic, 1.1, 1.2 mock, but typically 0.6 to 0.8 mock just for extremely extended periods of time, you know, essentially all the time. And this is aerospace where there's not supposed to be anything else at all. And it's pretty far out there. It starts 10 miles off the coast, goes like 300 miles. Can you say the location that we're talking about off the coast of Virginia Beach? Got it. And so nobody is supposed to be out there. It's possible for people to be there. It's not necessarily restricted, but it's well monitored and we're out there every day all day. And so, you know, people know to stay clear if a sesinicals bumbling in there, everyone's going to know about it. F A is going to, you know, call them out, going to tell us about it. So, incursions happen not a big deal, but they're pretty rare, honestly, because everyone knows area and we've been operating there for decades. And what are the trajectories 0.6 to 0.8 mock that these objects were taking? Typically, they would be in some type of circular pattern or kind of racetrack pattern when they were at those beads, or I just see them kind of, and it wasn't always like a mechanical flight description. And when I say that, I mean like an autopilot is going to be just very precise, right? It's going to be locked on straight. And whereas I could see an airplane, I could tell if the pilot's flying it, right? Because it's not going to be perfect. Computers are not controlling it. And these seemed more like that, not that they were in precise, but that they were even much more erratic than that. So like it wasn't like a straight line in a turn. It was just kind of like a, you know, we were drift like that in that direction, you know. So it wasn't controlled by a down computer or not the suspecting computers. So it wasn't controlled by autopilot kind of technology. It's not the sense that I got. So how many people have seen them in the squadron? Sort of how many times would they see? How many, where there are times when there's multiple objects? Once we started seeing them on the radar enough, and we would get close enough, we'd actually see them on our flea as well. So our advanced targeting pod, it's essentially an infrared camera that we use for targeting mostly in the air to surface environment. We don't use it in the air to arena. It's just not that good of a tool, frankly. But we would see IR energy emitting from that location where the radar was dropping us off. So you know, the radar, we'd lock onto the object and our sensors would all look there. And so then we could see that it's looking at that right piece of the sky, but there's energy actually coming from there. So now we started thinking that, okay, maybe not radar malfunctions, maybe more, maybe something is physically here, of course. And then people started to try to fly by and see it. And at this point, I would say maybe 80 to 90% of our squadron, they probably see one of these on the radar at this point. Everyone was aware of it. There was small communication, I think, between squadrons of the same area that had the same radar. So I knew it wasn't just our squadron for whatever strange reason, because they would be, other squadrons would be out there, and we would talk to them, hey, like careful, there's an object. So you were of that, you know, so like they would be aware of it. And then of course, people would want to go see what they look like, right? So people would try to fly by, I try to fly by him. I like how that's an of course. Of course. Of course, you don't fly by it. So there's an argument against that kind of perspective that maybe the thing is dangerous, so maybe we don't, but perhaps that's part of the reason you want to fly by it, it's to understand better what it is if it's a threat. We have a lot of context now that we did it back then, you know, and so it was still, hey, is this a balloon, is this a drone, you know, at a certain point? And we're also aware of, you know, potential intelligence gathering operations that could be going on. We're up there flying our tactics, we're meeting, we're practicing our EW, you know, we're turning at particular times, like there's stuff that can be learned. It's not a secret. And you know, country keep different fishing vessels and whatnot and international waters off there. So it's not exactly a secret that we're being observed out there. So to think that a foreign hospital or a foreign nation would want to, you know, somehow intercept information, whether that's our radar signals or our jamming capabilities to try to break that down or understand it better, be ready for that next fight. I mean, that's what scares me about the scenario because we didn't jump right to aliens or UFOs. We thought, you know, this is a radar malfunction we need to be aware of. It's a safety issue. And then, you know, this could be a tactical problem right here because everything we do is based off a crypto and locate, you know, locations, everything is classified. We do out there, right? And so over time, if you gather enough data about those fights and just modern them forever, just like some nations do with other piece of technology or software, they could probably learn a lot. So we have to be cognitive effect and defend against it. So what can you say about the other characteristics of these objects like shape, size, texture, luminosity, how else you describe object? Is there something that could be said? So you said that this is the tech down radar, step one. Now you have clear images that can give you a sense that it's actually a physical object. What else can be said about those physical objects? So eventually someone did see one with their own eyeballs, multiple people. And they saw it in a somewhat interesting way. The object presented itself at the exact altitude and geographic location of the entry points into our working areas. So we enter at a very specific point and a certain altitude and people leave the areas the same point at a lower altitude, probably one of the busiest pieces of the sky on the eastern receiver. So two jets from my squad and went out and they went flying and they entered the area and one of these objects went right between the aircraft as they're flying information and the object went between the aircraft. They went between the object I think. I don't think that the object was moving. I don't think it aggressively went at them. I think it was located still there and then they flew through it. But they didn't have it on their radar. And that would I think the radar might have been malfunctioning. I don't know that for sure. I would like to look into it. But my supposition is that if their radar was malfunctioning it would make sense that they wouldn't avoid the object that was there because they knew these were physical at that point. And we would go up to these objects all the time and try to see them. And we didn't know what it was. Was it they were they just not there or being fooled was something happening were they moving dropping L2 to the last minute. You know we're going by pretty quick so it's difficult to tell. But perhaps if his radar wasn't working it wasn't receiving energy from the jet. And the jet of course didn't know that it was there. And so whatever the case was they flew right by and they described it just as a dark gray or a black cube inside a clear translucent sphere. And the kind of the apex of the cube or touching the inside of that sphere. That's an image that's haunting. So what do they think it is? What did they think at that moment that they is it just this kind of cloud of uncertainty that they're just describing a geometric object? It's not on radar. So it's unclear what it is. What was the any kind of other description they've had of it in terms of the intuition from a pilot's perspective you know you have to kind of identify what a thing is. To answer the first part they actually canceled the flight and came back because they were you know like if there's one of these out here and one was hitting them and it's right there then you know perhaps we need to get a different jet with better radar. But so they came back and they're in their gear and they're they're talking to the front desk and talking to Skipper and like hey we almost hit one of those damn things out there. And this kind of was one of those kind of slight watershed moments where we all were kind of like all right like this is a serious deal now. Yeah. Yeah. Maybe it was a maybe we thought they were balloons or drones or malfunctions or maybe we thought it was fine. But then the day if we're going to hit one of these things and we need to you know we need to take care of the situation. And that's actually when we start submitting hazard reports or has reps to the naval to the naval aviation safety kind of communication network and it's you know it's not like a big proactive thing where people are going to investigate it's more of a data collection mechanism so that you can kind of share that aggregate data and make sure things are progressing. So it wasn't a mechanism that would result in action being taken but we were hoping to at least get the message out to whoever was maybe running a classified program that we were not aware of or something like that. That hey like you could kill somebody here like you've grown too big for your bridges here take a step back. So that was that was our concern at that point that's kind of where we were thinking this was going. What's the protocol for shooting at a thing? Was was there a concern that it's a direct threat not just surveillance but a thing that could be yeah a threat. At least from my perspective like that never really crossed into my mind. I thought it was potentially intelligence you know failure that could be being watched and information gathered but I didn't think that it was something that would proactively engage me in a hostile manner. It wouldn't really make sense either too. It would be shocking to like have one of these object take out an F18 but there's no real tactical advantage other fear perhaps. Psychological. Yeah. I've learned a lot about the psychological warfare in Ukraine. There's a big part of the war in terms of when you talk about siege warfare about warfare wars that last for many years for many months and then perhaps could extend to years but yes it didn't seem it didn't fit your conception of a threatening entity. Correct. So looking back now from all the pieces of data you've integrated you've personally added what do you think it could be? I don't know. I don't know what it could be. I think we've been able to categorize it successfully into a few buckets. We've been able to say that you know this could be US technology that someone put in the wrong piece of sky or you know perhaps was developed and tested in an inappropriate spot by someone that wasn't being best practices. Is there sorry to interrupt is there a sort of modularity to the way the military operates the way it's possible for one branch not to know about the tests of another? Yeah. I think it's perfectly reasonable to think that that could occur right? And so if we just make that assumption we can integrate that into our analysis here and just say okay but at the point we're at now you know we have to assume that that's not the case right with everything that's been going on in the statements of a maid and the hearings. I think that if it was a non-communication issue we're in big trouble at this point. What about it being an object from another nation from China from Russia? We want to realize perhaps right? Maybe that's it. I don't think it's controversial say that our allies could be gathering information about this or anything of that nature but that would be an extreme case but I think it's just important to say right to not just say Russia or China and just call them the bad guys and assume that if they don't have it no one can do it. And so from my perspective you know anyone else anyone else and it doesn't necessarily need to be a foreign power could be a non-government entity perhaps although I think that's very unlikely but again these are these are things you must consider if you kind of throw everything other than the US under scrutiny but you know from what had been reported and the behaviors that have been seen it would be I would expect to see remnants of that technology elsewhere in the economy. There seems to be too many things that require advanced technology that would be beneficial commercially as well as in other military applications for it to be completely locked away by one of our competitors. Now I could see us perhaps locking something away if we're already in the lead and having it to pull out as needed but for someone that's perhaps in a power struggle and they're in second place they might be more aggressive with the development of different types of technology willing to accept bigger risks. Do you think it could be natural phenomena that we don't yet understand? I think that there are a number of things that this is going to be right I don't think there's one thing at the end of the day but I certainly think that that is part of what some of this could be I don't think it's what we were seeing on the East Coast and I don't think it is related to the Roosevelt incident or I'll even go and say the Nimins incident but what's the Roosevelt incident? The Roosevelt incident typically referred to as a gimbal and where they go fast video. And the Nimins is from what the David Fravers when it's directly in this book and about who we'll talk about that as well I just love to get your interpretation of those incidents but yeah so in this particular case natural phenomena could be a part of the picture but you're saying not the whole picture. Yes. Yes and we can't discount it. All the other thing is what about the failure of pilot eyesight? Like sort of some deep mixture of actual direct vision human vision system failure and like psychology. Like seeing something weird and then filling in the gaps because in order to make sense of the weird. I've tried to expose myself to a scenario like that that I don't naturally think are right but I've explored them to see if they could have some truth. In one example is let's imagine a scenario where if we're seeing these objects every day off the East Coast I can imagine a technology or an operation where you had some type of traditional propulsion system operating drones in order to gather data like we had discussed and I could envision a clever enough adversary that could perhaps destroy or somehow remove these objects and replace them with new objects essentially when we're not looking right and that account for the large airborne time. So I explore options like that and I try to see what evidence of assumptions need to be made in order to prove or disprove that and you would need so much infrastructure. You need so many assets and so I try to explore some of those fallacies and some of those concerns and as aviators we're trained into many like actual physical like eyesight and kind of illusion training so like at night time flying there's so many things that can happen flying with false horizons and so we receive hours of training on that type of stuff but this just falls outside the category from my perspective. What was the visibility conditions when in the times when people were able to see it and we just earlier discussed complete nighttime darkness in this case was it during the day? It was a perfectly clear day that particular incident. In a world that's full of mystery I have to ask what do you think is the possibility that it's not of this earth origin? I like the term nonhuman intelligence in a sense because again there's a lot of assumptions in there that may cause us to go down the wrong roads. It could you know these could be something that are weather phenomena of earth right or something else that is just something we don't understand it can't imagine right now that's still of this earth. If we consider extraterrestrials or something that came from a physical place far away in space time you know that leads us to some detection of assumptions that we would need to make and so I just try to not categorize it under anything and just say hey is this demonstrating intelligence and start from there as a single object what can we learn about it kinematically how it's performing what does that mean for energy source what does that mean for the ge forces inside and then step it out of level and say okay how are these interacting with our fighters if they are how are they interacting with the weather and their environment how are they interacting with each other so can we look at these and how they're interacting perhaps as a swarm especially after east coast where this is happening all the time with multiple objects right and so we may be able to determine some things about there maybe you know center capabilities or the areas of focus you know if we can determine how they're working conjunction with each other but you know seeing one little flash of an object doesn't provide that type of insight but we have the systems for it but it's kind of made on irony but it's it's a fact of life to reality that many of these well deployed highly capable systems are held under the military umbrella which makes it difficult to provide that data for scientific analysis so there's probably a lot more data on these objects that's not being that's not made available probably even within the military for analysis I think so yeah I think there's a lot of data that could be made available and you know that's one of the reasons why you know I've been engaged with the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics to build you know a large resources of cross domain expertise so that if or when that data is available or that there's additional analysis needed you know we can spin up those teams and make that analysis so there's a recently a house intelligence subcommittee hearing on UFOs that you were a part of what was the goal of that hearing and can you maybe summarize what you heard the hearings from my perspective seemed a bit disingenuous kind of top level I think who was it run by side to interrupt like who were the people involved and what was the goal the state of goal congressman Andre Carson did chair the committee and he he was I think ultimately responsible for bringing it all together you know I think the intent from Congress was to try to bring light to what has been happening with the Navy and to help show the American people that Congress is taking the series because something serious is happening but you know the sense I got seemed a bit disingenuous they talked around it a lot they you know advertised their their love of science fiction but they you know they didn't treat this I would say in the manner it deserved as a potential tactical threat if it's coming from a foreign power and I get it though at the same day they have very specific objectives within the DOD right they have a very important job their jobs and necessarily do exploratory science for no reason so I applaud and I encourage their efforts on the intelligence side to help understand this but my concern is that they play a role they're not well suited for which is is doing science and depending on it's open in your office to investigate your phone is called all domain anomaly resolution office what do you think about this office do you think it can help alleviate the in the way which this hearing perhaps has failed to improve more the scientific rigor and the seriousness of investigating your photos I think that remains be seen I think it's a step in the right direction but it's a step that was taken because previous step didn't happen right so the AOI MSG was the progeny essentially of the ARO or arrow and you know the name was changed because nothing was happening and it was essentially just a confusing mess of words that were created to make this topic unpalatable that airborne object identification synchronization management group quite the mouthful I practice that but the new all domain anomaly resolution office you know from my perspective at least at least the perspective that they're putting out they they seem to want to be open they put out a Twitter handle they're out they're going out on Twitter and communicating saying they want to keep this open but you know that's going to run into a classification wall well so Dr. Sean Kropatik seems like an interesting guy he does yes so he's got a Evan looked into deeply but he seems to have sort of he's coming from like a science research perspective like the background so he he might be at least in the right minds at the right background to kind of lead a serious investigation I think so I'll just say generally you know the office has been receptive to AI Delay reaching out in order to collaborate which has been a positive sign also pass the same kudos to Dr. Spurgel and NASA's effort as well I see these organizations that are standing up I do see them as as good faith efforts that are coming about through a lot of difficulty and negotiation most likely right and I see these as as a small door opening that if we can take advantage of can lead to a much more productive relationship between these organizations how do you put pressure on this kind of thing is it come from the civilian leadership is it come from sort of congress and presidents does it come from the public does the public have any power to put pressure on this or is the the giant wall of bureaucracy going to protect it against any public pressure what do you think I think we've been in in that latter state for a while but you know society seems to be a bit different nowadays you know we have the ability to communicate and to group and to to form relationships in a way that hadn't been able to be present in the past we've been able to do research for better or worse on our own you know in a way that hasn't been able to happen for and so I sense that people are a bit less willing to kind of buy the bottom line statement from those in power as they used to be back when they didn't have access to those tools and so I do think there is a massive role for the general society general populist to play to show that they are interested in this because it's not that I don't think the politicians or the leaders in the in the Pentagon it's not that they don't like this topic necessarily or think it's toxic per se but they exist in a culture where this has been toxic and they don't feel comfortable talking about it and these are people that have spent their entire careers you know working towards a goal and getting to very high positions within government and so this is very against their nature to take a stance on a topic like this and so the fact that these are standing up even if they do have a small budget or if they struggled a bit at first I still think it's a massive change you know and it's a big step away from that stigma that has been prevailing this topic for so long and you're actually part of alleviating this stigma for somebody that's as credible as intelligent as like varied in background able to speak about these things that's a big risk that you took but it's extremely valuable because it's alleviating the stigma I think you're for saying that but I didn't feel like much of a risk for me you know I didn't come out about aliens right or whatever I I had a safety problem that I started asking questions about and you know I went down a road as a navy trained aviation safety officer right that sent me to school for six weeks in Pensacola would be a safety officer you know we're almost hitting these objects and it's not something that happened in the past and we want to understand it it's happening right now like these these occurrences still happening aviators are flying right now are still flying by these things and in fact I mentioned I was an instructor pilot I had a student call me about eight months ago or so and he's like hey sir you know I made it to the fleet finally you know I trained him how to fly and then he goes to that 18 he goes another year of training and then he gets out to his squadron on these coast and he's flying with a senior member of the base and the s oceana where the fighters fly out of senior o five or six and it was kind of a bad weather day and so they said hey you know whether it's not good enough for us to do this dogfighting set we'll we'll go out and do a UAP hunt you know I see if we can't find any seniors or take a look at him you know I don't know if it was ingest or not but you know this they actually would say it's not ingest because there were there were notices that were being bereaved about this being a safety hazard at this point and so I now that I think about it it likely wasn't ingest long story short they went flying the weather was too bad they did go on a UAP hunt and they physically saw one you know and he called me up and said hey sir I saw a Cuban spirit they're still out here you know years later and so it's almost like a generational issue you know for these fighter pilots at least on these coast but that's great that they can talk about it right exactly exactly they feel at least comfortable they have a reporting mechanism and so that was one of the problems that I noticed that we have a lot of reporting mechanisms to take care of safety issues and and even tactical issues in the times right in order to keep track of what's going on but there's no way to communicate about this share because submit a hazard report but nothing's actually being investigated and if this is a tactical vulnerability or something more it deserves attention if I could ask you're sort of take your opinion of the different UFO sightings that the DODS release videos on so what do you think about the Tic Tac UFO that David Fraver and others have cited that's a you know truly anomalous experience I can't I can't do like mental models in my head to find potential solutions to discredit that right like as much as I try right just as a logical process as a practice I can't I can't pick it apart in the way that we were just talk about a moment ago about you know thousands of drones being like sent up in very tricky manners right I can't really bring myself to a clever solution that you know other than just saying the pilots are lying or is error you know and I believe you know I know Dave Fraver you know I should run a friend we talk a lot I have zero zero reason to disbelieve anything he says yeah I agree with you but in terms of the actual UFO is there something anomalous and interesting to you about that particular case maybe one interesting aspect there is how much do I understand about the water surface and underwater aspects of these UFOs it seems like a lot of the discussions about is about the movement of a particular thing that seems to be weird anomalous seems to defy physics but what about stuff that's happening underwater that's interesting to me if I had advanced technology I would certainly like to operate in part underwater because you can hide a lot of stuff there you think it would be somewhat as easy as traveling through interstellar space at least right yeah you know I wish I had a great answer for that but as an aviator that's a kind of a black box for us you know we don't have great what I would call cross domain tracking right I can't see something go underwater and then follow it underwater so it's literally not your domain like underwater yeah like leave that for somebody else yeah and you know I use that terminology because it's it's kind of important right cross domain tracking is something that we haven't had to necessarily worry about right because airplanes operated in the air and submarines operated underwater and space planes operating in space right but you know there's going to be you know that's going to blur I think as as we move along here especially in the air and space regime and being able to perhaps transition my radar contact at 40,000 feet to another radar system that can track it up to 200,000 feet you know that might be a value and so we we seem to be missing that right now so what about the go fast and the gimbal videos that you mentioned earlier there was like what's interesting there to you so the gimbal I'll talk about that one first I was airborne for that one the person that recorded it was a good friend of mine but I mean both they're crew I knew both of them but the the wisdom self very close friends went through a lot of training together I went to the same fleet squadron he ended up transitioning to be a pilot and then came to where I was instructing so I got to instruct him a bit on his transition and you know the way that was was we went out on a air-to-air training mission so simulating a air fight against our own guys they're acting like the back guys and kind of go head to head against each other and when we fly on those missions we all fly out together more or less we set up and then we kind of a trite from the fight as we either you know run out of gas or something happens and so people usually go back onesies or twosies and so the air crew that recorded the gimbal they were going back to the boat and we were on what's called a workup training event and so this is like a month on the boat where we're essentially conducting more time operations more or less to stress ourselves out and to kind of do the last training block before we go on deployment essentially so it's pretty high stress they actually do send aircraft from like land bases to kind of try to penetrate and we're expected to go intercept them and so we're we're kind of practicing like we play and so he saw these objects on the radar the gimbal and a fleet of other aircraft or vehicles and they initially thought it was part of the training exercise that they were sending something in to try to penetrate the airspace and so they you know they flew over to it and as they got close enough to get on the fleer you know I think everyone has heard the reaction and they realized that wasn't something they were expecting to see can you actually describe what's in the video what's the reaction case they haven't seen it yeah a lot of swearing but so what you see on the fleer footage is a lacquer white depending when you look at it object that's somewhat shaped like a gimbal it appears almost as if someone but two plates together and then there seems to be almost like a small funnel of IR energy at the top of the bottom of those plates in a sense so almost as if you know there's a stick going in between two plates but not that pronounced right so there's an energy field that kind of went to a funnel on the top and the bottom at least that's how it's being portrayed on the fleer there's a lot of conversation about that being glare at things that nature but it was actually a very tight IR image it just was nondescript shape which was interesting typically we would see the skin of the aircraft we can see the flames coming out of the exhaust especially at those ranges and there was no flames or there's no exhaust here there was no exhaust there was no you know there was no outcatching for pellet in any manner right it was just an object that had nothing emitting from it that was stationary in the sky we're not stationary but it was it was moving along a path right was falling out of the sky and it continued along if we were to consider from a god's eye view again on that essay page it continued along in a path and from the perspective top down view it just went in the direction so no instantaneous direction change from that perspective you also hear them you know very excitedly talking on the tapes about you know whatever the heck this thing is and look at the essay there's a whole formation of them and so the essay is a situational awareness page and again it's a large display that gives that god's eye view of all the radar contacts so the videos actually shown just one and then they're speaking about many of them correct on the essay this play correct and what they essentially saw was if we were to consider above the object north so it kind of offset to the north of the object there was a formation of about some of the forms 60 these objects in a rough wedge formation you know so kind of side by side like this and again not in a like autopilot type manner where it was very stiff it was very kind of non-mechanical the flight mechanics again and these objects were in that formation and they were going along and then they turned pretty sharply but they still had a radius of turn and then went back in the opposite direction and during that turn it was they were kind of like all over the place like it wasn't tight they weren't even like super I they weren't flying in a way I would expect them to be flying in relation to a flight lead they were flying as if they were flying close to each other but not in formation which was kind of strange right and then when they rolled out they kind of tightened back up like so when they basically they started that turn and then 180 degrees out essentially they started flowing in the opposite direction and kind of got back in that formation and while that was happening the gimbal object was proceeding was left to right and as as those the formation kind of turned up to the north and was just passing back it the gimbal just kind of went back in the opposite direction so to follow it back in that direction and in the in the flare itself you know you see the object changes orientation quite a bit so you see it more or less level maybe candid about 45 degrees and then you see it kind of moving around like this almost as if it was a gimbal I've come to learn after some you know having seen some research online and people really looking into this that it seemed that the object actually climbed during that maneuver and so the reason it looked like it turned immediately is because it turned like this it turns in a vertical fashion like that which is pretty interesting that's kind of like another example of a flight mechanics that we don't normally operate because we don't change our directions by maneuvering in the vertical if we can help it it's you know just kill in the fuel you know and so if you're like surveillance platform looking to spend as much time around something you're not gonna you know climb 500 feet every time you make a turn unless you're talking cruise unless you talk cruise naturally okay so is that one of the more impressive flight mechanics you've seen in the video in video forms or not the direct eyesight reports but like in terms of video evidence that we have I think so we we we were seeing a lot of these but we weren't just going on recording them all day we we just kind of put them in that safety bucket like all right there's objects over there we're just not gonna go near it you know and so we weren't putting our sensors on them that much we were gathering the data kind of secondarily but we weren't primarily focusing on it to see all the details so that's so fascinating because you have a busy day you have a lot to do all right well there's some weird stuff going on there we're just not gonna go there and that's says something about sort of the about human nature about the the way that bureaucracy's function the way the military functions it fills up your day with busy important things and you don't get to I mean that is something that I'm in a sort of absurd way worry about which is like we fill our days with so much busyness then when truly beautiful things happen whatever they are truly anomalous things we just won't pay attention because they don't fit our busy schedule beautiful I think that's right on the nose and it's on my nose because you know I didn't give this topic the attention it deserved until I left right until I left and I went to be a instructor pilot where I had more time you know I had more downtime the kind of process and think and get out of exactly what you just described and that's kind of what broke me out of it and got me thinking more about it what do you think the DOD release these videos it's a great question did the DOD release there they kind of get out on their own in some sense so I don't know the answer to that question but my understanding of the situation is that the DOD talked about them so much because they're already out there in a sense and so you know they could they had a choice where they could have just straight up lied inside it wasn't theirs or was fake but again I think our culture now is too open and their information moves too freely to to do things like that and it kind of left them in a pickle that they had to respond to so what was the role of Pentagon's advanced aerospace threat intelligence program a tip from your perspective from what you know maybe your intuition is a tip a real thing that existed I was in a position as a navigator that never would have exposed me to anything like that but I was curious about what people knew and I think if my mind maybe hoped or you know hope someone was looking into this in some sense but on the day that gimbal was recorded I heard that they caught something extra interesting on the fleer and I went to the Intel deep reef space to go see the film and you know everyone's gathering around watching it very interesting and I heard the admiral is coming down and so I was like I'm going to hang out back you know quietly my mental business and see I just want to see his reaction and try to read it to see if this is brand new or if it is something that they've been dealing with you know and you know he came in and he watched a video for like five or six seconds and I'm like turn around and walk out and I you know I was like he's definitely seen these before there's no way that you only watched it for a few seconds and don't have more interest it was you know too bizarre so kind of going back does the office exist well you know I've heard that the the admiral essentially reported back to the Pentagon about that that case real time essentially after he left right so he basically went back and I was totally reported that to either a tip directly or to other you know somehow the information got there so from my perspective and from what I've experienced it seems like yes it was a thing but you know as an aviator I wouldn't know either way right that's just my experience from what happened but it seems like there's somewhere to report to at the time it seemed like there was at least someplace to complain to yeah it's not report to well let me ask you about sort of people that are taking a serious look at at the videos and just the different UFO sighting reports so there's a there's a person named Meg West who is a skeptic and tries to take a skeptical view on every single piece of evidence on these UFO sightings what do you think about his analysis he tries to analyze in a way that debunks some of these videos and assign probabilities to their explanations sort of leaning towards things that give a very low probability to alien extraterrestrial type of explanations for these UFOs what do you think about his approach to these analysis well two parts who is approach one I commend him for all the good work and effort he put into it he's I've seen him build some models and things of that nature and so I think that's something that's absolutely needed in this environment no one's asking anyone to believe anyone here right trust but verify I should certainly be the mantra but where I have you know a disagreement with his approach is that he's approaching from you know from a skeptic or from a debunker standpoint and you know from my perspective not speaking for everyone but when I hear that that tells me that you're driving towards a particular conclusion which has been a very safe process for the past six years right it's been a it's been like a very safe business to be in to tell people that they haven't seen aliens but time to change a little bit and the tactics I've seen to try to retain that view on reality has included things such as completely dismissing what the air crew are saying and I think that is a fallacy to think that we have to take the human outside of that analysis so those are the two things I disagree with when you put the night vision on and you look at the stars and you look out there and in the vast cosmos only a small fraction of which we can see how many intelligent alien civilizations do you think are out there do you think about this kind of stuff I do you know I'm I'm of the theory that we are not the only people out there I think it's it would be a statistically silly comment to assume we are although I get that we are the only data point that we currently have although I'm willing to jump over that fence and say that yes there most likely is intelligent life elsewhere although I'll concede that is a possibility we are early or there could be limited or it could be in a manner that we don't recognize or can really understand I spend so much time thinking about how we anthropomorphize things on this UFO topic and we've done it to ourselves with media in a sense right we've trained ourselves what to think about what we think is true or what this would be like and by doing so I think we're closing ourselves off to a lot of what the possibilities could be and the things that we could miss you beautifully put that the thing that drew you to fighter jets is the technology so if you were to think to imagine from an alien perspective what kind of technologies would we first encounters you know beings if we were to meet another alien civilization in the next few centuries what kind of thing would we see so you're now at the cutting edge and you see the quick progress that's happening that was happening throughout the 20th century that's happening now with greater degrees of autonomy with robots and that kind of stuff what do you think we will encounter I think we're going to see the ability to manipulate matter like we used to manipulate information like I think that's what whether that means being able to pop something on the table that didn't exist or to influence a chemical reaction somewhere but being able to manipulate and treat matter as if it was information and so being able to design specific materials being able to move past a lot of the barriers that seem to limit our progress with things such as miniaturized fusion or even just fusion in general is you know a lot of it is matter-based is material based and our ability to not manipulate we can only discover materials in a sense and so I think that a complete mastery of the physical reality would be one of the key traits of a very intelligent species. Well you're actually working on some maybe you can correct me but sort of quantum mechanical simulation to understand materials so is that do you see sort of the early steps that we're doing at quantum computing side to start to simulate to deeper understand materials but maybe to engineer intermescle materials at the at the very low level that aliens would be able to do hopefully humans would be able to do so. Yeah I think that's you know so if we think about how what materials are made of it's just a collection of atoms but each one of those atoms has a lot of data associated with it so if we want to kind of calculate how they interact with each other it requires a massive amount of computational resources so much so that it can't be done in a lot of cases with classical computers and that's where quantum computers come in although we don't have a perfectly functioning quantum computer at this point one of the things that we're working at at quantum general materials is to essentially bridge that gap between what a classical computer can do as far as stimulating materials and of course what a fully functioning quantum computer would mean for being able to design materials and so you know having the ability to study matter at a very fundamental level and unleashing artificial intelligence the machine learning on that problem I think is you know in a sense you know alien in a way that we're able to advance our science using you know a process that we may not fully understand with a perhaps a non-human based intelligence in some sense and so we may find patterns in the the processes right how does our machine learning output you know can we can we match behaviors with what we're observing with what maybe a machine learning algorithm with output right can we try to classify the intelligence in that manner perhaps and so you know at GenMAT we're looking at these materials it we're considering what these algorithms could have used for later on could we perhaps reverse the process and determine what a unique or anomalous material what type of properties it potentially could have and you said GenMAT right what's what is GenMAT GenMAT is a quantum general material so it's the company I work for we essentially are working on a couple of verticals one of them is our quantum chemistry work we're essentially we're bridging the gap between essentially physics and chemistry we're working on those problems and and again implementing artificial intelligence machine learning into that process so that we can design those materials from the ground up additionally we are what we consider a vertically integrated material science company which means we can generate our our own data and so within the next quarter coming up we we are launching a satellite in the space they'll have a fairly advanced hyper spectral sensor in there which is intended to be the first launch that will help us detect different types of materials using our advanced knowledge of a quantum chemistry right we're going to be leveraging the experience in order to better analyze that data oh interesting so materials that are strange or novel out there in space not necessarily but we'll be looking back at earth to be able to detect minute deposits on earth got it got it getting the greater perspective from out in space to do analysis of different materials right interesting yeah I was really impressed by the deep mind I got to hang out deep mind recently and they really impressed me the the possibility of the application as you're saying machine learning in the context of quantum cancels simulation for materials so to understand materials it's it's really really really interesting so manipulate matter huh I would say the next thing is horses right or maybe fields so you know manipulating or managing gravity can we you know uh maneuver within fields in some manner that allows us to perhaps move propellant less or another manor's right and so I think essentially having a deeper understanding of you know different fields of being able to interact with them I think would be you know a potential avenue for you know travel or advanced travel right propellant travel can we can we quantum and tangle gravity fields together and propeller ship by you know the gravity field of a planet the mass of planet and a drive on a ship you know this is all sorts of interesting things but um yeah people will look back at people like you and say wow they used to fly like with this kind of propellant it seems like to be a very antiquated way of flying and they were very impressed with themselves these humans that they could fly like birds uh it's like so much energy is used to fly such short distances from that perspective we can only throw so many rocks out the back yeah there needs to be a better way exactly it just seems dumb like these it's like flinstones or something like that good at it but yeah there's a limit right like we need to sound I mean that that's an interesting sort of tradeoff how much do you invest in getting really good at it I tend to believe the reason why it would be very important and very powerful to put a human on Mars is not necessarily for the exploration facet but in all the different technologies come from that so the in putting our there's something about putting humans in extreme conditions where we figure out how to make it less extreme more comfortable and uh for that we invent things like uh the DOD sort of helping invent the internet and all the different technologies we've invented it's almost like an indirect consequence of solving difficult problems whether that problem means winning wars or colonizing other planets and so I don't think Mars will help us figure out proportional systems or to crack open physics to where you can travel close to the speed of light or fast in the speed of light but it will help us figure out how to build some cool technology here on earth I think um so it's I'm a big proponent of doing really difficult things really difficult to engineer anything to um to see what kind of technology is emerged from that but let me ask you this do you think US government is hiding some technology like alien spacecraft technology I have no information either way and if you did you probably wouldn't tell me but my assumptions you know how like what did my heart tell me my heart tells me something's going on but I have no evidence for that maybe that's me wanting something to go on maybe that's a human feeling to want to know that my government in control of what some strange unknown thing is um what's your sense if such a thing happened with with this kind of information leak with this kind of information be released by the government I mean that's the worry that you have is because when you don't understand a thing and it's novel you want to hide it so that uh some kind of enemy doesn't get access to it and use it against you I wonder if that is the underlying assumption I it's a it's the one people always jump to that it's for to you know to maintain secrecy of technology and I assume that's part of it I wonder if there's any other reasons that we wouldn't want to not talk about it I imagine that in such information would have a shock to these you know social economic system of any country even out the world and so I wonder if perhaps that was part of the concern as well you know how society can react to it maybe we're anti-fragile enough now with everything that's going on and with our communication networks that um you know why not now I don't know but it's uh that's something I think about as well yeah the effect on the the mass psyche of something like this that uh that there's another intelligence out there we had trouble enough to deal with a pandemic to have something of this scale um basically having just an inkling of a phenomena that we have no understanding of and could lead to complete destruction of human civilization or a flourishing of it and what do you do what does it bureaucracy of government do with that yeah especially when they're the ones holding the range of power in such a communication would link with that power essentially some degree since you think there is aliens out there and you're somebody that's thought about war quite a bit do you think alien civilizations when we meet them would want war mm-hmm would would would they be a danger to us would they be a friend to us what's your intuition about intelligence is out there my intuition tells me that when two people like yourself and myself or anyone get together often the output is greater than individuals and when we work together we can typically do things that are more impressive and better than if a single person works alone mm-hmm and now I know that war has driven technological progress but perhaps there's other mechanisms that can do so but regardless I wonder you know if we truly think about advanced society that has been perhaps thousands or millions of years ahead of us I would imagine that same same truth to be there that people working together creatures working together is a good thing for society or its society as a whole and if we consider that as we imagine a society growing and expanding in a sense the ultimate output of a planet could only be achieved in some senses if everyone was working towards the same goal and there might be you know wonders and secrets and things that we can't imagine just simply because of time frames that we we live under and we think in but if a planet has a single unit and it almost as an entity itself at a certain level right if everything's working towards the same output you know I could almost imagine an intelligent species that approached us planet to planet instead of person to person because that's how they've evolved and they've assumed any intelligent species would understand that working together is better than not and so you know my heart tells me that at a certain point you know love and caring and desire to work together is much more powerful than you know the technological progress that war would bring I hope so as well let me jump to the AI topic that you've done so you've done research and development efforts focused on multi-aging intelligence for collaborative autonomy machine learning AI stuff that we've been talking about for combat for air to air combat man-done-man teaming technologies all that kind of stuff what's some interesting ideas in this base that fascinate you randomness you know being able to not predict what the enemy is doing almost no matter what because there's a level of randomness that's within the tactical envelope even the utility of randomness the utility of randomness in an increasing the book you should write I think if you could title name my band name your band yeah uh so yeah can you elaborate that so like the trying to deeper understand how you can integrate randomness uh through AI in the context of combat in order to make yourself uh in order to take away the enemy's ability to try to predict what you're gonna do to disrupt their technological progress cycles uh so that they don't have a clear target the aim at and if you don't clear target the aim at it's hard to hit it additionally more distribution of assets and capability so imagine being able to digitally model your your weapon or your system or your entire tactical engagement or scenario or allow a machine learning to help you better understand the technology that you need to build in order to defeat a particular scenario right and I'm talking hardware now not just the tactic itself um and you know being able to use large amounts of simulation and machine learning to build individual assets that are small boutique using advanced manual and factoring techniques for a mission or for particular battle right instead of just having these large things against an enemy you're building systems and technology for individual cases what about manned and unmanned teaming so uh man and machine working together is there interesting ideas there i approach it from the um position that the human should be commanding from the highest level possible right so mission objective base targeting and so if just for an example if there's a building here and I want that building the go away that's the message I want to communicate I don't want to tell certain vehicles to be in a certain spot I don't want to know how much fuel they have I don't even want to know what capabilities they have necessarily I just want to know that I have the ability to select from a cloud of capabilities and the right assets are going to arrive such that they deal with the contingencies around the target such as protection systems or EW and then can prosecute the target to the high enough probability of satisfaction that's needed by the mission and that's the power of the the human mind is it's able to do some of these strategic calculations but also ethical calculations all that kind of stuff exactly that's what humans are good at does it worry you a future where we have increasingly higher autonomy in our weapons systems in our war so you said building what about uh telling a set of fully autonomous drones to get rid of all the terrorists in the city so he's multiple buildings region that kind of it's a greater and greater autonomy so that's a fear right um you're viewing it from a we can cover more perspective which is um fair and a lot of we I don't approach it from that topic at least I don't think of it that way at least morally um I think that with the advancement of warfare assuming we have a just and and moral leadership um if that's the case then I am an advocate for increased autonomy and technology because I see it as an ability to be more precise and if we trust the moral leadership of our government then we would want to be as precise as possible in order to mitigate effects that we don't want so I know that's not a satisfying answer and it leaves us well no bad feelings but no because having experienced sort of um directly seen what it looks like when deliberately or carelessly or at least to the death of a large number of civilians as it does in currently in Ukraine the the value of precision given ethical leadership becomes apparent so there's something distinctly unethical about the the murder of civilians in a time of war um and I think technology helps lessen that of course all death is terrible but there's there's something about um schools hospitals being destroyed with everybody inside being killed um it's particularly terrible it is and you know you approached it from the angle of more autonomy enables a wider you know swath of destruction and that's where we get back into you know who's who's making the decisions based off of this and you know my hope again would be that we would have the leadership that would use these things when needed in the precise way as possible to minimize that and I've seen that firsthand you know I've seen that in country I've seen not not blue forces but you know I've seen truck bombs go off on school buses you know driving around Afghanistan uh while escorting convoys and you know it wasn't easy then and I'm sure it's not any easier now especially after what you've just seen do you have thoughts about the current war in Ukraine maybe from a military perspective maybe from the Air Force perspective so I could just mention a few things there's the baroque tar drones that are being used they're unmanned I think they have capability to be autonomous but they're usually remotely controlled they're used for reconnaissance but they're also used by by the Ukraine side for reconnaissance and I think also to destroy different technologies tanks and so on different targets like this so there's also on the Russian side the the oil and ten there's the the fighter jets make 29 the Ukraine side in the Sue 25 in the Russian side is there anything kind of stands out to you about this particular aspects of what this war looks like that's unique to what you've experienced maybe not unique but it's just been absolutely incredible to see the footage you know I mean we're watching war on Twitter you know essentially and to see you know these aircraft flying down low spit and flares out getting shot down and you know it's incredible to see this happening you know live for everyone to see so that's just kind of a quick meta comment but as far as the actual you know I think these small form factor UAVs where they're just like strapping weapon to it and flying over and trying to drop it at the right time or any of this these type of commercial applications of technology into this ad hoc warfare area is incredibly interesting because it shows you know how useful that technology can be outside of the military right like these like especially like DJI right like there's obviously a lot of technology in there is being leveraged for other capabilities within you know PLC military or at least we would assume what happens if that is more widespread right like what if we were creating our own drones and they were being used against us would we want to have them type of kill switch or something like that right so what I think governments are going to have to consider like all these tools that are going to be easily available to just any person could be turned into a tool of war or how do we stop that from being turned against us you know especially as we look at you know 10 years from now when we have a large number of autonomous UAVs delivering packages and doing everything else over our country and any one of those could be potentially a weapon if we don't have the proper security well there's we're known Texas and Texas values its guns and sees guns as among other things a protector of individual freedom and you could see a future perhaps where and I've certainly experienced this in the empowering nature of this in Ukraine where you can put the fight for independence into your own hands by literally strapping explosives to GGI drones that you purchase on your own salary I mean that one of the interesting things about the voluntary army in Ukraine is that they're basically using their own salary to buy the ammunition to fight for their independence there's a very kind of ideal that sort of people speak about when they speak about the the second amendment in this country that it's interesting to see the advanced technology version of that especially in Ukraine sort of using computer vision technology for surveillance and reconnaissance to try to integrate that information to discover the targets and all that kind of stuff to put that in the hands of civilians it's fascinating to see to sort of fight for their independence you could say that to fight against authoritarian regime of your own government all that kind of stuff as soon as you have complicated the war space in the future is going to be you know vading a land like that where people have you know that many different types of resources because it's absolutely changed warfare I mean hopefully that creates a decent incentive to start war to go to war with the yeah sort of it changes the nature of guerrilla warfare times you know I you know I don't think puttin was expecting to be in that engagement quite as long as he has of course but it can show you how you can get caught up you know if if if land wars turn into an inescapable quagmire each time due to the complications around the the society's ability to access interesting tools you know that it could be you know it could be a huge demotivator for aggression well let me ask you about this do you think there will always be war in the world is this just a part of human nature I think so I think I think it is until we until we move past resource limitation there's always going to be at least that one particular cause of conflict and then we can also consider all our psychological lizard brain emotions that cause us to act out although you know we're hopefully we have enough things in place to stop that from rising to the level of war but you know we have our own biology our own psychology and evolution to combat and then but there are pragmatic reasons to exert violence sometimes unfortunately and that one of those cases could be resource limitations and so while your question was do I think that all would be war in this world my unfortunate answer is perhaps yes but once there's more than one world than we're less resource constrained than perhaps it'll be a valve of sorts for that I talk to Jaco on this podcast I told him about a song called Brothers and Arms by Dire Straits and the question I asked him I'd like to ask you the same question is like the song goes do you think we're fools to wage war in our brothers and arms and Jaco said our enemy is not our brothers and arms they're the enemy and so this kind of notion that we're all human that's a notion that's a luxury you can have but there is good and bad in this world according to Jaco I hear that anger and hate when I was in Ukraine among some people were there was a sense where you could be brothers and sisters you can have family you can have love for from Ukraine to Russia but now that everything has changed and generational hate for some people have taken over so I guess the question is when you think about the enemy is there hate there the acknowledge that they're human I had never had any hate or just intent you know when I was doing my job I'll say but I was also never in a true life for death situation where they were gonna kill me if I didn't kill them but you know I think that environment isn't one born out of hate you know being in that type of scenario and you know since it's how to be alive right I mean that's the our natural state is be fighting for survival in a sense and so I think there's there's great power and strength and clarity perhaps in that and it's not always born out of hate but out of necessity and we can't always control that and I think as we focus on ourselves so much we only dance on that pinhead when we find ourselves fighting for things that we need and we're always taking from someone else at this point and so as someone that's been in combat and very high above it I'll say right where I didn't feel like I was in particular danger I rationalized it and I made my way do it knowing that there were people on the other side that were going to die that were on our side than not so it was always a very human thing it was never a reaction emotional reaction of any sense so you do you were able to see the basic it's human versus human there's some aspect of war that is basically one people fighting each other yes it's end of the day you know especially I would say innovation tackle aviation there's almost a kinship with your your enemies in a sense because you know that you know them in a sense right you know what they've been through you know what training they've been through you know where they failed and you know what type of person they are because it's a very unique person that does that job and usually can spot them I guess it's a kind of respect you have for the craftsmanship of the job that's taken on certainly and that person didn't come out in his hundred million dollar jet because I pissed them off you know it's not an emotional response we're both there maybe because we chose to be in some sense but at the best of of someone else and outside of our control and power and so in a sense for me it's almost a challenge that we've engaged upon agreeably but that's such a romantic version that I have the luxury to have being high in my castle in the jet up there not on the ground so I understand that it's a bit more romantic than perhaps you know someone on the ground experiencing all the horrors down there because everything looks very small from above and that's another aspect of war with greater autonomy when you're controlling the mission versus you know have a jengous con type of intimacy in terms of the actual experience of war where you directly have you murder with a sword versus a gun versus a remotely controlled drone versus a strategic mission assignment to an autonomous drone that executes abstracted away until it's just a small decision and my worry is the people without a voice are are completely forgotten and silenced in all these calculations I spoke to a lot of people poor people that feel like they've never really had a voice and and they're too easily forgotten even within the country of Ukraine it's the the big city versus the world divide you know it's easy to forget the people that don't have a Twitter account and don't that their basic existence is just trying to survive trying to put food on table they don't have anything else anything else and the day or the ones that truly feel the pain of war of the supply chain going down or the food supplies going down of of a cold winter without power you're still young but you've seen some things so let me ask you to put on your wise sage hat and give advice to young people whether they're fascinated by technology or fascinated by fighter jets whether they're fascinated by sort of engineering or the way the stars look at night what advice would you give them how to have a career that can be proud of or how to have a life that can be proud of I'd suggest that they don't fear looking foolish I spent a large portion of my life considering the laughter or the the comments at my statements as indication that I shouldn't pursue that and so you know I didn't I kind of woke up to that fact a bit later but I would encourage you know I would advise that that people you know trusting themselves and trusting the things that they care about it doesn't matter if they're good at it all that matters is that they find something that they can apply love and care to and they will grow better at it and then most likely make the world better because of it and don't be afraid to look stupid don't be afraid to look stupid yeah that's one of the things that I think as you get older you're expected to be to have it all figured out and so you are afraid to take on new things but I think as long as you're always okay I'm looking stupid and having a beginner's mind you can you can get really really far even later on in life so this isn't just advice for young people this is really advice for for everybody maybe a dark question but has there been a difficult time in your life a really dark place you've gone in your mind that stands out they had to really overcome I would suggest that I've been pretty firm ground for most of my life I haven't had too many personal tragedies I'll say that have really defined me certainly none that I would think are outside the norm so there is no truly low point actually I have one and it's tough for me because I you know I've spent most of my life beating motions and you know high high emotional responses out of my system right because that's what flying is right it's keeping a steady line and and doing what you need to do um factors been studies that shown reduced adrenaline production and vital pilots for a number of years after they get out but getting out of the Navy was difficult for me you know and I wasn't expecting it to be a lot of bravado and machuism of course in the military especially the fighter community and we all have our plans made up to get out and none of it really accounts for any type of mental health or anything like that it's all very much where am I going to get my paycheck from where am I going to move to and you know whether it's the Navy or just individuals truly understanding the difference that makes and when I got out it was difficult for me you know I think a lot of guys in that job when they get out they almost at least I had anxiety when I got out because it was I was so used to being highly involved in something that um that you know just was I was all involved with that when I got out I didn't know how to fill that space essentially you know um and while I wouldn't say it was an overly traumatic experience I think it's one that's not accounted for enough that people that are getting out you know so it encourage them to take it serious and actually think about it and have respect the change because it it is a big one well if I may say you found a place in nature currently a home is there can you speak to that being a source of happiness for you absolutely an escape from the world certainly in a very much is was a deliberate that you found it there that's home for me so you know I move back up to the the Boston area and my wife and I had an idea after moving about eight or nine times in the Navy of kind of what we what we wanted just generally and it was all really about the land and not about the house you know we just wanted privacy and to be nearby and so we ended up finding a lot of land there you know a parcel of land we put a house on it and it provides me with a sense of peace that I think I can only get when I'm in nature a sense of clarity that helps me think helps me relax maybe so relaxing that helps me think I don't know but being surrounded by nature and birds and animals for for me has always allowed me to I don't know feel most in touch with with my own thoughts in a sense just provides clarity and so this little sanctuary you could say I built allows me to to you know interface via fiber line at my house but also feel like a million miles away sometimes which is the best of both worlds hey you can just walk outside to escape at all yes to experience life as as hundreds of generations of human species have experienced it maybe it's a dichotomy my desire for the fastness of technology and experience compared with the most basic baseline that we have isn't that strange how do you how do you square that I don't know your draw how drawn you are to the cutting edge and still the calm you find in nature I think it makes sense nature is vastly superior to almost all of our technology perspective it is and so away it's being surrounded by perfection in a lot of senses in the military and in general have you contemplated your mortality have you been afraid of death what's your relationship like with death I was willing to accept an oversized amount of risk I'll say when I was young as an aviator yeah not not in the jet but just that was my life you know I felt like I was going to live forever and going out in the war you know strangely didn't really change that because you know as an aviator again we're riding up high on our horse up there so there were times when I was in situations that could have resulted in death from from flying or from emergency in the aircraft but I'll be honest I never really kind of sat down to think about the mortality of it afterwards I feel like I kind of signed a check at the beginning and it was my job to perform as well as I could and if something happened in that then I better damn will be sure I would do my best at the time then so you know I maybe didn't personally reflect on it as much as of I one would think you know because once you get in that machine it doesn't give you a lot of time to sit back and philosophize on on your current situation and the same just like we weren't seeing these off or when we seen these objects off the coast we weren't necessarily you know examining them every day right we put them into that bucket because it wasn't something that was going to kill us right away and thinking about death when you're so close to it all the time would be debilitating it would probably make you worse at your job what well maybe you can think about death when you look out when you go into nature and think like the the the fact that this whole ride ends it's such a weird thing and the the old makes way to new and that's all throughout nature and if you just look at the the cruelty of nature or the beauty of nature however you think about it the the fact that the the big thing eats the little thing over and over and that's just how it progresses and that's how adaptation happens death is a requirement for evolution and you know whether evolution allows us to see objective reality or not it still gives you some interesting thoughts about perspectives of death and especially concerning its biological necessity as far as evolution is concerned yes weird it's weird that it's been like a hundred billion people that lived before us and that you and I will be forgotten this whole thing we're doing is meaningless in that sense but at the same time it feels deeply meaningful somehow I guess that that's the question I want to ask when you go out to nature with family what do you think is the meaning of it all what's the meaning of life or maybe when you put on the night goggles the the night vision goggles and look up at the stars why are we here I can't speak for everyone but at least the way I interpret it you know or at least I I feel like I interpret my way here my job is I feel like my role is just to be curious about the environment in a manner that allows us to understand as much as possible I think that the human mind whether it's just the mass insider scholar you know whether there's some type of quantum interaction is going on our mind is incredible has incredible ability to output new information in in a universe that you know somewhat stale of information right our our minds are and somewhat unique in that we can imagine and perceive things that could never ever have possibly naturally occurred yet we can make it happen we can associate that with enough belief that is true and it can happen and so for me I feel like I just need to encourage that to encourage you know interaction with reality such that it leads us a newer and grander you know interactions with this universe and all that starts with a little bit of curiosity exactly right you're an incredible person you've done so many things and there's so much still still ahead of you thank you for being brave enough to talk about UFOs and doing it so seriously and thank you for pushing forward and all these fronts in terms of technology so from just the fighter just the the engineering of that to the AIML applications in the combat setting that's super interesting and then now quantum I can't wait to see to see what you do next thank you so much for saying down talking today it was an honor it was my pleasure thank you Lex thanks for listening to this conversation with Lieutenant Ryan Graves to support this podcast please check out our sponsors in the description and now let me leave you some words from Buzz Aldrin bravery comes along as a gradual accumulation of discipline thank you for listening and hope to see you next time