So Big Dog became LS3, which is the big load carrying one. Just a quick pause. It can carry 400 pounds. It was designed to carry 400, but we had it carrying about a thousand pounds. So I went, of course, you did. We had one carrying the other one. We had two of them. So we had one carrying the other one. So one of the things that stands out about the robots, Boston and Amos have created is how beautiful the movement is. How natural the walking is and running is, even flipping with, throwing is. So maybe you can talk about what's involved in making it look natural. Well, I think having good hardware is part of the story and people who think you don't need to innovate hardware anymore are wrong. The following is a conversation with Mark Ryberg, a legendary roboticist, founder and long time of Boston Dynamics and recently the executive director of the newly created Boston Dynamics AI Institute that focuses on research and the cutting edge on creating future generations of robots that are far better than anything that exists today. He has been leading the creation of incredible legged robots for over 40 years at CMU, at MIT, the legendary MIT Leg Lab, and then of course, Boston Dynamics with amazing robots like Big Dog, Atlas, Spot and Handel. This was a big honor and pleasure for me. This is the Lex Friedman podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description. Now, dear friends, here's Mark Ryberg. When did you first fall in love with the robotics? Well, I was always a builder from a young age. I was lucky. My father was a frustrated engineer and by that I mean he wanted to be an aerospace engineer, but his mom from the old country thought that that would be like a grease monkey. So he said no, so he became an accountant. But the result of that was our basement was always full of tools and equipment and electronics and from a young age I would watch him assembling a kit, an icocit or something like that. I still have a couple of his old icocuts. But it was really during graduate school when I followed a professor back from class. It was a Bertolt Horn at MIT and I was taking an interim class at its IAP independent activities period. And I followed him back to his lab and on the table was a a vicarm robot arm taken apart in probably a thousand pieces. And when I saw that, you know, from that day on I was a roboticist. Do you remember the year 1974? 1974. So there's just this arm in pieces. Yeah. And you saw the pieces and you saw it in your vision, the arm when it's put back together and the possibilities that holds. Somehow it spurred my imagination. I was in the Brandon Cognitive Sciences Department as a graduate student doing neurophysiology. I'd been a electrical engineer as an undergraduate in Northeastern. And the neurophysiology wasn't really working for me. You know, I wasn't conceptual enough. I couldn't see really how by looking at single neurons you were going to get to a place where you could understand, you know, control systems or thought or anything like that. And you know, the AI lab was always in appealing. This was before C.Sale, right? This was in the 70s. So the AI lab was always in appealing idea. And so when I went back to the AI lab with, you know, following him, and I saw the arm, I just thought, you know, this is it. It's so interesting. The tension between the BCS, Brandon Cognitive Science approach, the understanding intelligence and the robotics approach to understanding intelligence. Well, BCS is now morphed a bit, right? They they have the Center for Brains, Mines and Machines, which is trying to bridge that gap. And even when I was there, you know, David Mar was in the AI lab. David Mar had models of the brain that were appealing both to biologists, but also to computer people. So he was a visitor in the AI lab at the time. And I guess he became full time there. So that was the first time a bridge was made between those two groups. Then the bridge kind of went away. And then there was another time in the 80s. And then recently, you know, the last five or so years, there's been a stronger connection. You said you were always kind of a builder. What stands out to you in memory of a thing you built? Maybe a trivial thing that just kind of like inspired, inspired you in the possibilities that this direction of work might hold. I mean, we were just doing gadgets when we were kids, you know, I have a friend we were taking, you know, I don't know if everybody remembers, but fluorescent lights had this little aluminum cylinder. I can't even remember what it's called now that you needed a starter, I think it was. And we would take those apart, fill them with matchheads, put a tail on it and make it into little rockets. So it wasn't always about function. It was well, well, rocket was pretty, pretty much. I guess that is pretty functional. But yeah, I guess that is a question. How much was it about function versus just creating something cool? I think it's still a balance between those two. There was a time though when I was a, I guess I was probably already a professor or maybe late in graduate school when I thought that function was everything and that, you know, mobility, dexterity, perception and intelligence, those are sort of the function, the key functionalities for robotics. That, that's what mattered and nothing else mattered. And I even had kind of this platonic ideal that a robot, if you just looked at a robot and it wasn't doing anything, it would look like a pilot junk, which a lot of my robots looked like in those days. But then when it started moving, you'd get the idea that it, you know, it had some kind of life or some kind of interest in its movement. And I think it would be purposely even design the machines, not worrying about the aesthetics of the structure itself. But then, but then, you know, it turns out that the aesthetics of the thing itself add and combine with the life-like things that the robots can do. But the heart of it is, you know, making them do things that are, that are interesting. So one of the things that underlies a lot of your work is that the robots you create, the systems you have created for 40 years now, have a kind of, they're not cautious. So a lot of robots, the people know about, move about this world very cautiously, carefully, very afraid of the world. A lot of the robots you built, especially in the early days, were very aggressive, underexuated. They're hopping. They're, they're wild, moving quickly. So what, is there a philosophy underlined that? Well, let me tell you about how I got started on legs at all. When I was still a graduate student, I went to a conference and was a biological legged locomotion conference. And I think it was in Philadelphia. So it was all biomechanics people, you know, researchers who would look at muscle and maybe neurons and things like that. They weren't so much computational people, but they were more biomechanics. And maybe there were a thousand people there. And I went to a talk, one of the talks, all the talks were about the body of either animals or people and respiration, things like that. But one talk was by a robotics guy. And he showed a six-legged robot that walked very slowly. It always had at least three feet on the ground. So it worked like a table or a chair with tripod stability. And it moved really slowly. And I just looked at that and said, wow, that's wrong. That's not anything like how people of animals work. Because we balance and fly, we have to predict what's going to happen in order to keep our balance when we're taking a running step or something like that. We use the springiness in our legs, our muscles in our tendons and things like that. As part of the story, with energy circulates, we don't just throw it away every time. So I'm not sure I understood all that when I first thought. But I definitely got inspired to say, let's try the opposite. And I didn't have a clue as to how to make a hopping robot work, not really, not balance in 3D. In fact, when I started, it was all just about the energy of bouncing. And I was going to have a springy thing in the leg and some actuator so that you could get an energy regime going of bouncing. And the idea that balance was an important part of it didn't come until a little later. And then, you know, might made the one like it, the pogostic robots. Now, I think that we need to do that in manipulation. If you look at robot manipulation, we've been working, we, a community has been working on it for 50 years. We're nowhere near human levels of manipulation. I mean, we can, you know, it's come along. But I think it's all too safe. And I think trying to break out of that safety thing of static grasping, you know, if you look at the a lot of work that goes on, it's about the geometry of the part. And then, and then you figure out how to move your hand so that you can position it with respect to that. And then you grasp it carefully and then you move it. Well, that's not anything like how people in animals work, you know, we juggle in our hands. We hug multiple objects and can sort them. So now, to be fair, being more aggressive is going to mean things are going to work very well for a while. So it's a long, it's a longer term approach to the problem. But that, and that's just theory now, you know, maybe that won't pay off, but that's sort of how I'm trying to think about it, trying to encourage our group to go at it. Well, yeah, I mean, we'll talk about what it means to what is the actual thing we're trying to optimize for robot, you know, sometimes especially human robot interaction, maybe flaws is a good thing. Perfection is not necessarily the right thing to be chasing. Just like you said, maybe, maybe being good at fumbling an object, being good at fumbling, maybe the right thing to optimize versus perfect modeling of the object and perfect movement of the arm to crash grass that object is maybe perfection is not supposed to exist in the real world. I don't know if you know my friend, Matt Mason, who is who is the director of the Robotics Institute at Carnegie Mellon and we go back to graduate school together. But he analyzed a movie of Julia Childs doing a cooking thing. And she did, I think he said something like there were 40 different ways that she handled the thing and none of them was grasping. He would, she would nudge roll flatten with her, you know, knife, things like that. And none of them was grasping. So, okay, let's go back to the early days. First of all, you've created and led the leg lab, the legendary leg lab at MIT. So what was that first hopping robot? Can you? But first of all, the leg lab actually started at Carnegie Mellon. So I was a professor there, starting in 1980, to about 1986. And so that's where the first hopping machines were built. Starting, I guess we got the first one working in about 1982, something like that. That was a simplified one. Then we got a three dimensional one in 1983. The quadruped that we built at the leg lab, the first version was built in about 1984, five and really only got going about 86 or so. I took years of development to get it to. Let's just pause here. For people who don't know, I'm talking to Mark Weber, founder of Boston Dynamics. But before that, you were a professor developing some of the most incredible robots for 15 years. And before that, of course, a grad student, all that. So you've been doing this for a really long time. So you're like skipped over this, but they go go to the first hopping robot. There's videos of some of this. I mean, these are incredible robots. So you talked about the very first step was to get a thing hopping up and down. Right. And then you realized, well, balancing is the thing you should care about. And it's actually a solvable problem. So you can you just go through how to create that robot? What was what was involved in creating that robot? Well, I'm going to start on the not the technical side, but the, I guess we could call it the motivational side or the funding side. So before Carnegie Mellon, I was actually at JPL at the Jet Propulsion Lab for three years. And while I was there, I connected up with Ivan Sutherland, who is sometimes regarded as the father of computer graphics because of work he did both at MIT and then University of Utah and Evanson Sutherland. Anyway, I got to know him. And at one point, he said he encouraged me to do some kind of project at Caltech, even though I was at JPL, you know, those are kind of related institutions. And so I thought about it. And I made up a list of three possible projects. And I purposely made the top one and the bottom one really boring sounding. And in the middle, I put a Pogo stick robot. And when he looked at it, you know, I've been this a brilliant, brilliant guy, brilliant engineer and a real cultivator of people. He looked at it and knew right away what the thing that was worth doing. And so he, you know, he had an endowed chair. So he had about $3,000 that he gave me to build a first model, which I went, you know, I went to the shop and with my own hands kind of made a first model, which, which didn't work. And was just, you know, a beginning shot at it. And Ivan and I took that to Washington. And in those days, you could just walk into DARPA and walk down the hallway and see who's there. Ivan, who had been there in his previous life. And so we walked around and we looked in offices because I didn't know anything. You know, I was basically a kid, but I even moved away around. And we found Craig Fields in his office. Craig later became the director of DARPA, but in those days, he was a program manager. And so we went in. I had a little Samsonite suitcase, which we opened and it had just the skeleton of this one like at Hopping Robot. And we showed it to him. And you could almost see the drill going down his chin. So he said excitement. And he sent me $250,000. He said, okay, I'll, I want to fund this. And I was between institutions. I was just about to leave JPL. And I hadn't decided yet where I was going next. And then when I landed at CMU, he sent $250,000, which in 1980 was a lot of a lot of research money. Did you see the possibility of worth this going? Why this is an important problem? No, the balance. I mean, it's, it has to do with leg look emotion. I mean, it has to do with all these problems that that that the human body saw when we're walking, for example, like all the fundamentals are there. Yeah. I mean, I think that was the motivation to try and get more at the fundamentals of how animals work. But the idea that it would result in, you know, machines that were anything like practical, like we're making now that that wasn't anywhere in my head now. You know, as an academic, I was mostly just trying to do the next thing, you know, make some progress and press my colleagues if I could and have fun and have fun. Pogo stick robot. So what was on the technical side, what are the some of the challenges of getting up, getting to the point where we saw like in the video, the, the Pogo stick robot that's actually successfully hopping and then eventually doing flips and all this kind of stuff. Well, in the very early days, I needed some better engineering than I had than I could do myself and I hired Ben Brown. We each had our way of contributing to the design and we came up with a thing that could, could start to work. I had some stupid ideas about how the actuation system should work and we, you know, we started that out. It wasn't that hard to make it balanced once you get the, the physical machine to be working well enough and have enough control over the degrees of freedom. And then we very quickly, you know, we started out by having it floating on an inclined air table and then that only gave us like six foot of travel. So once it started working, we switched to a thing that could run around the room on a, another device. It's hard to explain these without you seeing them, but you probably know when talking about a plane orizer. And, and then the next big step was to make it work in 3D, which that was really the scary part with these simple things. You know, people had inverted pendulums at the time for for years and they could control them by driving a cart back and forth. But could you make it work in 3D dimensions while it's bouncing and all that? And, but it turned out, you know, not to be that hard to do, at least at the level of performance we achieved at the time. So, okay, you mentioned inverted pendulum, but like can you explain how a hopping stick in 3D can control can balance itself? Yes. What are what what is the actuation look like? You know, the simple story is that there's three things going on. There's something making it bounce. And, you know, we we had a system that was estimating how high the robot was off the ground. And using that, you know, there's energy that can be in three places in a in a pogostick. One is in the spring, one is in the altitude, and the other is in the velocity. And so, when at the top of the hop, it's all in the height. And so, you could just measure how high you're going. And thereby, thereby have an idea of a lot about the cycle. And you could decide whether to put more energy in or less. So, that's one element. Then there's a part that you decide where to put the foot. And if you think when you're landing on the ground with respect to the center of mass. So, if you think of a pole vaulter, the key thing the pole vaulter has to do is get its body to the right place when the pole gets stuck. If they're too far forward, they kind of get thrown backwards. If they're too far back, they go, you know, over. And what they need to do is get it so that they go mostly up to get over the thing. And, you know, high jumpers is the same kind of thing. So, there's a calculation about where to put the foot. And we did something, you know, relatively simple. And then there's a third part to keep the body at an attitude that's upright. Because if it gets too far, you know, you could hop and just keep rotating around. But if it gets too far, then you've right out of motion of the joints at the hips. So, you have to do that. And we did that by applying a torque between the legs and the body every time the foot's on the ground. You only can do it while the foot's on the ground in the air, you know, the physics don't work out. How far does it have to tell before it's too late to be able to balance itself or some possible to balance itself, correct itself? Well, you're asking a just in question because in those days, we didn't actually optimize things. And they probably could have gotten much further than we did and then had higher performance. And we just kind of got, you know, a sketch of a solution and worked on that. And then in your sense, some people working for us, some people working for others, people came up with all kinds of equations for, or, you know, algorithms for how to do a better job, be able to go faster. One of my students worked on getting things to go faster. Another one worked on climbing over obstacles. Because when you're running, it's one on the open ground. It's one thing. If you're running like up a stair, you have to adjust where you are. Otherwise, things don't work out right. You land your foot on the edge of the step. So there's other degrees of freedom to control if you're getting to, you know, more realistic practical situations. I think it's really interesting to ask about the early days because, you know, believing yourself, believing that there's something interesting here. And then you mentioned finding somebody else, Ben Brown. What's that like? Finding other people with whom you can build this crazy idea and actually make it work? Probably the smartest thing I ever did is to find the other people. I mean, when I look at it now, you know, I look at Boston Dynamics and all the really excellent engineering there, you know, people who really make stuff work. You know, I'm only the dreamer. So when you talk about pogos like robot or legged robots, whether it's quadrupeds or humanoid robots, did people doubt that this is possible? Did you experience a lot of people around you kind of? I don't know if they doubted whether it was possible, but I think they thought it was a waste of time. Oh, it's not even an interesting problem. I think for a lot of people, you know, people who were, I think it's been both though. Some people, I think I felt like they were saying, oh, you know, why are you wasting your time on this stupid problem? And then, but then I've been at many things where people have told me it's been an inspiration to go out and, you know, attack these, these harder things. And I think it has turned out, I think legged locomotion has turned out to be a useful thing. Did you ever have like doubt about bringing Atlas to life, for example, or with big dog just every step over the way? Did you have doubt like what this is, this is too hard of a problem? I mean, at first, I wasn't an enthusiast for the humanoid because again, it goes back to saying, what's the functionality? And the form wasn't as important as the functionality. And also, you know, there's an aspect to humanoid robots that's about all about the cosmetics where there isn't really other functionality. And that kind of is off-punning for me as a roboticist, I think the functionality really matters. So probably that's why I avoided human robots, humanoid robots to start with. But I'll tell you, now, you know, after we start working on them, you could see that the connection and the impact with other people, whether they're lay people or even other technical people, there's a special thing that goes on. Even though most of the humanoid robots aren't that much like a person. But we have to put more files and we see the humanity. But also like with the spot, you can see not the humanity, but whatever we find compelling about social interactions there in spot as well. I'll tell you, you know, I go around giving talks and take spot to a lot of them. And it's amazing. The media likes to say that they're terrifying and that people are afraid. And YouTube commenters like to say that it's frightening. But when you take a spot out there, now maybe it's self-selecting, but you get a crowd of people who want to take pictures, want to pose for selfies, want to operate the robot, want to pet it, want to put clothes on it. It's amazing. Yeah, a lot of spot. So if we move around history a little bit, so you said, I think in the early days of Boston Dynamics that you quietly worked on making a running version of Ibo. Sony's robot dog. It's just an interesting little tidbit of history for me. What stands out to you in memory from that task? For people who don't know that little dog robot moves slowly. How did that become big dog? What was involved there? What was the dance between how do we make this cute little dog versus a thing that can actually care a lot of payload and move fast and stuff like that? What the connection was is that at that point, Boston Dynamics was mostly a physics-based simulation company. When I left MIT to start Boston Dynamics, there was a few years of overlap, but the concept wasn't to start a robot company. The concept was to use this dynamic simulation tool that we developed to do robotics for other things. But working with Sony, we got back into robotics by doing the Ibo runner. We made some tools for programming Curio, which was a small humanoid, this big that could do some dancing and other kinds of fun stuff. I don't think it ever reached the market even though they did show it. When I look back, I say that we got us back where we belonged. You've rediscovered the soul of the company. That's right. From there, it was always a lot of robots. You started Boston Dynamics in 1992. What are some fond memories from the early days? One of the robots that we built wasn't actually a robot. It was a surgical simulator, but it had forced feedback. It had all the techniques of robotics. You looked down into this mirror it actually was. It looked like you were looking down onto the body you were working on. Your hands were underneath the mirror. There were where you were looking. You had tools in your hands that were connected up to these forced feedback devices made by another MIT spin-out sensible technologies. They made the forced feedback device. We attached the tools and we brought all the software and did all the graphics. We had 3D computer graphics. It was in the old days when this was in the late 90s. When you had a Silicon graphics computer that was about this big, it was the heater in the office basically. We were doing surgical operations. Nastimosis, which was stitching tubes together, tubes like blood vessels or other things in their body. You could feel and you could see the tissues move and it was really exciting. The idea was to make a trainer to teach surgeons how to do stuff. We built a scoring system because we interviewed surgeons that told us what you're supposed to do and what you're not supposed to do. You're not supposed to tear the tissue. You're not supposed to touch it in any place except for where you're trying to engage. There were a bunch of rules. We built this thing and took it to a trade show, a surgical trade show. The surgeons were practically lined up. We kept the score and we posted their scores on a video game. Those guys are so competitive that they really loved doing it. They would come around and they see someone's score was higher there so they would come back. But we figured out shortly after that we thought surgeons were going to pay us to get trained on these things. The surgeons thought we should pay them in order to so they could teach us about the thing. There was no money from the surgeons and we looked at it and thought, well, maybe we could sell it to hospitals that would teach to train their surgeons. Then we said, well, we're at the time we were probably a 12 person company or maybe 15 people. I don't remember. There's no way we could go after a marketing activity. The company was all bootstrapped in those years. We never had investors until Google bought us, which was after 20 years. We didn't have any resources to go after hospitals. At one day, Rob and I were looking at that and we said, we'd built another simulator for knee arthroscopy and we said, this isn't going to work and we killed it and we moved on. That was really a milestone in the company because we sort of understood who we were and what would work and what wouldn't. Even though technically it was really a fascinating thing. What was that meaning like? Were you just sitting at it? You know what? Probably. We're going to pivot completely. We're going to let go of this thing. We put so much hard work into and then go back to the thing. It just always felt right when we did it. You know, just look at each other and say, let's build robots. What was the first robot you built under the flag of Boston Dynamics? Big dog? Well, there was the IBO runner, but it wasn't even a whole robot. It was just legs that we took off the legs on IBOs and attached legs we'd made. We got that working and showed it to the Sony people. We worked pretty closely with Sony in those years. One of the interesting things is that it was before the internet and zoom and anything like that. So we had six ISDN lines installed and we would have a telecon every week that worked at very low frame rate, something like 10 hertz. You know, English across the boundary with Japan was a challenge trying to understand what what each of us was saying and have meetings every week for for several years doing that. And it was a pleasure working with them. They were really supporters. They they seemed to like us and what we were doing. That was the real transition from us being a simulation company into being a robotics company again. It was a quadruped that the legs were four legs or two legs, four legs. And what did you learn from that experience of building it basically a fast moving quadruped? Mostly we learned that something that small doesn't look very exciting when it's running. It's like it's scampering and you had to you had to watch a slowmo for it to look like it was interesting. If you watch it fast, it was just like a that's funny. One of my things was to show stuff in video from the very early days of the hopping machines. And so I was always focused on how it's going to look through the viewfinder and running iBOD didn't look so cool through the viewfinder. So what what came next in terms of what was a big next milestone in terms of the robot you built? I mean you got to say that Big Dog was you know sort of put us on the map and got our heads really pulled together. We scaled up the company. Big Dog was the result of Alan Rudolph at DARPA starting a biodynamics program. And he put out a you know a request for proposals. And I think there were 42 proposals written and three got funded. One was Big Dog. One was a climbing robot rise. And you know that put things in motion. We hired Martin Bueller. He was a professor at Montreal at McGill. He was incredibly important for getting Big Dog out of the lab and into the mud which is a you know it was a key step to really be willing to go out there and build it. Break it fixed it which is sort of one of our models at the company. So testing it in the real world. For people who don't know Big Dog maybe you can correct me. It's a it's a big quadruped four-legged robot that it looks big. Probably carry a lot of weight. Not the most weight that Boston and Amsterdam built but a lot. Well it's the first thing that we're so let's see if we go back to the leg lab we'd built a quadruped that could do many of the things that Big Dog did but it had a hydraulic pump sitting in the room with hoses connected to the robot. It had a Vax computer in the next room it needed its own room because it was this giant thing with air conditioning and it had this very complicated bus connected to the robot. And the robot itself just had the actuators it had gyroscopes for sensing and other some other sensors but all the power and computing was off board. Big Dog had all that stuff integrated on the platform. It had a gasoline engine for power which was a very complicated thing to undertake. It had to convert the rotation of the engine in hydraulic power which is how we actuated it. So there was a lot of learning just on the you know building the physical robot and the system integration for that. And then there was the controls of it. So for Big Dog we brought it all together onto one platform and then so you could take it out in the woods. Yeah and you did. We did. We spent a lot of time down at the Marine Corps base in Quantico where there was a trail called the Guadalcanal Trail and our milestone that DARPA had specified was that we could go on this one particular trail that involved you know a lot of challenge and we spent a lot of time our team spent a lot of time down there. Those were fun days hiking with the robot. So what did you learn about like what it takes to balance the robot like that on a trail on a hiking trail on the woods. But basically forget the woods just the real world. That's the big leap into testing in the real world. Yeah as challenging as the woods were working inside of a home or in an office is really harder. Yeah because when you're in the woods you can actually take any path up the hill all you have to do is avoid the obstacles. There's no such thing as damaging the woods at least you know to first order whereas if you're in a house you can't leave scuff marks you can't bang into the walls the robots aren't very comfortable bumping into the walls especially in the early days. So I think those were actually bigger challenges once once we faced them. It was mostly you know getting the systems to work well enough to gather the hardware systems to work and the controls. In those days we did have a human operator who did all the visual perception going up the Guadalcanal trail. So there was an operator who was right there who was very skilled at even though the robot was balancing itself and placing its own feet if the operator didn't do the right thing it wouldn't go. But years later we went back with one of the electric precursor to spot and we had advanced the controls and everything so much that an amateur complete amateur could operate the robot the first time up and down and up and down whereas it taken us years to get there in the previous robot. So if you fast forward big dog eventually became spot. So big dog became LS3 which is the big load carrying one just just a quick pause it can carry 400 pounds. It was designed to carry 400 but we had it carrying about a thousand pounds. Of course you did just we had we had one carrying the other one we had two of them so we had one carrying the other one there's a little clip of that we should put that out somewhere that's from like 20 years ago but wow and it can go for very long distances you can travel 20 miles. Yeah gasoline. Gasoline. Yeah and that that adventure just okay sorry so LS3 then what how did that lead to spot? So big dog and LS3 had engine power and hydraulic actuation then we made a robot that was this electric power so there's a battery driving a motor driving a pump but still hydraulic actuation. Yeah. Larry sort of asked us could you make something that weighed 60 pounds that would not be so intimidating if you had it in a house where there were people and that was the inspiration behind the spot pretty much as it exists today we did a prototype the same size that was the first all electric non hydraulic robot. What was the conversational Larry page like about so here's a guy that kind of is very product focused and that can can see a vision for like what the future holds that's just interesting kind of aside what was the brainstorm about the future robotics with him like I mean it was almost as simple as when I just said he you know we had making small things he said jeez you know do you think you could make a smaller one that wouldn't be so intimidating it'll like a big dog yeah if it was in your house and I said yeah we could do that and we started and did. Is there a lot of technical challenges to go from hydraulic to electric? You know I had been in love with hydraulics and still love hydraulics you know it's a great technology it's too bad that somehow the the world out there looks at it like it's old fashion or that it's um iki and it's true that you do it is very hard to keep it from having some amount of dripping from time to time but if you look at the performance you know how strong you can get in a lightweight package and of course we did a huge amount of innovation most of hydraulic control that is the valve that controls the flow of oil had been designed in the fifties for airplanes it had been made robust enough safe enough that you could count on it so that humans could fly in airplanes and very little innovation had happened you know that might not be fair to the people who make the valves I'm sure that they did innovate but the basic design had stayed the same and there was so much more you could do and so our engineers designed valves the ones that are in in atlas for instance that had new kinds of circuits they sort of did some of the computing that could get you much more efficient use they were much smaller and lighter so the whole robot could be smaller and lighter we made a hydraulic power supply that had a bunch of components integrated in this tiny package it's about this big you know the size of a football weighs five kilograms and it produces five kilowatts of power of course it has that battery operating but it's got a motor a pump filters heat exchanger to keep it cool some valves all of it all in this tiny little package so hydraulics you know could still have a ways to go one of the things that stands out about the robots Boston the name of stuff created is how beautiful the movement is how natural the walking is and running is even flipping is throwing is so maybe you can talk about what's involved in making it look natural well I think having good hardware is part of the story and people who think you don't need to innovate hardware anymore are wrong in my opinion so I think one of the things certainly in the early years for me taking a dynamic approach where you think about what's the evolution of the motion of the thing going to be in the future and having a prediction of that that's used at the time that you're giving signals to it as opposed to it all being servoing which is servoing is sort of backward looking it says okay where am I now I'm gonna I'm gonna try and adjust for that but you really need to think about what's coming so how far had you do you have to look in time it's interesting I think that the number is only a couple of seconds for spot so there's a limited horizon type approach where you're recalculating assuming what's going to happen in the next second or second and a half and then you keep iterating you know at the next even though a tenth of a second later you'll say okay let's do that again and see what's happening and you're looking at what the obstacles are where the feet are going to be placed how to you know you have to coordinate a lot of things if you have obstacles and you're balancing at the same time and it's that the limited horizon type calculation that's doing a lot of that but if you're doing something like a summer song you're looking out a lot further right if you want to stick the landing you have to get the you have to at the time of launch have you know momentum and rotation all those things coordinated so that a landing is within reach how hard is it to stick the landing I mean it's very much under-exuated like you once you've in the air you don't have as much control about anything so how hard is it to get that to work you first of all did flips with a hopping robot if you look at the first time we ever made a robot do a summer song it was in a planer robot you know it had a boom so it could only it was restricted to the surface of a sphere we call that planer so it could move for an aft it could go up and down and it could rotate and so the calculation of what you need to do to get a to stick a landing isn't all that complicated you have to look at you know you have to get time to make the rotation so how hard you jump how how you jump gives you time you look at how quickly you can rotate and so you know if you get those two right then when you land you have the feet in the right place and you have to get rid of all that rotational and linear momentum but you know that's not too hard to figure out and we made you know back in about 1985 or six I can't remember we had a simple robot doing summer songs to do it in 3D really the calculations the same you just have to be balancing in the other degrees of freedom if you're just doing a summer song it's just a planer thing Roy Marabu is my graduate student and we ran MIT which is when we made you know a two-legged robot do a 3D summer song for the first time there we in order to get enough rotation rate you needed to do tucking also you know withdraw the legs in order to accelerate it and he did some really fascinating work on on how you stabilize more complicated maneuvers remember he was a gymnast a champion gymnast before he'd come to me so he had he had the physical abilities and he was you know an engineer so he could translate some of that into the math and the algorithms that you need to do that he knew how humans do it you just have to get robots to do the same unfortunately though when humans don't really know how they do it yeah right we were coached we we have ways of learning but do we really understand in the physical in a physics way what we're doing probably most gymnasts and athletes don't know so in some way by building robots you are in part understanding how humans do like walking most of us walk without considering how we walk really right and how we make it so natural inefficient all those kinds of atlas still doesn't walk like a person and it still doesn't walk quite as gracefully as a person even though it's been getting closer and closer the running might be close to a human but the walking is still a challenge that's interesting right that running is closer to a human it just shows that the more aggressive and kind of the more you leap into the unknown the more natural it is I mean walking is kind of falling always right and something weird about the knee that you can kind of do this folding and unfolding and get it to work out just a human can get it to work out just right there's compliances compliance main springiness in the design that are important to know what it is well we used to have a motto at boss dynamics in the early days which is the half the run before you can walk that's a good motto because you also had wildcat which was one of the along the way towards spot which is a quadripe I went 19 miles an hour on flat terrain is that the fastest you've ever built oh yeah might be the fastest quadripe in the world I don't know for a quadripe probably of course it was probably the loudest too so we had this little racing go-card engine on it and we would get people from you know three buildings away sending us you know complaining about how loud it was so at the leg lab I believe most the robots didn't have knees what's the how do you figure out what is the right number of actuators what what are the joints to have what do you need to have you know we humans have knees and all kinds of interesting stuff on the feet the toe is an important part I guess for humans or maybe it's not I injured my toe recently and it made running very unpleasant so that seems to be kind of important so how do you figure out for efficiency for function for aesthetics how many joints to have how many actuators to have well it's always a balance between wanting to get where you really want to get and what's practical to do based on your resources or what you know and all that so I mean the whole idea of the of the pogostick was to do a simplification obviously it didn't look like a human I think a technical scientist could appreciate that we were capturing some of the things that are important in human locomotion without it looking like it without having a knee an ankle I'll tell you the first sketch that Ben Brown made when we were talking about building this thing was a very complicated thing with zillions of springs lots of joints it looked like much more like a kangaroo or a or an ostrich or something like that things we were paying a lot of attention to at the time you know so my job was to say okay well let's do something simpler to get started and maybe we'll get there at some point I just love the idea that you you two were studying kangaroos and ostriches oh yeah we we did we filmed and digitized data from horses I did I did a dissection of a ostrich at one point which has absolutely remarkable legs dumb question does she have like must must a lot of musculature on the legs or no most of it's up in the feathers but there's a huge about going on the feathers including a knee joint the knee joints way up there the thing that's halfway down the leg that looks like a backwards knee is actually the ankle the thing on the ground which looks like the foot is actually the toes it's an extended toe but you know the basic morphology is in is the same in in all these animals what do you think is the most beautiful movement of an animal like what animal these things the coolest land animal let's go cuz fish is pretty cool like the fish moves the water but like like it look emotion you know the slow mo is of cheetahs running are are incredible you know there they there's so much back motion and you know grace and of course they're moving very fast the animals running away from the cheetah are pretty exciting you know the pronghorn which you know they they do this all four legs at once jump called the prompt to kind of confuse the especially if there's a group of them to confuse whoever's chasing them so did you like a misdirection type of thing yep they do a misdirection thing the front on views of the cheetahs running fast where the tail is whipping around to help in the turns to help stabilize in the turns that's that's pretty exciting because they spent a lot of time in the air I guess yeah they're running that fast but they also turn very fast is that a tail thing or is it do you have to have contact with ground everything in the body is probably helping turn because chasing something that's trying to get away that's also zigzagging around but I would be remiss if I didn't say you know humans are pretty pretty good to you know watch gymnasts especially these days they're doing just incredible stuff well like especially like Olympic level gymnast see but there could be I think there could be cheetahs their Olympic low we might be watching the average cheetah versus like that could be like a really special cheetah that can do like they're right when do the knees first coming to play in in you building like a robot I in big dog big dog yeah big dog came first and then little dog was later and you know there was a there's a big compromise there human knees have multiple muscles and you could argue that there's I mean it's a technical thing about negative work when you're when you're contracting a joint but you're pushing out that's negative work and if you don't have a place to store that it can be very expensive to do negative work and the most of in a big dog there was no place to store negative work in the knees but big dog also had pogos stick springs down below so part of the action was to comply in a bouncing motion you know later on in spot we we took that out and as we got further and further away from the leg lab we had more you know energy driven controls is there something to be said about like knees that go forward versus backward sure there's this idea called the passive dynamics which says that although although you can use computers and actuators to make a motion a mechanical system can make a motion just by itself if it gets stimulated the right way so tadmigear in the I think in the mid 80s maybe within the late 80s starting to started to work on that and he made this uh legged system that could walk down and then climb plain where the legs folded and unfolded and swung forward you know do the whole walking motion where the only there was no computer there were some adjustments to the mechanics so that there were dampers and springs in some places that helped the the mechanical action happen was essentially a mechanical computer and the idea the interesting idea there is that it's not all about the brain uh telling dictating to the body what the body should do the body is a participant in the motion so a great design for a robot has a mechanical component where the movement is efficient even without a brain yes how do you design that I think that these days most robots aren't doing that most robots are are basically using the computer to to govern the motion now the the brain though is taking into account what the mechanical thing can do uh and how it's going to behave otherwise it would have to really forcefully move everything around all the time which probably some solutions do but I think he end up with a more efficient and more graceful thing if you're taking into account what the what the machine wants to do so this might be a good place to mention that you're now uh leading up the the boss and dynamics AI institute newly formed which is focused more on designing the robots the future I think one of the things maybe you can tell me the big vision for what's going on with one of the things is uh this idea that hardware still matters with with organic design and so on maybe before that can you zoom out and tell me what the vision is for the AI institute you know I like to talk about intelligence having two parts an athletic part and a cognitive part and I think you know Boston dynamics in my view has sort of set the standard for uh what athletic intelligence can be and you know it has to do with all the things we've been talking about the the mechanical design the the real time control the energetics and that kind of stuff but obviously uh people have another kind of intelligence and and animals have another kind of intelligence you know we can make a plan uh our meeting started at nine thirty I looked up on google maps how long it took to walk over here was you know twenty minutes so uh I decided okay I'd leave my house at nine which is what I did um you know simple intelligence but we use that kind of stuff all the time it's sort of what we think of as going on in our heads um and I think that's in short supply for robots most robots are pretty dumb and as a result it takes a lot of skilled people to program them to do everything they do and it takes a long time and if robots are gonna you know satisfy our dreams uh they need to be smarter uh so the in AI institute is designed to combine that physicality of the athletic side with uh the cognitive side so for instance we're trying to make robots that can watch a human do a task uh understand what that's seeing and then do the task itself so sort of OJT for robots on this job training for robots uh as a paradigm uh now you know that's pretty hard uh and it's it's sort of science fiction but our idea is to work on a longer time frame and and work on uh solving those kinds of problems and I have a whole list of things that are kind of like in that in that vein maybe we can just take many of the things you mentioned just take it as a tangent okay first of all athletic intelligence is a super cool term uh and that's that really is intelligence we humans kind of take it for granted that we're so good at walking and moving about the world and using our hands you know the mechanics of interacting with all these two things you know I'm not I'm not looking for it well I've touched ones like this look at all the things I can do right I can juggling I'm this way I can rotate it without looking I could fetch these things out of my pocket and figure out which one was switch and all that kind of stuff yeah and uh I don't think we have much of a clue how all that works yet right and that's I really like putting that under the banner of athletic uh intelligence what are the big open problems in athletic intelligence so Boston Dynamics all with spot with Atlas just have shown time and time again like push the limits of what we think is possible with robots but where do we stand actually if we kind of zoom out what are the big open problems on the athletic intelligence side I mean one question you could ask that isn't my question but you know are they commercially uh viable uh could will they increase productivity yeah and I think you know we're getting very close to that uh I don't think we're quite there still you know most of the robotics companies it's it's uh it's a struggle you know it's really the lack of the cognitive side that probably is the biggest barrier at the moment even for the physical least successful robots but uh you know your question is to go I mean you can always do a thing that's more efficient lighter more reliable I'd say reliability you know I know that spot they've been working very hard on getting the the tail of the reliability curve up and they've made a huge progress so the robots you know there's a 1500 of them out there now many of them being used in practical applications day in and day out where you know where they have to work reliably and you know it's very exciting that they've done that but it takes a huge effort to get that kind of reliability in the robot there's cost too you know you'd like to get the cost down uh sponsor's still pretty expensive uh and I don't think that they have to be but it takes you know a different kind of activity to do that now that uh you know I think you know that uh boss dynamics is owned primarily by a Hyundai now and I think that the skills of Hyundai in making cars can be brought to bear in uh uh making robots that are less expensive and more reliable and those kinds of things so on the cognizide uh for the iInstitute what's what's the tradeoff between moonshot projects for you and maybe incremental progress that's a good question I think we're we're using the paradigm called stepping stones to moon shots I don't I don't believe and that that was in my original proposal for institute stepping stones to moon shots I think if you go more than a year without seeing a tangible status report or where you are which is the stepping stone uh and it could be a simplification right you don't necessarily have to solve all the problems of your target goal even though your target goal is going to take several years uh you know those those stepping stone results give you feedback uh give motivation because usually there's some success in there uh and so you know that's the mantra uh we've been working on and that's pretty much how uh you know I'd say boss dynamics has worked uh you know where you make progress uh and show it as you go show it to yourself if not to the world what a success look like like what what are some of the milestones your uh you chasing well we've we've we've watched understand through the project I mentioned before you know we've broken that down into uh getting some progress with what is meaningfully watching something mean uh breaking down uh an observation of a person doing something into the components you know segment segmenting you know you watch me do something I'm going to pick up this thing and put it down here and stack this on it well it's not obvious if you just look at the raw data uh what the sequence of ax arts it's really a creative intelligent act for you to to break that down into the pieces and understand them in a way so you could say okay what skill do I need to accomplish each of those things uh so we're working on you know the front end of of that kind of problem where we observe and translate the if it may be video it may be live into a description of what we think is going on and then trying map that into skills to accomplish that it might be developing skills as well so you know we have kind of multiple stabs at the pieces of of doing that and this is usually video of humans manipulating objects with their hands kind of think mm-hmm we're starting out with bicycle repair some simple bicycle repair oh that seems complicated that seems really complicated it is but but there's some parts of it that aren't like uh putting the seat in you know into the you know you have a tube that goes inside of another tube and there's a latch you know that's that should be within range is it possible to to observe to watch a video like this without having an explicit model of what a bicycle looks like i think it is and i think that's the kind of thing that people don't recognize let me translate it to navigation you know uh i think the basic paradigm for navigating a space is to get some kind of sensor that tells you where's an obstacle is and what's open build a map and then go through the space but if i if we were doing on the job training where i was giving you a task i wouldn't have to say anything about the room right we came in here all we did is adjust the chair but we didn't say anything about the room and you know we could navigate it so i think there's opportunities to build that kind of navigation skill into robots and we're you know we're hoping to be able to do that so operate successfully under a lot of uncertainty like yeah and and lack of specification lack of specification i mean that's what sort of intelligence is right kind of dealing with a such understanding a situation even though it wasn't explained so how big of a role does machine learning uh plane all of this is this more and more learning based you know since chat gbt which is a year ago basically uh there's a huge interest in that and a huge optimism about it and i think that there's a lot of things that machine learning that kind of machine learning now christmas there's lots of different kinds of machine learning i think there's a you know a lot of interest in optimism about it i think uh you know the facts on the ground are that doing physical things with physical robots is a little bit different than language and the tokens you know the tokens sort of don't exist you know pixel pixel values aren't like words um but i think that there's a lot that can be done there we have uh uh we have several people working on machine learning approaches i don't know if you know but we we opened an office in zirka recently and uh marco hutter who's one of the real leaders in uh reinforcement learning for robots uh is the the director of that office he's still half time at uh eth uh the university there where he has a unbelievably fantastic lab and then he's half time uh leading uh we'll be leading off efforts in the zirka office so we have a healthy uh learning component but there's part of me that still says if you look out in the world at what the most impressive performances are there's still pretty much uh i hate to use the word traditional but that's what everybody's calling it traditional controls like model predictive control uh you know the thing the the atlas performances that you've seen are mostly model predictive control they've started to do some learning stuff that's really incredible yeah i don't know if it's all been shown yet but you'll see it over over time um and then marco has done some great stuff and and others so especially for the athletic intelligent piece the traditional approach seems to be the one that still performs the best i think we're going to find a uh mating in the tube and we'll have the best both worlds and we're working on that at the institute too if i can talk to you about teams you've built an incredible team of boss dynamics before it on my tnc view and boss dynamics and out the a i institute and you said that there's four components to a great team uh technical fearlessness diligence and trepidness and fun technical fun can you explain each technical fearlessness what do you mean by that sure uh technical fearlessness means being willing to take on a problem that you don't know how to solve uh and you know uh study it uh figure out an act an entry point you know maybe a simplified version or a simplified solution or something learned from the stepping stone and uh and go back and uh eventually make a solution that meets your goals and i think that's really important the fearlessness comes into play because some of it has never been done before yeah and you don't know how to do it and you know just the easier stuff to do in life uh so you know i mean i don't know watch understand do it's a it's a mountain of uh of a challenge so that's the really big challenge you're you're tackling now can we watch humans at scale and have robots by watching humans become effective actors in the world yeah i mean we have others like that i we have one called inspect diagnosed fix like uh you know you uh call up the maytag uh repairman or okay he's the one who you don't have to call but you you know you call up the the dishwasher repair person and they come to your house and they look at your machine it's already been actually figured out that something doesn't work but they have to kind of examine it and figure out what what's wrong and then fix it and uh i think robots should be able to do that uh we already a Boston dynamics already has spot robots collecting data on machines things like thermal data reading the gauges listening to them getting sounds and that data are used to determine whether they're healthy or not but the interpretation isn't done by the robots yet and the uh certainly the the fixing the diagnosing and the fixing isn't done yet but i think it could be and yeah that's bringing the AI and combining it with the physical skills to do it yeah and you're referring to the fixing in the physical world i can't wait until you can fix the psychological problems of humans and show up and talk do therapy yeah that's that's a different thing yes different well but let's all part of the same thing again humanity maybe maybe you mean convincing you it's okay that the dishwasher is broken just do all the other the marketing approach yeah exactly it's all yeah don't don't sweat the small stuff yeah it's supposed to fix the dishwasher it'll convince you that it's okay that the dishwasher is broken it's a different approach uh diligence why is diligence important well if you want a real robot solution it can't be a very narrow solution that's going to break at the first variation in what the robot does or the environment if it wasn't exactly as you expected it so how do you get there i think uh having an approach that leaves you unsatisfied until you've embraced the bigger problem is the is the diligence i'm talking about and uh again i'll point it across dynamics i think they've done it you know some of the videos that we had showing the engineer making it hard for the robot to do its task uh spot opening a door and then the guy gets there and pushes on the door so it doesn't open the way it's supposed to pulling on the on the rope that's attached to the robot so it's navigation has been screwed up uh we have one where the robot's climbing stairs and uh engineer is tugging on a rope that's pulling it back down the stairs you know that's totally different than just the robot seeing the stairs making a model putting its feet carefully on each step but that's what probably robotics needs to succeed and having that broader that broader idea that you want to come up with a robust solution is what i meant by diligence so really testing in all conditions preserving the system in all kinds of ways right and as a result creating some epic videos the the legendary fun part the hockey stick and then yes tugging on spot is just trying to open the door i mean it's it's great testing but it's also i don't know it's just somehow extremely compelling demonstration of robotics in video form i learned something very early on with the first three dimensional hopping machine if you just show a video of it hopping it's a so what if you show it falling over a couple of times and you can see how easily and fast it falls over then you appreciate what the robot's doing when it's when it's doing its thing so i think you know you're the reaction you just gave to the door the robot getting kind of uh interfered with or tested while it's going through the door it's showing you the scope of the solution the the limits of the system the the challenges involved and failure if the show them both failure and success makes you appreciate the success yeah and then just the way the videos are done in both dynamics are incredible because they're not there's no flash there's no extra like production is just raw testing of the robot well you know i was the final edit for most of the videos up until uh until about three years ago or four years ago and uh you know my theory of the video is no no explanation if they can't see it then it's not the right thing and if you do something worth showing then let them see it don't interfere with uh you know a bunch of titles that slow you down or a bunch of distraction just you know do something worth showing and then show it that's brilliant it's it's hard it's hard though for for people to buy into that yeah i mean people always want to add more stuff but the simplicity of just do something worth showing and show it that's brilliant and don't add extra stuff that people people have criticized uh especially the the big dog videos where there's a human driving the robot and and i understand the criticism now at the time we wanted to just show look this thing's using its legs to get up the hill so we focused on showing that which was we thought the the story the fact that there's a human so they were thinking about autonomy whereas we were thinking about the mobility yeah and so you know we've we've adjusted to a lot of things that we see that people care about uh trying to be honest we've always tried to be honest but also just show cool stuff in this raw form the limits of the system the see the system be perturbed and be robust in resilient and all that kind of stuff and uh and dancing with some music uh intrepidness and fun so intrepid i mean it might be the most important ingredient and that is you know robotics is hard it's not going to work right right away so don't be discouraged this all all it really means so usually when i talk about these things i show videos and i show a long string of outtakes you know and you know you have to have courage to be to be intrepid when you know you work so hard you built your machine you know and then you're trying and it just doesn't do what you thought it would do what you want it to do and uh you know you have to stick to it and keep trying how long i mean we don't often see that the story behind spot and atlas how long how many failures was there a long way to get it you know a working out list of working spot in the early days even working big dog there's a video of atlas climbing three big steps and it's very dynamic and it's you know it's really exciting real accomplishment it took uh 109 tries and we have video of every one of them you know we shoot everything again we this is at boss dynamics um uh so it took 109 tries but once it did it it had a high percentage of success so it's not like we're cheating by just showing the best one but we do show the evolved you know performance not everything along the way but everything along the way is informative and you know it shows sort of uh there's you know stupid things that go wrong like like the robot just when you say go and it collapses right there on the start that doesn't have to do with the steps uh or the perception didn't work right so you missed the target when you jump or something breaks and there's oil flying everywhere uh but that's fun yeah so the hardware failures and then maybe some software lots of control of evolution during that time I think it took six weeks to get that there's uh 109 trials you know because there was there was a programming going on you know it was it was actually robot learning but there were human in the loop helping with the learning so all data driven but uh okay and so and you always are learning from that failure so right and how do you how do you protect Atlas from not getting damaged from 109 uh attempts it was it's remarkable one of the accomplishments of Atlas is that the engineers have made a machine that's robust enough that it can take that kind of testing where it's falling and stuff and it doesn't break every time it still breaks and we had you know part of the the paradigm is to have people to repair stuff you got to figure that in if you're going to do this kind of work um you know I sometimes criticize the people who have their gold plated thing and they keep it on the shelf and everybody and they're afraid to kind of use it I don't think you can make progress if you're work in that way you know you need to be ready to have it break and and go in there and fix it's part of the thing you know plan your budget so you have spare parts and a crew and all that stuff yeah if it falls 109 times it's okay well um so intrapid truly and that applies to spot that applies to all the other ones everything I think it applies to everything anybody tries to do that's worth doing in a special systems in the real world right uh and so fun fun technical fun I usually have technical fun I think that that life as an engineer is really satisfying I think you get to uh you know to some degree it can be like crafts work where you get to do things with your own hands or your own design or whatever your you know your media is and it's very satisfying to be able to just do the work unlike you know a lot of people who have to do something that they don't like doing I think engineers typically get to do something that they that they like and there's a lot of satisfaction from that then there's um you know in many cases you can have impact on the world somehow because you've done something that other people admire which is different from the own just the craft fun of building a thing uh so that's the second way that uh that being engineers good I think the third thing is that if you're lucky to be working in a team where you're getting the benefit of other people skills that are helping you do your thing uh you know none of us has all the skills needed to do um most of these projects and uh if you have a team where you're working well with the others that can be very satisfying and then if you're an engineer you also usually get paid and see you get paid four times yeah uh in my view of the world yeah so what could be better than that get paid to have fun uh I mean what do you love about engineering what when you say engineering what does that what does that mean to you exactly what is this kind of big thing that we call engineering I think it's both being a scientist or getting to use science at the same time as being kind of an artist or creator because you're making some you know scientists only get to describe to study what's out there and engineers get to make stuff that didn't exist before and so it's really I think a higher calling even though I think most you know the public out there think sciences top and engineering is somehow secondary but I think it's the other way around and at the cutting edge I think when you when you talk about robotics there is possibility to do art in that you do like the first of its kind thing so then there's the met production at scale which is it's so a beautiful thing but when you do the first new robot or the first new thing that's the possibility to create something totally new that's the art. Bringing metal to life or a machine to life is kind of is fun and you know it was fun doing the the dancing videos where uh got a huge you know public response and we're gonna do more we're gonna do something we're doing some at the institute and we'll we'll do more with that metal to life moment I mean to me that's still magical like uh when uh inanimate objects comes to life that's still like to me it's because this day is still an incredible moment the human intelligence can create systems that instill life or whatever that is into inanimate objects it's really it's truly magical especially when it's at the scale of the humans can perceive and appreciate like directly but I think sort of with it going going back to the pieces of that you know you design a linkage that turns out to be half the weight and just as strong that's that's very satisfying and you know the people who do that and it's it's a creative creative act uh what what do you use uh most beautiful robot robotics sorry for the big romantic question I think having the robots move in a way that's uh uh if occupant of life is is pretty exciting so the elegance of movement yeah or or if it's a high performance act where it's doing it you know faster bigger than uh then other robots usually we're not doing it bigger faster than people but we know we're getting there in a few narrow dimensions so faster bigger smoother more elegant more graceful I mean I'd like to do dancing that that starts you know we're nowhere near the the dancing capabilities of a human we we've been having a ballerina and who's uh kind of a well-known ballerina and she's been programming the robot we've been working on the tools that can make it so that she can use her way of talking you know way of doing a choreography or something like that more accessible uh to uh to get the robot through things and starting to produce some interesting stuff well we should mention that there is a choreography tool there is I mean I I guess I saw versions of it uh which is pretty cool you can kind of at its slices of time control different parts at the high level the movement of the robot we hope to take that forward and make it you know more tuned to how the dance world wants to talk once the communicate and and get better performances I mean that that a lot but there's still a lot possible and I'd like to have performances where the robots are dancing with people so right now almost everything that we've done on dancing uh is to a fixed time base so once you press go the robot does its thing and plays that's thing it's not listening it's not watching but I think it should do those things I think I would love to see a professional ballerina like a lone in a room with a robot slowly teaching the robot just actually the the process of a clueless robot trying to figure out a small little piece of a dance so it's not like uh because right now Atlas and spot have done like perfect dancing right uh to a beat and so on one so you know uh to degree but like the learning process love interacting with the human would be like incredible to watch one of the cool things going on you know that there's a class at Brown University called choreo robotics Sydney Skybatter is a dancer choreographer and he he teamed up with Stephanie Telax who's a computer science professor and they taught this class and I think they have some graduate students help and teach it where they have two spots and people come in most I think it's 50-50 of computer science people and dance people and uh they do they program performances that are that are very interesting I show some of them sometimes when I give a talk and making that process of a human teaching the robot more efficient more intuitive maybe partial language part movement that'd be fascinating that'd be really fascinating because I mean one of the things I've kind of realized is um humans communicate with movement a lot it's not just language there's a lot there's body language there's so many intricate little things and totally and like that you know to watch a human and spot communicate back and forth with movement it's uh I mean there's so many wonderful possibilities there but it's also a challenge you know we we get asked to have our robot performance performed with uh with famous dancers and they can you know they have 200 degrees of freedom or something right every little ripple and thing and they have all this head neck and shoulders and stuff and the robots mostly don't have all that stuff and it's uh it's uh it's a daunting challenge to not look stupid you know physically stupid next to them yeah so we've we pretty much avoided that kind of performance but we'll we'll get to it I think even with a limited degrees of freedom we could still have some sass and flavor and so on you can figure out your own thing even if you can't and we can reverse things like if you watch a human do a robot animation which is a dance style where you know you jerk around sort of and you pop and pop and lock and all that stuff I think the robots could show up the day the humans by you know doing unstable oscillations and things that are faster than that person could so that's sort of on my you know my plan but we haven't got quite gotten there you you mentioned about building teams and robotics teams and so on how do you how do you find great engineers how do you hire great engineers I think you even need to have an environment where interesting engineer that well you know it's a chicken neck if you have an environment where interesting engineering is going on then engineers want to work and you know I think it took a long time to develop that at Boston Dynamics in fact when we started although you know I had the experience of building things in the in the in the leg lab both at CMU and at MIT we weren't that sophisticated of an engineering then compared to what Boston Dynamics is now but it was our ambition to do that and you know sarcos was another robot company so I always thought of us as being this much on the computing side and this much on the hardware side and they were like this and then over the years we you know I think we achieved the same or better levels of engineering meanwhile you know sarcos got acquired and then they went through all kinds of changes and I don't know exactly what their current status is but so it took it took many years is part of the answer I think you get you got to find people who love it in the early days we would we paid a little less so we only got people who were doing it because because they really loved it we also hired people who might not have professional degrees you know people who were building bicycles and building kayaks we have some people who come from that kind of the maker world and that's really important for the kind of work we do to have that be part of the mix whatever that is the whatever the magic degree and the mix a great builder maker that that's the big part of people who took who repaired the car the cars or built or motorcycles or whatever in their garages when they were kids there's a kind of like the robotics students grad students and just roboticists that I know and hang out with there's a kind of endless energy and like they're just they're just happy like say I compare it another group of people that are like that are people that skydive professionally there's just like an excitement in general energy that I think probably has to do with the fact that they're just constantly first of all fail a lot and then the joy of building a thing that you eventually works I'm talking about being happy there used to be a time when when I was doing the machine shop work myself back in those JPL and Caltech days when if I came home smelling like the machine shop you know because it's an oily place my wife would say oh you you had a good day today you had a good good tell that's where I've been you've done you've been you've actually built something you've done something in the physical world yeah and probably the videos help right the videos help show off what robotics is oh you know at Boston Dynamics it put us on the map we I remember interviewing some sales guy and he was from a company and he said well no one's ever heard of my company but we have products you know really good products you guys everybody knows who you are but you don't have any products at all which was true so it was and you know we thank YouTube for that YouTube came we caught the YouTube wave and it had a huge impact on on our company I mean this that's it's it's a big impact on not just in your company but on robotics in general and helping people understand and inspire what is possible yeah with robots yeah inspire imagination fear and everything all the full spectrum of human emotion was it was a rouse which is yeah which is great which is great for the entirety of humanity and and also it's probably inspiring for young people that want to get into AI robotics yeah let me ask you about some competitors sure you've been a complimentary of Elon and Tesla's work on Optimus robot with this their humanoid robot what do you think of their efforts there with the humanoid robot you know I really admire Elon as a technologist I think that when he did with Tesla it was just totally mind-boggling that he could go from this totally niche area that you know less than 1% of anybody seemed to be interested to making it so that essentially every car company in the world is trying to do what what he's done so you got to give it to then look at SpaceX you know he's basically replaced NASA if you could that might be a little exaggeration but not by much so you know you got to admire the guy and you know I wouldn't count them out for for anything you know I don't think Optimus today is is where Atlas is for instance I don't know it's a little hard to compare him to the other companies you know I I've visited figure I think they're doing well and they have a good team I've visited electronic and I think they're they have a good team and they're doing well but Elon has a lot of resources he has a lot of ambition I'd like to take some credit for his ambition I think I think if I read between the lines it's hard not to think that him seeing what Atlas is doing is a little bit of an inspiration I I hope so do you think Atlas and Optimus will will hang out at some point I would love to host that you know now that I'm not at Boston dynamics you know I'm not officially connected I am on the board but I'm not officially connected I would love to host a robot meetups I wrote that meetup yeah does the AI Institute work with spots and Atlas is a focus on spots mostly right now we have a bunch of different robots we bought everything we could buy so we have spots I think we have a good size fleet in them I don't know how many it is but a good size fleet we have a couple of animal robots you know animals a company founded by Marco Harder even though he's not that involved anymore but we have a couple of those we have a bunch of arms like you know Frank is and US robotics because you know even though we have ambitions to build stuff and we are built starting to build stuff you know they won getting off the ground we just you know just bought stuff I love this like robot playground you've built yeah you can come over and take a look at you that's great so it's like all these kinds of robots legged arms it doesn't feel that much like well there's some areas that feel like a playground but it's not like they're all frolic to get there hey again maybe you'll arrange it a robot meetup but in general what's your view on competition in the space for especially like humanoid and like the robots are you are you excited by the competition or the friendly competition I think that it doesn't you know I don't think I don't think about competition that much you know I'm not a commercial guy I think for many years at Boston you know the many years I was at Boston Dynamics we didn't we didn't think about competition we were just kind of doing our thing there wasn't it wasn't like there were products out there that we were competing and no you know maybe there was some competition for DARPA funding which we got you know got a lot of got very good at getting but even there in a couple of cases where we might have competed we ended up just being the robot provider that is for the little dog program you know we we just made the robots we didn't participate as developers except for developing the robot and in the DARPA Robotics Challenge we didn't compete we provided the robots so you know in the AI world now now that we're working on cognitive stuff it feels much more like a competition you know the the entry requirements in terms of computing hardware and the skills of the team are and and and hiring talent it's it's a much tougher place so I think much more about competition now on the cognitive side on the physical side it doesn't feel like it's that much about competition yet obviously with 10 humanoid companies out there 10 or 12 I mean there's probably others that I don't know about um they're definitely in competition will be in competition how much room is there for quadruped and especially a humanoid robot to become cheaper so like cutting costs and like how low can you go and how much of it is just mass production so questions of you know Hyundai like how to produce versus like engineering innovation how to simplify um I think there's a huge way to go I don't think we've seen the bottom up it or the bottom in terms of lower prices you know I think you should be totally optimistic that at asymptote things don't have to be anything like as expensive as they are now back to competition I wanted to say one thing I think in the quadruped space having other people selling quadrupeds is a great thing for Boston dynamics because the question I believe the question and the user's minds is which quadruped do I want it's not oh can a quadruped do I want a quadruped can a quadruped do my job it's much more like that which is a great place for it to be yeah then then you're just you know doing doing the things you normally do to make your product better and compete selling and all that stuff and that'll be the way it is with humanoid at some point well there's a lot of humanoid and you're just not even it's like uh uh iPhone versus Android and people just buying both and it's kind of just yeah uh you're not really you're creating the category yeah or the category is happening I mean right now the use cases you know that that's the the key thing having realistic use cases that are money making uh in robotics is is a big challenge you know this the warehouse use case that's probably the only thing that makes anybody any money in robotics at this point there's got to be a moment there's old-fashioned everybody I mean there's the fixed arms doing manufacturing I don't want to say that they're not making money is industrial robotics yes but I there's got to be a moment when social robotics starts making real money meaning like a spot type robot in the home and there's tens of millions of them in the home and they're like no I don't mean dogs are in the United States as pets but this feels many it feels like there's something we love about having a intelligent companion with us that remembers us that's excited to see us all that kind of stuff but it's also true that the company's making those things there've been a lot of failures in recent times right there's that one year when I think three of them went under so it's not that easy to do that right getting you know getting uh performance safety and cost all to be where they need to be at the same time is uh that's that's hard but also some of it is like you said you can have a product people might not be aware of it so like also part of it is the videos are however you connect with the public the the culture and like create the category they make people realize this is the thing you want because from a you know there's a lot of negative perceptions you can have do you really want a system with the camera in your home walking around right uh if if it's presented correctly and if there's like the right kind of boundaries around it they understand how it works and so on that uh a lot of people would want to and if they don't they might be suspicious of it so that that's important like we while you smart phones and that as a camera that's looking at us you know yeah it has two or three or four and it's listening isn't a very few people are uh you know suspicious about it they kind of take it for granted and so on I think robots would be the same kind of way I agree so as you work on the cognitive aspect of of these robots do you think we'll ever get to a human level or superhuman level intelligence there's been a lot of conversations about this and recently given the rapid development in large language models um I think that intelligence is a lot of different things and I think some things computers are already smarter than people and some things they're not even close and you know I think you need a menu of of detailed categories to come up with uh with that but I also think that the you know the the the conversation that seems to be happening about AGI is puzzles me it's sort of I so I ask you a question do you think there's anybody smarter than you in the world absolutely yes does do you find that threatening no so I don't understand even if computers were smarter than people why we should assume that that's a threat especially since they could easily be smarter but still available to us or under our control which is basically how computers generally are I think the the fears that they would be 10x 100x smarter and uh operating under different morals and ethical codes than humans like naturally do and so almost become misaligned in uh unintended ways and therefore harm humans in ways which just can't predict and even if we program them to do a thing as on the way of doing that thing they would cause a lot of harm and when there are a hundred times a thousand times 10,000 times smarter than us we won't be able to stop it or won't be able to even see the harm as it's happening until it's too late that kind of stuff so you can construct all kinds of like possible trajectories of how the world ends because of super entire systems it's a little bit like that line in the Oppenheimer movie uh where they contemplate whether the first time they set off a reaction all matter on earth is gonna uh you know go go up I don't remember what the the verb they used was for uh for the chain reaction right? Yeah I guess it's possible but uh I don't I don't think I personally don't think it's worth worrying about that I think that the you know it's an opportunity balancing opportunities in risk I think if you take any technology uh there's opportunity in risk and you know it's easy to put I'll point at the car uh they pollute and they um about what um 1.25 million people get killed every year around the world because of them despite that I think they're a boon to humankind very useful we all love many of us love them uh and those technical problems can be solved they I think they are becoming safer I think they're becoming less polluting at least some of them are um and every technology you can name has a story like that in my opinion what's the story behind the Hawaiian shirt is it a fashion statement philosophical statement is it just a statement of rebellion uh engineering statement it was born of me being a contrarian yes someone someone told me once that uh I was wearing one when I only had one or two and uh they said oh those things are so old fashioned you can't wear that mark and I stopped wearing them for about a week yeah and then I said I'm not gonna let them tell me what to do and so every day since pretty much so it's like a six years ago that was 20 years ago 15 years ago probably uh that says something while you're personality it's great as you're not took me a while to realize I was a contrarian but you know it can be a useful tool mm-hmm have you had people tell you about on the robotic side that like I don't think you could do this the kind of negative motivation uh I'd rather talk about this a guy uh what we were doing a lot of DARPA work there was a marine uh ed tovar who's still around who uh his his what he would always say is when someone would say oh you can't do that he'd say why not yeah and it's a great question I asked all the time when I'm thinking oh that's gonna we're not gonna do that and I think why not and uh I give him credit for opening my eyes to to uh to resisting that so uh yeah yeah the Hawaiian shirt is almost like a simple why not okay um what advice would you give to young folks that are trying to figure out what they want to do with their life how to have a life they can be proud of how they can have a career they can be proud of when I was uh teaching at MIT I that for a while I had undergraduate advisees where you know people would have to meet with me uh once a semester or something mm-hmm and they frequently would ask you you know uh what they should do and uh I think the advice I used to give with something like uh well if you had no constraints on you uh no resource constraints no opportunity constraints and no skill constraints what would you could you imagine doing and I said well start there mm-hmm and see how close you can get you know what's realistic yeah for how close you can get you know the other version of that is you know try and figure out what you want to do and and do that because I don't I don't think a lot of people think that they're in a channel right and there's only limited opportunities but yeah it's usually wider than they think yeah the opportunities really are limitless but like at the same time you want to pick a thing right and it's the the diligence yeah and really really pursue it right really pursue it yeah um it could because sometimes like the really special stuff happens after years of pursuit yeah oh absolutely it can take it can take a while I mean you've been doing this for 40 plus years people some people think I'm in a rut right why don't I do and in fact the some of the inspiration for the AI Institute is to say okay I've been working at local motion for however many years it was let's do something else and it's it's a really fascinating and interesting challenge and and you uh you're hoping to show it off also in the same way as just about to start showing some stuff off yeah I hope we have YouTube channel I mean one of the challenges is it's one thing to show athletic skills on YouTube showing cognitive function is a lot harder and I haven't quite figured out yet how that's gonna work uh there might be a way there's a way there's a way why not I also do think sucking at a task is also compelling like the incremental improvement a robot being like really terrible at a task and then slowly becoming better even in athletic intelligence honestly like learning to walk and falling and slowly figuring that out I think there's something extremely compelling about that you're right we like flaws especially with the cognitive task it's okay to be clumsy it's okay to be confused and a little silly and all that kind of stuff it feels like in that space is where we can there's charm there's charm the charm the charm the charm and there's something inspiring about a robot sucking and then becoming less terrible slowly at a task I think you're right that kind of reveals something about about ourselves and ultimately that's what's one of the coolest things about robots is it's kind of a mirror about what makes humans special just by watching a heart is just to make a robot do the things that humans do you realize how special we are what do you think is the meaning of this whole thing why are we here mark you have to ask about the big questions as you try to create these humanoid human-like intelligence systems I don't know I think you have to have fun while you're here that's about all I know it would be a waste it would be a waste not to right the ride is pretty short so might as well have fun mark I'm a huge fan of yours it's a huge honor that you would talk with me this is really amazing and your work for many decades has been amazing I can't wait to see what you do at the AI institute I'm going to be waiting impatiently for the videos and the demos and the next robot meetup for maybe Atlas and Optimus to hang out I would love to do that that would be fun thank you so much for talking thank you it was fun talking to you thanks for listening to this conversation with Mark Riber to support this podcast please check out our sponsors in the description and now let me leave you with some words some Arthur C. Clark whether we're based on carbon or silicon makes no fundamental difference we should each be treated with appropriate respect thank you for listening and hope to see you next time
