 The following is a conversation with Douglas Murray, author of the Badness of Crowds, Gender, Race, and Identity, and his most recent book, The War on the West, How to Proveil in the Age of Unreason. He's a brilliant, fearless, and often controversial thinker who points out and pushes back against what he sees as the madness of our modern world. I should note that the use of the word Marxism and The West in this conversation refers primarily to cultural Marxism and the cultural values of Western civilization, respectively. This is, in contrast, to my previous conversation with Richard Wolfe, where we focused on Marxism as primarily a critique of capitalism, and thus looking at it through the lens of economics and not culture. Nevertheless, these two episodes stand opposite of each other with very different perspectives on how we build a flourishing civilization together. I leave it to you, the listener, to think and to decide which is the better way. And now a quick few second mention of each sponsor. Check them out in the description. It's the best way to support this podcast. We got Brave for browsing, BetterHelp for mental health, Bi-optimizers for magnesium, supplementation, notion for startups, and expressive pn for privacy. Choose wisely, my friends. And now onto the full ad reads. As always, no ads in the middle. I try to make this interesting, but if you skip them, please still check out our sponsors. I enjoy their stuff. Maybe you will too. This show is brought to you by Brave, a fast, privacy-preserving browser that feels like Google Chrome, but without ads, with various kinds of tracking that ads can do. I love using it more than any other browser, including Chrome, Chrome being my second favorite browser. I fell in love with Chrome first, and then I met Brave. It's like that meme, ear with your girlfriend, but you're checking out the new girl. But in this case, it wasn't just that the grass is green on the other side. It turned out when I went to the other side, the grass was still greener. So it's from one love to a bigger love. Overall, as a fan of technological innovation and given all the history of browser wars, it's just exciting and inspiring to see that a new browser comes along that really pushes all the other players to do better. I should also mention they have the Brave Search Engine, which is great. Get it at brave.com slash lux, and it might become your favorite browser too. This episode is also brought to you by BetterHelp. Spelled H-E-L-P-H-H-H-E-L-P. I almost struggle. Spelling help. I need help. Spelling help. They figure out what you need to match you with a licensed professional therapist in under 48 hours because friends, it's not your fault. It's not your fault. It's not your fault. Well, if that doesn't at all ring a bell for you, that's from Goodwill Hunting, one of my favorite movies, one of my favorite sort of therapist-patient relationship that's not really an actual healthy therapist-patient relationship, but more like a father-son relationship. And also just a human relationship. That's what great therapy is all about. To a degree. But actually, just the first step of doing therapy, I think, for a lot of people is really helpful, or at least something worth trying. That's why I should try BetterHelp because it's easy, private, affordable, and available, worldwide. Check them out at BetterHelp.com slash likes and save when you first month. The next sponsor is by Optimizers. They have a new magnesium supplement. When I fast, I'm doing keto or carnivore, sodium potassium and magnesium are essential. And magnesium is the tricky one. She listened to Andrew Huberman of the Huberman Lab podcast. Also a good friend of mine just texted me, actually, I need to respond to him. And I should probably pause this ad read and respond to him. But instead, I'm going to finish the ad read. And the ad read goes that there's a magnesium breakthrough from bi optimizers that you should check out. They solve this problem with magnesium because most supplements, this is the part of the ad read will talk trash about the others. They only do one or two forms of magnesium like glycinate and citrate, or perhaps as pronounced citrate. The point is the chemistry is still the same. In reality, there are at least seven that your body needs and benefits from. And you can get all of this with bi optimizers that magnesium breakthrough and plus a special discount all at magbreakthrough.com slash likes. This show is also brought to you by Notion, a note taking and team collaboration tool and combines note taking document sharing, wiki's project management and much more into one space that's simple, powerful and beautifully designed. People love Notion. Anyone I ask on the internet, on Reddit, Google around looking for reviews and stuff. When I ask friends and you're talking about note taking apps, like what is the cutting edge? It's certainly not the thing I've used for most of my life, which is Emax. Now, if you're legit, you will still use Emax or VIM for some things, but surely not for collaboration or for rigorous organized note taking. For that, you need something like Notion, which is what everybody loves, but they also want you to know that if you're in a startup, you can use Notion for that as well. It's kind of like a, what they're calling a full operating system for running your startup. You can get a thousand bucks off the team plan, which is almost one year free for team of ten. If you go to Notion.com slash startups. This show is brought to you by ExpressVPN. I use them to protect my privacy on the internet. You should know friends that the ISPs, the internet service providers can still track you even if you use basic protection like incognito mode on Chrome. They can still get your data and see all the shady websites you've been going to, which I know you've been going to because I've been watching you. Like the song from the police, which I wonder if that's a love song or a stalker song? Every breath you take, every move you make. Probably a stalker song. Well, you can think of your ISPs as a kind of stalker. There you go. You can also change your location and watch your favorite shows. My favorite aspect is that it's just a VPN that works really well. When you connect, it's really fast, which was what matters. It works on almost any device that I'm aware of an operating system, including Linux, my favorite operating system. Anyway, you can sign up, download, install it. If you go to ExpressVPN.com slash flex pod for an extra three months free. This is the Lexington podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description. Now, dear friends, here's Douglas Murray. He recently wrote the book titled The War on the West, which in part says that the values ideas and history of Western civilization are under attack. So let's start with the basics. Historically, and today, what are the ideas that represent Western civilization? The good, the bad, the ugly. I actually don't get stuck on definitions, precisely because, as you know, once you get stuck on definitions as a possibility, you'll never get off. Yes. I'd say a few things. Firstly, obviously, the Western tradition is a specific tradition, a specific tradition of ideas, culture. Well known to be perhaps easily defined by the combination of Athens and Jerusalem, the world of the Bible, and the world of ancient Greece and indeed Rome. Effectively creates, creates European civilization, which itself spawns the rest of the Western civilization, America, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and others. But these are the main countries that we still refer to as the West. So there's a specific tradition and all the things that come from it. My shorthand cheat on this answer is to say, you know when you're not in it. So if you've ever been to Beijing, Shanghai, you know you're not in the West, somewhere else. When you're in Tokyo, somewhere extraordinary, but you know you're not in the West. Obviously there are, let's say borderline questions like Russia in the West, which I sort of leave open as a question, possibly. If you were placed into Moscow blindfolded and you woke up and you couldn't hear the language or maybe you didn't know what the language sounded like, would you guess you were in the West or not? I think I was somewhere near it. I think the Gingloser. I mean, you know, it's also asked the question, doesn't it, whether it's European? And I think the answer to that is not really, although massively influenced by Europe, but and times wanting to reach towards it at times, wanting to stay away. But apart of the West, possibly yes. But anyway, it's a very specific tradition. It's one of a number of major traditions in the world. And because it's hard to define doesn't mean it doesn't exist. Are there certain characteristics and qualities about the values and the ideas that define it as the type of rule, the type of governmental structure? Yes. I mean, the rule of law, properly owning democracies and much more. I mean, these are, of course, things that were ended up being developed in America and then give them back too much of the rest of the West. I'd say there are other, perhaps more controversial attributes I would give to the West. One is a ravenous interest in the rest of the world, which is not shared, of course, by every other culture. The late philosopher, George Steiner, who said he could never get out of his head, the haunting fact that the boat only seems to go out from Europe. They did explore as the scholars, the linguists, the people who wanted to discover other civilizations. And indeed, even President ancient civilizations and lost civilizations, these were scholars that were always coming from the West to discover this elsewhere by contrast to you. You know, there were never boats coming from Egypt to help the Anglo-Saxons discover the origins of their language and so on. So I think there is a sort of ravenous interest in the rest of the world, which can be said to be a Western. Attributal load, of course, also has, immediately, preface it, some downsides and many criticisms that can be made of some of the consequences of that interest. Because, of course, it's not entirely lacking in self-interest. So it's not just the scholars, it's also the armies. The armies, and they're looking to gain access and control over resources elsewhere. And they're markets. And hence the imperial imperative to conquer, to expand. Although that itself, of course, is a universal thing. I mean, no civilization, I think that we know of doesn't try to gain ground from its neighbors where it can. The Western ability to go further faster certainly gave an advantage in that regard. To do some civilizations get a bit more excited by that kind of idea than others? Impossible. It's possible. Because you could say it's the Western civilization because the technological innovation was more efficient doing that kind of thing. Absolutely. But maybe you wanted it more too. Well, the Ottomans wanted it as an awful lot and did very terribly well for many centuries and shouldn't forget that, as did others. I'd also say, by the way, that again, it's a very broad one, but it's worth throwing out there. I think self-criticism is an important attribute to the Western mind. One that, as you know, is not common everywhere. Not all societies allow even their most vociferous critics to become rich. So, you know, criticism is a negative sounding word. It could be self-interrespection, self-analysis, self-reflection. And it can be what you need. And in the Western system, I'd argue that one of the advantages of the system of representative governance is that where there are problems in the system, you can attempt to sort them out by peaceable means. We listen to arguments, I mean, most famously in America in the late 20th century. Civil rights movement achieved its aims by force of moral argument and just way to the rest of the country that it had been wrong. That's not common in every society, by any means. So I think there are certain attributes of the Western mind that you could say are entirely unique, but they are not as commonplace elsewhere. What about the emergence and hierarchies of a symmetry of power most visible, most drastic in the form of slavery, for example? Well, I mean, everyone in the world is slavery. I don't know, regardless of being a Western, a unique Western sin. It's rather hard to think of a civilization in history that didn't have slavery of some kind. One of the oddities of the Western ignorance of our day is that people seem to imagine that our societies in the West were the only ones who ever engaged in any vices, elases isn't true. It's a sort of rissoian mistake, or at least one that's blossomed since the risso, that everybody else in the world was born into sort of a denig innocence. And only we in the West had this sort of evil in us that caused us to do bad things to other people. Slavery was engaging by everyone in the ancient world, of course, and through most of the modern world as well, of course, there were 40 million slaves in the world today. So it's clearly not something that the species as a whole has a problem with. That's more slaves, of course, than there were in the 19th century. I'd say on top of that that the interesting thing about the Western mind, as regards to slavery, is that we were the civilization that did away with it. And by the way, the founding fathers of America who today are lambasted routinely for being acquiescent in the slave trade, engaging in it, owning slaves. There's not people almost don't even bother now to recognize the facts that Thomas Jeff's and George Washington all wanted to see this trade done away with. Couldn't hold the country together at the origins if they'd have made such an effort, and believed and hoped that it would be something they'll be dealt with after their time. So the founding ideas within the notion that we should, as a people, get rid of this? The opening lines of the Declaration of Independence set up the conditions under which slavery will be impossible. All manner created equal. Once you've put that, that's like a time bomb under the whole concept of slavery. That's ticking away. Okay. And sure enough, it detonated in the next century. If we just step back and look at the human species, what does slavery teach you about human nature? The fact that slavery has appeared as a function of society throughout human history. There are two possibilities. One is what people think they can do and God is not watching. Another is what they can do if they think the God allows it. Really, really well put. And the fact that they want to do this kind of subjugation, what does that mean? Well, it's pretty straightforward in a way. There are people who get to work for free. There's economic in nature in some sense. Yes. But in order to do it, I mean, almost always, there are some examples in the ancient world where this wasn't the case, but almost always it had to be a subjugated people or people who regarded it as different. One of the things I've tried to inject into the discussion through this book among other things is a recognition that there were very major questions still going on in the 18th and early 90th century, the one resolved, which were one of the reasons why slavery was not as morally repugnant to people then as it was to us, now as it is to us now. And that's the question of polygenesis and monogenesis. At the time of Thomas Jefferson, the founding fathers were thinking and working. They didn't know because nobody knew whether the human races were related or not. There were arguments that the monogenesis argument that we were all indeed from the same racial stock. Polygenesis argument was that we weren't. Black Africans, Ethiopians, they're often referred to at the time because they provided some of the first slaves were different from white Europeans, simply not related in any way. And that makes it easier, of course. That makes it easier to enslave people if you think they're not your brother. Am I my brother's keeper? No, he's not your brother. And it's a very troubling argument in the 18th, 90th century also because there was a biblical question. It threw up a theological question, which was, people were literally debating this at the time. Was there also a black Adamadive? Was there as there were an Indian Adamadive, an Native American Adamadive? This was a serious theological debate because they didn't know the answer. People say that Darwin solved this. It wasn't just Darwin, of course, but by the late 19th century, the argument that we were not all related as human beings had suffered so many blows that you had to really be very, very ignorant, deliberately willfully ignorant to ignore it by that. So no longer was after Darwin the theological question, it became a moral question. It was already a moral question, but it clarified it. Darwin clarifies it definitely. And then you're in this, the same in this situation, if you're not subjugating some other people, you're subjugating your own kin. And that becomes morally unsustainable. So given that slavery in America is part of its history, how do we incorporate into the calculus of policy today, social discourse, what we learn in school? We can look at slavery in America. We can look at it maybe more recent things like in Europe, the other atrocities, the Holocaust. How do we incorporate that in terms of how we create policy, how we treat each other, all those kinds of things? What is the calculus of integrating the atrocities, the injustices of the past into the way we are today? That's a very complex question because it's a moral question at this point. And a moral question long after the fact. I say at one point in the war on the West that the argument, for instance, on reparations now that goes on and it's not a fringe argument anymore. Some people say, oh, you're pulling up this fringe argument, it really isn't. I mean, every contender for the Democratic nomination for the presidency in 2020 was willing to talk about the possibility of reparations. From very eager that this country, America goes through that entirely self-destructive exercise. I say that there's a lot of problems with this, but if I could refine it out of one thing I'd say this. It's no longer about a wealth transfer from one group of people who did something wrong to another group of people who were wronged. It would have been that, it would have been that, could have been that 200 years ago. Today, it's not even the descendants of people who did something wrong giving money to people who were the descendants of people who were wronged. It's a wealth transfer from people who look like people who did a wrong thing in the past to another group of people who resemble people who were wronged. That's impossible to do. I'm completely clear about this. There is no way in which you could organize such a wealth transfer on moral or practical reasons. There's a lot of people who are filled with people who have the same skin color as us, for instance, who have no connection to the slave trade and should not be made to pay money to people who have some connection. Then the country is also filled with ethnic minorities who have come after slavery, who would not be, do you for any reimbursement, as it were? The problem with this is, though, is that I'm perfectly open to the possibility that there are residual inequities that exist in American life and that the consequences of slavery could be one of the factors that result from this. The thing is, I don't think it's a single issue answer. I think it's a multi-dimensional issue, something like BlackHunter achievement in America. It's obviously a multi-dimensional issue. Much of the left and others wish to say, it's not. It's only about racism. They can't answer why Asians who have arrived more recently don't, for instance, get held down by white supremacy, but actually white supremacy and quotes, obviously. But don't get held back by it, but actually flourish to the extent that Asian Americans have a higher household earnings and higher household mean equity than home equity and so on, than white Americans. So I don't think that on the merits, the evidence is there that racism is the explanation for BlackHunter achievement in some sections of the Black community in America. It's obviously a part of it. Could you say that even those things like fatherlessness and similar family breakdown issues are a long-term consequence of it? Possibly, but it's being awfully generous to people's ability to make bad decisions. For instance, how many generations after the Holocaust would you allow people to claim that everything that went wrong in the Jewish community was as a result of the Holocaust? I mean, is there some kind of term limit on this? I would have thought so. And I think most people probably think that's over. I think the details matter there and but it's very different. We're in deep orders, yeah. I enjoy swimming out in the ocean. Although I'm terrified of what's lurking underneath in the darkness. You're right. Okay, it's really complicated calculus with the Holocaust and with slavery. So the argument in America is that there's deep institutional racism against African Americans that's rooted in slavery. So however, that calculus turns out that calculation still persists in the culture and the institutions and the allocation of resources in the way that we communicate in the subtle ways and major ways all that kind of stuff. How is it possible to win or lose that argument of how much institutional racism there is that's rooted in slavery? Is it a winnable? It's an unquantified argument. And I'd like to apply some shortcuts to some of this as a following. Our, for instance, all, let's take the EV1 that's most often cited. If a white person is walking down a street in America and they see a group of young black men coming towards them and it's later night and they cross the road, is it because of slavery? Is it because of institutional racism? No, it's because they've made a calculus based not entirely on unfounded beliefs that given crime rates, it's possible that this group of people might be a group of people they don't want to meet later night. That's an ugly fact but as crime statistics in American cities are from American cities bear out, it's not an entirely unreasonable one. It's not reasonable every time, obviously, obviously. But is it attributable to slavery? That's a stretch. If you're in a city like Chicago where the homicide rates shot up in the last two years, we'll be it again as always has to be remembered, mainly black on black gun violence and knife violence. Nevertheless, if you're in a city like Chicago and you make that calculus, I've just suggested the cliched one that the street later night, there are other factors other than a memory of slavery that kick in. And I'm afraid it's something which people don't want to particularly acknowledge in America for obvious reasons because it's the ugly, it's damn debated world. But I was actually just writing the what in my column in New York Post today about a very interesting case, a similar which is the question of obesity in the US. As you know, America's the most overweight country in the world. America has I think 40% of the population is obese. In medical ways in the nearest next country is a long way down, that's New Zealand, a 30% of the population. So America's a long way ahead. Why during the coronavirus era when we know that obesity is the one clearest factor that's likely to lead to your hospitalization if you also get the virus? Why did almost no public health information in America focus on obesity? 80% of the people who ended up hospitalized in America with coronavirus were obese. We locked to the schools when there was no evidence that the coronavirus was deadly for children. We all wore cloth masks when there was a very little evidence that this was much use in stopping the spread of the virus. We had massive evidence about obesity being a problem and we never addressed it. Why is it just because we wide-rowed our fat people? No, it's actually because about fat shaming as it were. No, it's also because when it great extent it's a racial issue in America as well. And actually I quoted this new publication from University of Chicago as it happens, which makes that claim explicit. It says the reasons why people have views that are negative about obesity is because of racism and slavery. This is what everything is drawn back to in America. Anything you want to stop, you say it's because of racism, it's because of slavery. How about it's actually because you mind the hospitals getting clogged up, you mind people dying, you mind ethnic minorities disproportionately dying, and you'd like to say something about it. Once again, as in everything in America, it's cut off by some poorly educated academic saying it's about slavery. So we're really not, I mean this requires a kind of form of brain surgery to perform it on a society, probably one that's not possible without killing the patient. And it's being done by people who are wearing like mittens. So I'm sure that there's a few folks listening to this that are rolling their eyes and saying here we go again to white guys talking about the lack of institutional racism in America. First of all, what's your, what would you like to tell them? So our African American friends who are looking at this and I've gotten a chance to talk to a bunch of them on clubhouse recently, clubhouse is the social app. Yeah, yeah, and I really enjoy it. It's an absolute zoo with an app as far as I can see it. I personally love it because you get to talk to, as somebody who's an introvert and doesn't socialize much, I enjoy talking to people from all walks of life. So it got, you gave me a chance to first of all practice Russian and Ukrainian. So I get the chance to do that. Then you get a chance to talk about Israel and Palestine with people who are from that part of the world and you get to hear raw emotion of people from the ground where they start screaming, they start crying, they start being calm and collected and thoughtful. This is as if you walked into a bar with custom picked regular folks and quotes regular folks. Just people that have quote unquote lived experiences, real pain, real hope, real emotions, biases and you get to listen to them, go at it with no, because it's an audio app, you're not allowed to start getting into physical fist fight. So even though it really sounds like it sounds like it's happening. Yeah, and so you get to really listen to that feeling. And for example, it allows a white guy like me from another part of the world coming from the former Soviet Union to go into a room with a few hundred African Americans screaming about Joe Rogan using the N word. And I get to really listen. There's very different perspectives on that in the African American community. And it's fascinating to listen. So I don't get access to that by sort of excellent books and articles and so on. You get that real raw emotion. And I'm just saying, there's a few of those folks listening to this with that real raw emotion. And they, one argument they say is you Douglas Murray and you Lex Freeman don't have the right to talk about race and racism in America. It is our struggle. You are from a privileged class of people that don't don't know what it's like to be a black man or woman in America walking down the street. Can you steal man that case? First of all, fuck that. Okay. That's not I think we need to define steel. It's still manning. Okay. I know what the training is. I really resent that form of argumentation. Sure. I really resent it. I have the right to talk about whatever the hell I want. And no one's going to stop me or try to intimidate me or tell me that I can't simply because of my skin color. And I think that if I said to somebody else the other way around, it would be equally reprehensible. If I said shut up, you have no right to criticize anything that Douglas Murray says because you've not got my skin color. Okay. It's not an exact comparison. But seriously, is that a reasonable form of argument? You haven't been through everything I've been through my life, therefore you can't comment. No. In that case, nobody can talk about anything. We might as well pack up, go home and isolate ourselves. Strong words, but can you try to steal me on the case, not in this particular situation, but there's people that have lived through something that can comment in a very specific way, like for example, Holocaust survivors. Yes. There is a sense in which maybe a basic sense of civility when a Holocaust survivor speaking about their experience of the Holocaust, then an intellectual from a very different part of the world is simply writing about nuance geopolitics of World War II, just should not interrupt the Holocaust we physically interrupt them if they're telling us stories with logic and reason that the experience of the Holocaust survivor somehow fundamentally has a deeper understanding of the humanity and the injustice of the first of all, again, when even deeper word is now, but in terms of wanting to listen to another person who has experienced something, yes, yes, but not endlessly, not endlessly, I mean, there are some people who've written about the Holocaust who didn't experience the Holocaust and have written about it better than people who did. It's not this idea that the lived experience to use this terrible modern jargon as if there's another type. This idea that the lived experience has to triumph over everything else is not always correct. It can be correct in some circumstances. If you are sitting in a room with a Holocaust survivor and somebody who'd never heard about the Holocaust and wanted to kind of shoot out their views on it, one of those people should be heard more than the other, obviously. If there's somebody who's experienced racism first hand and there's somebody else who has never experienced it, then obviously you'd want to hear from the person who has experienced it first hand. If that is the discussion underway, I don't think that it's the case that that is endlessly the case. I'm also highly reluctant to concede that there are groups of people who by didn't of their skin color or anything else get to dominate the microphone. Now, of course, we're literally both speaking to microphones at the moment, so there's an irony to this, but let's skate over the irony. What I mean is people saying you don't have the right to speak, I have the right to take the microphone from you and speak because I know best. Fine, if you know best, we'll argue without and someone will win long or short term. But the almost aggressive tone in which this is now leveled, I don't like the sound of, nobody's experience is completely understandable by another human being. Nobody's and what many people are asking us to do at the moment, us collectively is to fall for that thing. I think it was Camille Faster who said it first, but I've adopted in recent years, is to say you must spend an inordinate amount of your life trying to understand me, personally, my lived experience, everything about me, you should dedicate your life to trying to do that. Simultaneously, you'll never understand me. This is not an attractive invitation. This is an unwinnable game. So, if somebody has a legitimate and an important point to make, they should make it and they will win through whatever their character is or whatever their race. And by the way, there are plenty of white people who experience racism as well. There are plenty of white people who do and have done and increasingly so, which is one of the things I write about from the war on the West. I mean, I would argue that today in America, the only group you're actually allowed to be consistently, vilely racist against the white people. If you say disgusting things about black people in America in 2022, you will be over. You will be over. If you decide to talk about people's white tears, their white female tears, their white guilt, their white privilege, their white rage and all these other pseudo-papologizing terms, you'll be just fine. You could be the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. You could lecture at Yale University absolutely fine. And the white people have to suck that up as if that's fine because there was racism in another direction in the past. So white people can have racism as well. Does that mean that I think that I have a right or other white people have a right to dominate the discourse by talking about their feelings of having been victims of racism? No, not particularly because what does that get us? It gets us into an endless cycle of competitive victimhood. Am I saying that white people who have experienced violence have experienced historically anything like the violence that was perpetrated against black people in America historically? Obviously not. But what kind of competition do we want to enter here? And this is very, very important to rain now in America because there's one other thing I have to throw in there which is how do you work out the sincerity of the claim? How do you work out the sincerity of the claim being made? At one point in this latest book, I refer to very useful bit in in Nietzsche and Genealogy of morals where as you know Nietzsche always has to be treated carefully you know and people say I love Nietzsche which bits. What exactly do you love about him? But he had a lot can be learned from the other side but there are moments in Genealogy of morals that were very useful for this book. One of them was the moment when Nietzsche uses a phrase that I've now stolen for myself, appropriated you might say, where he refers to people who tear wounds long since closed and then cry about the pain they feel. Now, how do you know whether the pain is real? How do you know? I'm not saying you can never know but it's hard. So when somebody says I feel that my life hasn't gone that well and it's because of something that was done to my ancestors 200 years ago maybe they do feel that maybe they're right to feel that maybe they're making it up maybe they're using it as their reason for failure in life maybe they're using it as their reason to not even try. Maybe they're using it as their reason to smoke weed all day. I don't know and who does know how can you work that out and that's why I come back to this thing of who are we to constantly judge in this society other people who we don't know and attribute motives to them based on racial or other characteristics. And as you write in this part I like your cultural appropriation of Nietzsche and at the same time cancelling Nietzsche in the same set of sentences but you write in this part about evil. Now I didn't cancel Nietzsche. Well, I can't cancel Nietzsche. I was saying I was saying treat him carefully. But you can judge a man's character by which parts of Nietzsche he quotes. That's so much. I think when you meet people who do man and Superman a bit too much. Now you're pulling in even deeper water referencing Hitler here. So you write in this part of the book about evil. I quote, what is it that drives evil? Many things without doubt but one of them is identified by several of the great philosophers is resentment. That sentiment is one of the greatest drivers for people who want to destroy. Colin blaming someone else for having something you believe you deserve and you're saying this kind of resentment we don't know as its surfaces whether it's genuine or if it's used to sort of play games of power to evil ends. Can you speak to this because the decision in fascinating idea that one of the biggest drivers of evil in the world is resentment because if you look at, boy, if you look at human history, if you look at Hitler so much of the propaganda, so much of the narrative was about resentment. So that's surface, there's level or is that deep? There is that. It can be any of the above. First of all, everybody has resentment. I use the result tomorrow which is sort very similar to resentment. Let's stick with resentment. So we don't sound too pretentious. Let me give you a quick example of somebody in our own day who has a former resentment of Vladimir Putin. Did you see Navalny's documentary Putin's palace? Yes. You remember the stuff about Putin as a young KGB officer in Germany? Remember the stuff about Putin, his first wife's resentment of one of his KGB colleagues who had a an apartment that was a few meters bigger than the Putin's apartment. It's very interesting. By the way, I'm not saying that Vladimir Putin became the man he has become and invaded Ukraine because he didn't have an apartment he liked in Berlin or Munich or whatever. What is the stink possibility? My point is that resentment is a factor in all human lives and we all feel it in our lives and it's something that has to be struggled against. Resentment is in political terms can be a deadly. It's an incredibly deep thing to draw upon. You mentioned Hitler. Obviously one of the things that Hitler played on was resentment. Almost every revolution it does. The French Revolution was dead as well. Not without cause. It was a good reason to feel that Versailles was not listening to Paris in the 1780s and feel resentment for Mary Antoinette and her palace within the palace, ignoring the bread shortages in Paris. So resentment is a very understandable thing and sometimes it's justifiable and it's also deadly to the person as it is to the society. It's an incredibly deep sentiment. Somebody else has got something that you should have. And the problem about it is that it has potential to be endless. You can do it your whole life. One of the ways I've sort of found myself explaining this to people is to say it's also important to recognize that resentment is something that can cross absolutely every boundary. So for instance, it crosses all racial boundaries obviously. I guess that's saying. More interesting is it crosses all class boundaries and socioeconomic boundaries. And if I was to sort of simplify this thought I would say, I guess you and I and everybody watching knows or has known somebody in their lives who has almost nothing in worldly terms and is a generous person, a kindly person, a giving person, a happy person, even a cheerful person. And I think we probably have also or many of us would have met people who seem to have everything and who are filled with resentment, filled with resentment. Somebody else has held them back from something their sister once did something. She got this and I should have got that. And on and on and on. It's a human trait. And one of the things that suggests to me is that we therefore have a choice in our lives about this. This is something which we can do something about not limitlessly. But for instance, I mean, there are very good reasons that some people in their lives might feel resentment. Let's say you're involved in a car crash and a friend fell asleep at the wheel and that's why you are spending your rest of your life in a wheelchair. It's a pertinent example of this in American politics at the moment. You would be justified in feeling resentment. And at some point you have to make a decision, which is am I going to be that person or a different person. But even in that case, you're saying at the individual level and that societal level is destructive to the mind, even when you're quite unqualified. It rots you. It rots you because the best you can do is to eke out your days unfulfilled. So the antidote as you describe is gratitude. Yes. Gratitude is the antidote to evil in a sense. So gratitude is the individual level and the societal level. Gratitude is certainly the answer to resentment. I quote in the one west, this, this, this, but when I read it, first time a few years ago, I was absolutely floored by the brothers, Caramaus, of not everything in it, by the way, when I went into it, but I had some very big structural criticisms of the novel. Now you're just sweet talking to me because I'm a dusty, esky fan, but I appreciate this. Okay. Well, we could get into what I see as big as structural floors in the brothers, Caramaus. Anyway, now I'm offended and triggered. Yeah, no, I mean, this is coming out of my breath and saying, I didn't think it was much good. Yeah, there's structural flaws. Yeah, I thought they're the ending stank in the middle wasn't very good. No. When I read that novel, I was floored by a couple of things. One is, one is of course, of the moment where we rise the devil appears. The moment that Ivan says to his brother, you know, he visits me and he realized that he's talking about the devil. The whole model goes into this totally different space. He's even more than you've already read his novels about. And then when the conversation occurs between Ivan and the devil, remember, he says it describes him as dressed as a French, a French, a French, redress in the French style of the early part of the 90th century. Very strange, the devil will be dressed like that, but sort of... And if you remember that he's sort of crossed the leg, rather a vain figure. But the devil mentions imparcing to Ivan that he says, I don't know why gratitude is not a instinct that's being given to me. And you're not allowed. This is not given the role of being the devil. This is not one of the things. And of course, only a genius of Dostoevsky's stature could... I mean, a lesser genius would have made a whole novel out of that insight. Only Dostoevsky can just throw it away because there's such an abundance of riches that he still has to get through the structural problems aside. But the past of aggressive, the microaggression in this conversation is palpable. But the reason I mention is because, of course, when I've thought this is such as brilliant insight by Dostoevsky, because why would gratitude not be a sentiment that the devil was capable of? The answer is, of course, that if the devil was capable of gratitude, he wouldn't be the devil. He'd be somebody else. He has to be incapable of gratitude. Do you think for Dostoevsky, that was as strong as an insight as it is for you? Because I think that's a really powerful idea that with gratitude, you don't get the resentment that rots you from the core. Yes, I think it was one of the just endless things that he saw in us. And the way I put it is that... I mean, I also think of it in terms of the era of deconstruction, which is one of the things I'd like us to call the era that's now ending. The era of deconstruction was the era that started, let's say from the 60s onwards, and was originally an academic game that then spilled out into the wider culture, which was, let's take everything apart, let's pull it all apart. There are lots of problems with it. One is it's quite boring. You don't get an awful lot from it. You also have the problem of what Hildren find when they try to do this with bicycles, which is they can take it apart quite easily but they can't put it back together. And the era of taking things apart as a game is one we've lived through and it's been highly destructive, but you can do it for quite a long time. I'm going to look at this society and I'm going to take it apart by showing systemic problems. I'm going to at the end of that, what have you got? What have you done? What have you achieved? We need to interrogate this. Okay, interrogate, by all means, ask questions, but interrogate as a deliberate hostility to this. I'm going to interrogate this thing and take it apart, and again, at the end of it, what have you got? Whether you're interrogating a text or a piece of music, or an idea or a society, fine question, endlessly question, yes, interrogate, assumes it's all criminal in a cell and it's guilty and therefore it must be taken apart. And that's what we've been doing for decades in the West. And that's resentment, that's one by product of resentment. You can't build the thing, but you know how to take it apart. It's a little bit of resentment good. So you have, you know, that I love Tom Wates and he has a song where a little drop of poison, I like my tongue with a little drop of poison, is it good to do that? Is it good to have a little bit of poison in your drink? Depends what poison is, and it depends if you know not to have another drink. Well, it might be the case you find out as some alcoholics do that one was too many and ten is not enough. So there's a natural, in this case, this kind of deconstruction as a slippery slope, it becomes an addiction, becomes a drug and you just can't stop. Well, you'd have to wean yourself off it and try to start creating again. You'd have to start trying to put things together again. Something I think might be in the throes of starting is it happens. Well, speaking of taking things apart and not putting them together again, the idea of critical race theory. Can you, to me, explain, so I'm an engineer and have not been actually paying attention much, unfortunately, to these things. None of the people in your field were until it comes along as a smexier in the face. I, you know, I've had that line of thinking, you know, from MIT, I said, well, surely whatever you folks are busy about yelling at each other for is a thing at Harvard and Yale. Hmm, it's not going to be. Yeah, yeah, yeah, of course. Yes, people in the STEM subjects thought it's not coming for us. It can't come to us. And bang. Well, it's, you know, it hasn't quite been bang. I'm not. Engineering is more safe than others. Yeah. So not, so let's draw on why now between engineering and science. So I think engineering is, I'm sitting in a castle in the tallest tower with my pinky out drinking my martini saying, surely, the peasants below with their biology and their humanities, we'll figure it all out. No, I'm just kidding. There's no, there's no pinky out at drink vodka. And I hang with the peasants. Okay, where's this metaphor gone too far? Can you explain to this engineer what critical race theory is? Is it a term that's definable? Is there a tradition? Is there a history? What is good about it? What is bad about it? It is a tradition. Is a history? Is a school of thought? It started in the law, roughly in the 1970s and some of the American Academy. It's spilled out. It always aimed to be an activist philosophy. People deny that now, but as I cite them in the war on the west, I mean, the the foundational texts say as much. This isn't, this is an activist academic study. We're not just looking at the law. We seek to change the law. And it spilled out into all of the other disciplines. I think there's a reason for that, by the way, which is it happened at the time that the humanities and others in America were increasingly weak and didn't know what to do. And they needed more games to play or new games to play. The psychologist got bored. Yeah, I mean, that, well, they needed to tenure. They needed something to do. And I mean, it's not an original observation. Plenty of people have made this, but I mean, Neil Ferguson said to some time ago, for instance, that in the last 50 years in American academia, certainly in humanities departments, when somebody dies out, who's a great scholar and something, that's just not replaced by somebody of equal stature. They're replaced by somebody who does theory or critical race theory. They're replaced by somebody who does the modern games. Somebody dies out, who's a great historian of say, I don't know, it's one of my mind, Russian history or Russian literature, and they're not replaced by a similar scholar. In his observation, in yours, is this a recent development? It's happened in the last few decades, for sure. And it's sped up. Is it because we've gotten to the bottom of some of the biggest questions of history? No, it's because we're willing to forget the big questions. Because it's more fun to big questions are asked on. No, partly, no, I should stress that partly, this is in the weeks, but partly is a result of hyperspecialization in academia. If you said you'd like to write your dissertation on Hobbes. If you want to just, if you, something central to Kant's thought or Hegel or something, I mean, that's not popular. What's popular is to take somebody way down the line from that, because there's a feeling that that's all been done. So you take something way, way, way down the line from that that's much less important, and then you sort of play with that. And I think most people, anyone who's watching who's been in a philosophy department or in the other, in recent years will know that tendency. By the way, there's a very practical consequence of this. I saw this the end of my friend Roger Scruton's life when he, he would occasionally, he didn't get tenure at universities, but he would occasionally be flown in even by his enemies to teach courses in various universities in basics of philosophy, because there was no one in the department able to do it. He would go in and teach for a semester, you know, Hegel and Kant and Chopinhar and others, because there was no one to do it, because they were all playing with things way, way, way down the road from this. So that had already happened. And people were searching for new games to play, and the critical race theory stuff forced its way in, partly in the way that all of this that's now known as anti-racism does, which is in a sort of bullying tone, of saying if you don't follow this, it's the same way that all the things that are called studies, I think everything called studies and the humanities should be shut down. Because of the activist, it's an act of it, they're all activism, gay studies and queer studies, nothing good has ever come from it, nothing good. To push back, is it obvious that activism is a sign of a flaw in a discipline? So is it the sign of the death of the discipline? It's a sign that the discipline's over. But isn't it a good goal to have for a discipline to enact change, positive change in the world? Or is that for politicians to do with the findings of science? I mean, not to create an ideology and then set out to find disciplines that have weekly put together to try to back up your political ideology. So ideology should not be part of science or of humanities. I mean, anyone could do it. You could decide to go in and be wildly right wing about something and only do things that prove your right wing ideas. Be fantastic the anti-academic, fantastic the anti-science, it's an absurd way to mix up activism and academia and it's absolutely right and critical race theory is one of the ones that completely polluted the academy. Yeah and there's been dark moments throughout history both for doing World War II with both communism and Nazism, fascism that infiltrated science and then corrupted it. Yes. I mean, for instance, also let's face it by the in science as in everything else, there are dark difficult things. It's much better we know about them, face up to them and try to find a way socially to deal with them than that you leave them in the hands of some activist who wants to do stuff with them. Some of my best friends are activists, I'm just kidding. Okay. And none of my best friends are activists, so that's how it should be. Well, I was kidding because I don't have any friends, but okay. Now I'm trying to get some pity points. Okay. So to return. You have your clubhouse friends screaming away like the ranged maniacs. Now I'm anti-clubhouse by the way because at the only time I heard it was that Brett Weinstein one when he did that. I didn't know if you heard that, but early in clubhouse, I was invited clubhouse with various people who said, oh, this is a really great civilized way to hang out and talk with interesting people and I downloaded the app and I got on one because Brett Weinstein said I'm doing this conversation and I listened and it was a maddest damn discussion I've ever heard. Was there something about biology? Something about... Is it some... Is it some... Covid times or that... At some point Brett said, I'm an evolutionary biologist and somebody else that is saying you're a eugenicist and he said, no, I'm an evolutionary biologist and somebody says, that's the same thing. And it just went on like that and Brett desperately tried to explain that's not the same thing as being a eugenicist and he lost the clubhouse room. They thought that was the same thing. He'd come... It horribly reminded me of a time some years ago in a British newspaper ran a sort of realizing that the only thing you can unite people on in sexual ethics is revulsion against Peter Filia, ran an anti-Pedo campaign and shortly after pediatrician's offices were torched in north of England by a mob who hadn't read the whole sign. Yeah, well to me, like I said, a little bit of poison is good for the town. Anyhow, sorry, I interrupted you with flattering you with your people on clubhouse. I have many... I have multiples of friends, yes. We didn't get to some of the ideas of critical race theory. What exactly is it? I'm actually in part asking this question quite genuinely. Yeah, it's an attempt to look at everything among other things through the lens of race and to add race into things where it may not be as a way of adding... I'm trying to give the most generous estimation. To add race in as a conversation in a place where it may not have been in the conversation. And that means history too? The history? Oh, short racism. Yeah, yeah, yeah. All history and to look at it through these particular lenses. I mean, there's a certain... Like all these things, there's a certain logic in it. Like with feminist studies or something, I mean, is there a utility in looking back through undoubtedly male dominated histories and asking whether the more silent female voice was, yes. Very interesting. Not endlessly interesting and can't be put exactly on the same par as, but it has a utility. It's that endlessly so to interrupt that endlessly part that seems to get us into trouble. Yes, absolutely. Well, because of this thing of where do you stop? And that's... That's always... I looked at it, taught by my last book in the Manus of Crowd. It's one of the big conundrums in activist movements and particularly in activist academia. Where would you stop? It's not clear because you've got a job in it. You've got a pension in it. You've got your only esteem in society is in keeping this gig going. I mean, is there any likelihood... Have you ever... There's the old academic joke, isn't it? That you know, the end of every conference, the only thing everyone agrees on is that we must have another conference like this one. So one thing they always agree on. These conferences are so great when we just have another one. Well, that's the criticism you could apply to a lot of disciplines. Of course civil engineering, bridge building, at a certain point, do we need any more bridges? Can we just fly everywhere? So at the very least, you need to keep the bridges up. Sure. And they would... Critical Race Theory folks would probably make the same argument that the very least we need to keep the racism out. We don't descend into the racism. It assumes all the time that we are living on the cusp of the return of the KKK, which is totally wrong. I mean, it's a massive... You say that now, until the KKK Army is margin, we can't always predict the future. We can't always predict the future and you can always say, you should be careful, but you've also got to be careful of people who've got their timing like totally, totally wrong or their estimation of society. You mean like most of society before in the 1930s when Hitler was... I mean, so many people got Hitler wrong. Sure they did. And so... Most people... Maybe it was nice to have the alarmist thinking there. Well, the wear of the man with a mustache. If only it was that easy. Not always above facial hair. I mean, I always say that I mean, what... Very often it seems to clean, shave and chat, but say... One of the problems everybody knowing a little bit about Nazism is that they think that they know where evil comes from and that it comes from like a German with a small mustache, getting people to go step, for instance. And that's not correct. A much better understanding of it is it can come from all number of directions and keep your antennae as good as you can. But once you end up in this society, which I would argue certainly parts of America in, where you're always in 1938, that's not healthy for a society either. Where people are so primed and think they're so well trained because they spent a term in school learning about the Second World War and the Holocaust. I think they're so well trained in Hitler spotting that they can do it all the time. Look at all these phrases we now have in our societies like dog whistle. You know, as I always say, if you hear the whistle, you're the dog. But people say... That's a dog whistle. As if they're highly trained anti-Nazis. I mean, you know, there should be some humility. We should be careful, we should be wary for sure. And we should also be slightly humble in our inability to to spot everything. If not significantly humble. Right. So if we can... There's something funny, if not dark, about the activity of Hitler spotting. If I just may take it aside. But so critical race theory, how much racism... What is racism? How much of it is in our world today? If we were thinking about this activity of Hitler spotting, how... and trying to steal man the case of, if not critical race theory, but people who look for racism in our world. How much would you say? Well, it's a good thing to try to define how to say that racism is the belief that other people are inferior to you. You could say... You could see a form where you thought people were sub-area to you. That could also happen. But more commonly is, you see a group of people as being inferior to you simply by the end of the fact that they have a different racial background. And that's sort of the easiest way to define racism. As I say, I mean, there are types of racism. I mean, mainly anti-Semitism actually, perhaps it's the only one, which weirdly lies on a hatred of people who a certain type person thinks are better than them. And that's a particular peculiarity, one of the peculiarities of anti-Semitism. Why did anti-Semitism somehow does both? Right. Yes. One of the eternal, fascinating things about anti-Semitism is it can do... It does everything at the same time. Like quantum racism. Yes. It's both superior and inferior. You know that... You know, Vastley Grossman's life and fate. So in the middle of life and fate, which a Persian friend of mine who said was one of only two great novels of the 20th century, she was very harsh, literally critique. What was the other one? Oh, the leopard, obviously. The leopard? The leopard, the Persian Sepulad lamp producer. Okay. I'm definitely right on that one. Life and fate is... Learning so much today. Yes, what is it? Life and fate is an extraordinary book. Mainly about... Well, you know, Grossman was an... Obviously, George himself, he saw almost everything that he could have done in the second, but he saw Stalin grad, who was a journalist. And he he wrote first hand the accounts of Stalin grad. He was also the first journalist into to to blinker. And his account was you can read him on the collections of his journalism, his account of walking into to blinker is just one of the most devastating haunting pieces of journalism or prose you can read. Anyhow, I mention him because Grossman at the beginning, in the middle of life and fate, which is about sort of a 900-page novel, in the middle of it, which is about the dark axis around Stalin grad. He way at one point, he amazing me. He sort of goes into the minds of earth Hitler and Stalin. He says he says Stalin in his study feels his counterpart, but then he says he feels very close to him at this moment. Wow. Around Stalin grad, like leading up to... After Stalin grad. When the Germans lost, he says he feels close to this of Hitler. But Grossman, in the middle of life and fate, swat bang at the worst hours of the 20th century, suddenly dedicates a chapter to anti-Semitism. And I've seen anti-Semitism something I've always been very interested in because I've always had the instinctive utter revulsion of it. And I've also partly because I've only seen bits of it in the Middle East and elsewhere, but I mention this because Grossman in the middle of life and fate has it takes time out and does its like three-page explanation, three-page description of anti-Semitism. And it's extraordinary. I mean, it's the only thing I can think of that's equally good is Gregor von Redsori who wrote a lyridly titled, but brilliant set of novellas called Confessions of an Anti-Semite and about pre-First World War anti-Semitism in Eastern and Central Europe. Anyway, Grossman says in the middle of life and fate that one of the extraordinary things about anti-Semitism is that it does everything at the same time. That Jews get condemned in one place for being rich and in another for being poor, condemned in one place for assimilating and another for not assimilating, for assimilating too much and assimilating too little for being too successful for not being successful enough. So it's I think it's the only racism that includes within it. A detestation for the real anti-Semite, a detestation of people that the person may perceive to be better than them. Correctly or otherwise. By the way, I'm embarrassed to say I have not read this one of two greatest novels of the 20th Century Life and Fate, the Gisene Seedba and just to read off of Wikipedia. I see Grossman, the Ukrainian Jew became a correspondent for the Soviet military paper, Krasnaya Vizda, having volunteered and been rejected from military service. He spent a thousand days in the front lines, roughly three of the four years of the conflict between the Germans and the Soviets and the main themes covered in Hoseko Life and Fate. I keep thinking Gisene Seedba is a theme on Jewish identity in the Holocaust, Grossman's idea of humanity and the human goodness, Stalin's distortion of reality and values. And science goes on in reality of war. I need to definitely read it. You need to read it. I think you'll really get a lot from it. It's one of the other things, so one of the other things he does is he has this extraordinary ability to talk about the absolute highest levels of the conflict and then zoom in. It's rather like the camera work they use and things like Lord of the Rings where he zooms down and gets one person in the midst of all this and you get on that. I'll put you in the study too. I personally have read and reread the William Shire's The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, who is another journalist who was there. But he does not do it. Interesting enough, given such a large novel, the definitive work on the definitive original work that goes to Sorsche Materials on Hitler, he doesn't touch anti-Semitism really. Big thing to miss out. He just says it very calming and objective, he does for most of the work that this was the fact of life. There's a lot of cruelty throughout, but he doesn't get to... Well, one of the things is because he lost the war because of anti-Semitism. That's one important way to view it. And to Robert, some other historian said, is that the Nazis lost the war because there were Nazis. It sounds almost too neat, but it's worth remembering that at the end of the war, when the Germans need to be transporting troops and they need to be transporting very basic supplies, I can make sure he gets the trains to transport the Jews right up to the end. Well, that's certainly a dark possibility. But to go back to racism in general, racism in general, apart from anti-Semitism relies on the perception that another group of people, a racial group, other than your own, are inferior to you. That's what I'd say is that he's easiest shorthand of racism. And of course, it's one of the stupidest things that our species is capable of. I mean, one of the stupidest that you can look at a person and guess them in their entirety, in fact, because of their skin color. I mean, it's like what a stupid idea that is, as well as being an evil one. But the I would say that one of the, I think it's a dangerous thing in our era that there are bits of it coming back. That's why I say we do need sort of... We need our antennae working. We just don't need them to be overactive or undirective, you know. Now the book is war on the West. But speaking of racism, racism towards different groups based on their skin color, you've said that there's a war on white people in the West. Would you say that's the case? Would you say that there are significant racism towards white people in the United States? I'd say that the white people in the United States are the only people who are told that they have a redditary sin. That's a big one just to start with. Based on the skin color. I mean, I would find it so repugnant if, and I hope everybody would join me in feeling this, I would feel it's so repugnant if there were any school of thought in America today that had any grass on the public attention that said that black people were born into evil because of something their ancestors have done. Like they had the mark of cane upon them. I mean, I think it would be such a vicious way to try to demoralize a group of people and to tell them that the things they would be able to achieve in their lives are much lessened because they should spend significant portions of their lives trying to return for something they didn't do. Is there a difference? And the funny point, the obvious point, left unsaid, but it said nobody in the public square says that. I mean, they're the main acts of the far fringes, but nobody in the mainstream would dare to say that or I think even think that about any group of people other than white people. And does this mean that white people are more disadvantaged than black people know? And again, let's not make this a competition, but let's not get into, I just desperately urge people not to get into the idea of her editory sin according to racial background. Is there something to be said about the feature aspect that sort of played devil's advocate about the asymmetry of sort of accusations towards the majority? Yes, because white is much easier to attack a majority. It is much easier, but is there something to be said about that being a useful function of society that you always attack that the minority has disproportionate power to attack the majority so that you can always keep the majority in check? Well, it's a dangerous game to play, isn't it? I think that's a good summary of entire human surface issue. Oh yeah, everything is dangerous. But it's a very dangerous game to play that. I wrote about this bit in the madness of crowds when I was saying gay rights people, the ones that still exist, the ones who don't have homes to go to, who want to beat up on straight people in a way, or want to make straight people feel like they're kind of unremarkable, uncool, boring straights, so boring. Not like the magical pixie fairy dust gaze. That's a bad idea to push that one. That's a bad idea and some gaze pushed that. Highly unwise, given the fact that about two to three percent of population actually gay, now there's an additional 20% who think they're too spirit or something and all that bullshit, but they're just attention seekers. That's not spent too much time on that. But equally, as I've said, I said in the man as a crowd with the feminist movement, very unwise, for half of the species to say that the other half of the species isn't needed. And there were always third and fourth wave feminists willing to make that nuts argument. Not first wave feminists, you didn't hear it in first wave feminists, you didn't hear suffragette tended not to say we like the vote and men scum. It would have been hard to have one ever on their side, not least the men they needed to win over their side. But you do get third and fourth wave feminists to say like, do we need men or men or ex? Again, it's a bad idea. It's a bad idea tactically. What if men, Richard Rangham, somebody from Harvard, describes that men are the originators of violence, physical violence in society. And he argues that actually the world would be better off. Now, just a very cold calculus. If you get rid of men, there would be a lot less violence in society is his claim. But who says you need to get rid of violence in society? Well, that's but shouldn't that at least be a discussion. All right, but the pros and cons have a debate on a panel discussion, violence pros and cons. Well, that's the sort of thing I can say so the Sunday, week ass academic decides to do because he thinks that his area of Boston would be nicer or whatever. He might decide it's useful if he was living in Kiev today to have violent men. I mean, it might, if New York was invaded right now, I need some violent men around here. But it wouldn't be invaded if there's no violent men. Well, there's the arc goes to argument. There's also at least there's some level of threat that you ought to exude that puts people off. If I was in, you know, I'm very glad that the men and women of Ukraine are capable of and more than capable of fighting for their country and for their neighbors and their families and much more. But it's better that that there was violence ready to unleash when violence was unleashed upon them, than that the whole society had been told that they should identify as non-binary. But at least it's a conversation to have isn't there? Is there aspect to the sort of the feminist movement that is correct in challenging the some forms of violence domestic violence, for instance, although women are capable of that as well. I'm learning about this. We're all learning about this in the moment. I can't help but watch the entirety of it go down in this beautiful mess that is human relations. Okay. But it's just finished. I thought it's it's very unwise for women to war against men as it would be for men to war against women. It's highly, highly unwise to war on a majority population and in America, Britain and other Western countries, white people are still a majority. And so why would you tell the majority that they're evil by the end of their skin color? And think that that would be a good way to keep them in check. I mean, I'm not guilty of anything because of my skin color. I'm not guilty of anything. My ancestors didn't do anything wrong. And even if they had, why would I be held responsible for it? So to go back to Nietzsche, is there some aspect to where if we try to explain the forces of play is it the will to power playing itself out from individual human nature and from group behavior nature? Is there some elements to this which is the game we play as human beings is always one way of less power. We try to find ways to gain more power. That's certainly one. The desire to grab is, let me see if I find a quote for you on that, the desire to grab that which we think we're owed and to do it often in the guise of justice. I mean, justice is one of the great terms of our age and one of the very great bogus terms of our age. People forever talk about their search for justice. It's amazing how violent they can often be in their search for justice and how many rules they're willing to break so long as they can say that they're after justice and how many norms they can trample so long as they can say it's in the name of justice. You can burn down building with the name of justice. Well, the majority groups throughout history, including those with white skin color have done the same in the name of justice. We deal up with all kinds of sexy terms in our propaganda machines to sell whatever atrocities we'd like to commit. One of the quotes of Nietzsche that I liked and I quoted in this. Careful I'm judging you harshly. Yeah, of course. Nietzsche says that one of the dangers of men of resentment is they'll achieve their ultimate form of revenge which is to turn happy people into unhappy people like themselves, to shove their misery in the faces of the happy so that in due course the happy and this is quoting Nietzsche, start to be ashamed of their happiness and perhaps say to one another it's a disgrace to be happy. There is too much misery. This is something to be averted for the sick says Nietzsche must not make the healthy sick too or make the healthy confuse themselves with the sick. Well, I think there again there's a lot of that going on. How could I be happy when there is unhappiness in the world? Why should I not join the ranks of the unhappy? I think Justi Eski has a book about that as well. Sure. No, it's from Underground. Okay. This has been very Russian, but Russian focus. I'm very pleased with it. Other times, both Justi Eski and Grossman and others have come in. This is very... I wasn't like doing this as a sort of... Yeah, well, it's always good to plug the grates and good to know they're still relevant. Do you speak Russian, by the way at all? Which I did. I'm told it's a 10-year language basically to learn from scratch. As my friends who have done it. Well, there's the language and then there's the personality behind the language and the personality. I feel like you already have. So you just need to know the surface details. Okay. In fact, the silence to be silent in the Russian language is something that's already important. Oh, I should... If we had a moment, I'd tell you my story about Stalin's birthplace. I don't know that. No. I once went to Gory where Stalin was born. Have you been? No. That's really... I was there just after the Georgia War. I went to the... No matter how it's landed, it's out of the set here in Abkhazia. And I said, I really got to go to Gory also here because the shell had landed in Gory rather weirdly from the Russian side and Gory is where Stalin was born. And of course Gory is in Georgia. And I only have the museum of Stalin's birthplace. They've been trying to change for some years because it's been unadulteratedly pro-Styling for years. And the Georgian authorities, this is in Chicago's village time. We're trying to make it into a museum of Stalinism. And it was really tough. The only place I've seen which is similar as the house in Mexico City where Trotsky was killed. That also is that they're not quite sure to do. They don't want to say he's a bad guy because they think that people won't come any out. Stalin's house in Gory had changed from the museum of Stalinism. There was this large Georgian woman with a pink pencil who had clearly been doing the talk for like 50 years. And he just pointed all the fascists. You did that classic thing. I also saw some sort of North Korea where they sort of that sort of communist thing where they say here is this is 147 feet high by 13 feet deep. It gives you lots of fascism. I don't care. What does it matter? It will give you facts. This is Stalin's suitcase. It is 13 inches wide by, you know, there's anyhow. And this woman did all of this and it was all just wildly pro, not pro-Styling. It's just explaining the signs. It was just all in great local boy done good. They didn't mention the fact he killed more Georgians per gap than anyone else. And we get to the end. And before being taken to the gift shop where they sell red wine with Stalin's face on it and among other things. And a lighter with Stalin on it. They took you to a little room under the stairs and they said this is a replica of interrogation style to show a represent horror of what happened in Stalin time. Now a gift shop. As I said, there's no no kind of thing. I took the woman aside. Yeah, in Icecraft she said this to other journalists and visited for icecraft. I said, I said, what do you think about communist Stalin? And she said, I was going to say she'd obviously done this during communist times. She said it's not my place to judge. That's sort of thing. We have an interesting comment in itself. I said, yeah, but he killed more Georgians than anyone. And all that sort of thing. And she said, it's not my place to judge. You want to give my views. And the advantage I said, but what do you think about it? And she said it was like a hurricane. It happened. That's interesting because if I may mention clubhouse once again, I got in a chance to talk to a few people from Angolia. There's a woman from Angolia. And they talked about the fact that they deeply admire Stalin. The love she sounded if I may. Hopefully that's not cross in line. I think I'm representing her correctly in saying she admired him almost like loved them. Like the people love like Jesus, like a holy figure. Well, isn't that still the case in Lyspots of Russia? Yeah. Stalin keeps on winning greatest Russian of all time. And that's perhaps maybe there's a dip. But if we were to think about the long arc of history, perhaps that's going to go up and up and up and up. There's something about human memory that you forget the details of the atrocities of the past. And remember the, I mean, think of the number of people we talk about as historical hero Napoleon. I mean, British people don't talk about Napoleon as a hero, but the French. Now you're, you didn't think that does the Yosuke now get a tricky ground. But no, but like the French are as you normally imagine Napoleon and there hadn't many, and more as with you is also a unbelievable brute and killed many people unnecessarily. And there are lots of figures from history that we sort of cover that over with. Yeah. Yeah. Can we mention Churchill briefly? Sure. Because he is one of the, you could make a case for him being one of the great representatives or great figures historically of Western civilization. Yes. And then there's a lot of people from not a lot. I know I have like three friends and one of one of them happens to be from London. And they say that he is a not a good person. Why? So listen, this friend would not discuss, I just, this is an opinion poll of the three friends. But I do know that there's quite a bit, you know, there's a backlash going on at the moment. At the moment, in general, there's a spirit like reflecting on the darker sides of some of these historical figures like challenging history through. It's not just critical race theory. It's challenging history through well. Are the people we think of as heroes? What are their flaws? And are they in fact villains that are convenient sort of were there at the right time to accidentally do the right thing? Accidentally. Well, I hope this isn't the representative fair estimation of your friend in London's views. No, she's going to be quite mad at this, but I didn't say the name so it could be any friend. It could be. But we know it's a she Canada. Well, see, I, I, I, I've given that away. Well, that's with, of course, I would not, I made that up completely. It's, it's all just like my girlfriend in Canada. She's completely a figment of my imagination. Nevertheless, Winston Churchill is somebody, I mean, just looking at reading the Ryzenfall that the Reich is an incredible figure that, that to me, so much a world war two is marked leading up to the wars marked by stunning amounts of cowardice by political leaders. Yes. And it's fascinating to watch here. This person clearly with the drinking and a smoking problem was, I didn't understand why that's a negative. No, I didn't say it. You see, yeah, you thought it in as if it is. No, well, it's, it's called humor. I'll explain it to you one day with that means, but that he still explain dry him. He stood up. He, he, he stood up to what we now see as evil. When at the time, it was not so obvious to see, you know, so that's, that's, that's just a fascinating figure of Western civilization. I'd love to get your comments. The real criticisms. I mean, yeah, that's making it drinking. The real Christians of, of Churchill are quite easy to sum up. And I do so in the war on the West age. I say, these are the things that they now use against him. I didn't do enough to revert the but Bengal family in 1943, for instance, that's, that's been shot down by numerous historians, including Indian historians, in the middle of the war, in the middle of a world, the world, Churchill did what he could to get grain supplies diverted from Australia to, to, to, to Bengal. The, the famine was appalling. It was caused by a typhoon. It was not caused by Winston Churchill. And the idea that some, basically Indian nationalists historians have pumped out in recent years and just, Andy Churchill figures that he actually wanted Indians to die as, I mean, it's just a total calamity. And when people claim, some people claim them, I mean, there was a few very ignorant scholars, and now, the less with some credentials, who claim that Churchill wanted the Indian population to, right, basically be genocide. And it's, it's complete nonsense, not least, but the fact that during the period, which in question, Indian population boomed. So that's one of the main ones. Another one is that he had some views that we now had regard as racist. He definitely regarded racism as being of different characters. And that there were superior races and the, as it were, the white European was a superior culture. He was born in Victorian England. So he has a Victorian attitude. These are things in the negative side of the ledger. And as with all history, you should have a negative and a positive side of the ledger. Positive side of the ledger includes that he almost certainly didn't more than anyone human being to save the world from Nazism. So that should count as something. And one of the reasons I talk about Churchill and this regard is this is to stress that if you get, I'm not trying to stop anyone doing history at all. I don't think that the revisionism of recent years about Churchill or the founding fathers of America or anywhere else is anything I want to stop. I find it interesting, I find interesting, not least, because it's so sloppy on occasions, but I find it interesting and it's important. And we should be able to see people in the round. But that includes recognizing the positive side of the ledger. And if you can't recognize that side, you're doing something else. You're doing something else. It's not history. It's some form of politicking of a very particular kind. And I think it's the same thing with the founding fathers. There are some people, for instance, certainly since the 90s who have pushed the Sally Hemings Thomas Jefferson story to show that Thomas Jefferson was some kind of brute. As a result, we see Jefferson's statue being removed from the council chamber and the city was sitting in last November by council members who said that Thomas Jefferson no longer represents our values. If you can't recognize greatness of Thomas Jefferson and that he had flaws, I mean, that's not a grown up debate and weigh them and weigh them in the context of the time. But let me sort of throw a curb-ballet you then. What about recognizing the positive and the negative of a fellow with a nice facial hair called Karl Marx? Sure. I mean, I have a section in the one-the-west, as you know, where I go for Karl Marx with some glee. So he seems to have gotten some popularity in the west recently. Not just recently. Yeah, I mean, he's had a resurgence recently. Yes, resurgence recently. Well, that's because whenever things are seen to go wrong, people reach for other options. And when, for instance, it's very hard for people to accumulate capitalists. They're going to become capitalists. And so one thing that happens is people say, let's look at the Marxism thing again, see if that's a viable goer. My argument would simply be point me to one place that's worked. Well, the argument from the Marxist or the Marxian economist is that we've only really tried it once the Soviets tried it. And then if there's a few people that kind of tried the Soviet thing. You were tried it? Well, they basically is an offshoot of the Soviet. Yes, they've tried it. They tried it in Venezuela. Yes, yes, yes. So let's just quickly say, how did all these experiments go? They did not, while they failed in fascinating ways. They did, but they failed. Yes, they did. We should stress so grossly failed. So grossly failed that they threw millions and millions of people into completely 40 lives that were much shorter than they should have been. Yes. So the lesson to learn there, that you can learn several lessons. One is that anything that smells like Marxism is going to lead to a lot of problems. Now, another lesson could be, well, what is the fundamental idea that Marx had? He was criticizing capitalism. And the flaws of capitalism. So is it possible to do better than capitalism? And that's if you take that spirit, you start to wonder, that might actually become relevant in, I don't know, 20, 30, 50 years when the machine started doing more and more of the labor, all those kinds of things. You start to ask questions. My finally, my get to Marx is dream of what the average day would look like. Yes. Well, there's going to be a lot of literary criticism then. If you remember, that's what Marx said that we would be doing in the evening. It was the labor in the evening. Well, he didn't know Twitter was a thing or Netflix. So he would, he would change other things we could learn from Marx plausibly, possibly. I can't think of anything myself of hand, but to have a critique of capitalism isn't by any means a bad thing in the society. I'd rather that it was a critique of capitalism that showed how you improve capitalism, a critique of free market that showed how people could get better access to the free market, how you could ensure, since young people get onto the property ladder, things like that, those are constructive things. So people who say, we must have Marxism, I mean, don't know what the hell they're talking about, because that never leads to any of those things. Haven't learned in the past. It's never led in the past. And at some point, you've got to try to work out how many attempts you make at this damn philosophy before you realize that every attempt always leads to the same thing. I would say we could pretend that fascism has never been properly tried, and that it was unfortunate what happened in Nazi Germany, but you know, that wasn't real fascism. And in Mussolini's fascism, you know, it didn't go all that well, but it was, you know, a bit better. And maybe we could try a bit more Franco-fascism. Nobody would have any time for this crap, nor should they, the people who try that are reviled and quite rightly. So why do we tolerate it? With the Marxist fascism thing. And it's a great mystery to me the way that people do tolerate it. Always, always in this stupid way of saying, we haven't done it yet. And if you keep trying the same recipe and every time it comes out as shit, it's the recipes shit. Well, sort of, I'm trying to practice here by playing Devils Advocate. Practice the same idea that you mentioned, which is, when you say the word Marxism, should you throw out everything or should you ask a question, is there a good idea here? And the same, it's the good, it's the way in the good and the bad and be able to do so calmly and thoughtfully. Sure. You know, this famous George Orwell comment on the Stalinist. Do you know that? That's one of my favorite quotes. George Orwell in the early 40s gets into an argument with a Stalinist, his obviously Marxist. And the, this is after the show trial, it was 37. This is when it's very clear what Marxism in the Russian form is. And this, always in the discussion with this, this Marxist, and it goes on and on, and eventually Orwell says, well, you know, what about the show trials and and what about what's happened in Ukraine and the famines and much more and the purges and the purges and the purges and eventually the Stalinist says Orwell, what Orwell knows he's going to say all along, which is he says you can't make an omelette without breaking eggs. And Orwell says, where's the omelette? Oh yeah. So it's a good, that's a really good, because look at this by this stage. Okay. How many, where's my damn omelette? Where how many just messy, big, bloody, eggy piles have the Marxists created by now in country after country? Always next time they're going to produce the great omelette. But they never have and they never will because the whole thing is rotten from the start. But let me just also say one thing about, because Marx isn't as nice as he sounds. And that's one of the things that I try to highlight in the book is if we're going to do this reductive thing of people in history in St. Will they had views of their time and we must therefore condemn them for them. So fine, let's do the same thing with Marx. And there are things I quote in this book from Marxist letters, not least letters to angles. And indeed in his published writings, he was writing for the Moroccan press in the age of 50s. He has horrible views on slavery and colonialism and much more. But the main thing is, I mean, the horrible things he says about black people and the constant use of the N word. In fact, when I was doing the audiobook for the one of the words, I had to decide, will I read out the quotes from Marx or not? If I had to read them out, I'd have been canceled because people would have just said you've been using the N word so much in this passage. And I slightly thought of doing it so that I could say I was only quoting Marx to try to hit the point home in the end, of course, I was sensible and decided not to. But Marx's letters are disgusting on these terms. Since I highlighted this in this book and some of the media picked it up and have popularized this thing, I'm trying to put into the system, which is if you're going to accuse church of racism, you're going to accuse Jefferson of racism, Washington of racism and so on, what about Marx? The two things that Marxists have said since this came out has been, first of all, why are you saying this about Marx? He was a man of his time. Like everyone else. And the second thing that says, we don't go to Marx for his horrible, of horrible views on race. So talking about and mixed race people with gorillas and so on. We don't go to him for that. We go to him for his economic theories. I say, okay, well, we don't go to Thomas Jefferson for his views on slaves. We don't go to Churchill for his, the precise language he used that points in the 1910s about Indians or his health advice or his health advice. I do get him for that. But let's have some standards on this. And that's why I'm very suspicious of the fact that the people don't do this with Marx because I think what they're trying, what some people are trying to do and this isn't, this may sound conspiratorial, but I really don't think it is. I think that some people are deliberately trying to completely clear the cultural landscape of our past. In order to say there's nothing good, nothing you can hold on to. No one you should revere. You've got no heroes. The whole thing comes down. Who's left standing? Oh, we've also got this idea from the 20th century still about Marxism. Well, the 19th and 20th centuries. And no, no, you will not have the entire landscape derasinated. And then the worst ideas tried again. So basically destroy all of history and the lessons learned from history and then start from scratch and then then it's completely any idea can work and then you could just take whatever. Well, and the thing is there are always some people with pre-preferred ideas. And I mentioned this also with the postcolonialists. The postcolonialists were really interesting because when the European powers were moving from Africa and the Far East, postcolonial movements had one obvious move they could have done, which was to say since the European powers of the left, we will return to a pretty colonial life, which in some of their places would have been returning to slave markets and slave ownership and slave selling a much more. But put that aside for a second. They could have said we have an indigenous culture which we will return to. Almost uniformly in the postcolonial era, you had figures like France, Fannon, you had European intellectuals like Sartre who said the Western powers are retreating from these countries and therefore we should institute in these countries what but Western Marxism. Well, it's not obvious to me that like the bad ideas will be the ones that emerge but it's more likely that the bad ideas would emerge in this kind of context when you erase history. When you erase history. When you erase history and you leave some ideas deliberately uninterrogated. I mean, as I say, find me one in a hundred American students who've heard of any of the Communist despots of the 20th century. I mean, name recognition in there was a poll down a few years ago in the UK and like name recognition among children, school children for Stalin, let alone Mao. I mean Mao who kills more people than anyone 65 million Chinese perhaps. How many students in America know what Mao was, who he was, where he was, nothing or the atrocities committed, where the atrocities were committed. Or worry about that because it means that we might have learned one of the two lessons of the 20th century. We think we've learned one of the two lessons of the 20th century, we actually haven't learned that lesson. We've learned a little bit of it and we've not learned the other one at all because that's why we still have people in American politics and elsewhere actually talking about collectivization and things as if there's no problem with that and as if it's perfectly obvious and they could run it and they'd know exactly where to start. What are the two lessons of the 20th century? Fascism and communism. Yeah, I mean, I'm not exactly sure what the exactly the lessons are. No, it's not clear. The lessons were very clear that we'd be better at it. Well, one is your book broadly applied of the madness of crowds. That's one lesson. How so? Meaning like large crowds can display heard-like behavior. Yes, be very suspicious of crowds. Yeah. In general, I mean, you apply it in different, more to modern application in a sense, but that's rooted in history that crowds can, when humans get together, they can do some quite radically silly things. Belize can at ease very good on that crowds and power. And Eric Hoffa, who was a sort of self-taught amazing, not say what a didactic writer, the true believer and so on, he was extremely good on that. But the reason I mention the two thing though, I mean, we should have realized that the two nightmares of the 20th century fascism and communism, that we should know how they came about and we're interested in learning how one of them came about fascism and we know some of the lessons, like don't treat other people as less than you because of their race. That's one lesson. But when we've done some good at learning that, but the second one, not to do communism again, not to do socialism, I think we're way away from knowing because we don't know how it happened. And the little temptations are still there always. Look at people saying, I'm going to expropriate your property. People do things they don't like. They will get to a can't wait to take your property. Well, there's an appealing sense. Okay, every ideology has an appealing narrative behind it that sells the ideology. So for socialism, for communism is that there's a, it seems unfair that the working class does all of this work and gets only a fraction of the output. It just seems unfair. So you want to make it. If they do get a fraction of the output, yes. Yes. And so it seems to be more fair if we increase that. If the workers own all of the value of their output and well, the things that are more fair seems to be a good thing. Well, yeah, I mean, fairness is, I like fairness as a job. No, I must be for fairness because it's a much easier thing to try to work out. It's quite a morphous itself of the concept, but everyone can recognize it. So for instance, should the boss of the company earn a million times that of the lowest paid employee doesn't seem fair. Should they earn maybe five or ten times the salary of the lesser? Yeah, possibly. That could be fair. There are certain sort of multiples which are within the bounds of reasonableness. I think actually that's the much bigger problem in capitalism at the moment as I see it is the not untrue perception that a tiny number of people get a lot of the, a crew a lot of the benefits and that the bit in the middle has become increasingly squeezed and is danger always of falling all the way down to the bottom. I mean, I think in the snakes and ladders of American capitalism, for instance, it's a correct perception to say that the snakes go down awfully far. If you tread on the snake, you can plummet an awfully long way in America. And the deal in the game was that the ladders took you high and there's a perception and again, it's not entirely wrong that the ladders system on the board is kind of broken. What you're saying is you're a Marxist. I'm not the same. You heard that here first in the in the out of context blog post going to write about this. I get to that. I get back to the point the way to critique capitalism if it's gone bad is to get better capitalists. Free markets whether not fair should be made fair. Never decide that the answer is the thing that has never produced any human flourishing i.e. Marxism. So as you describe in the madness of crowds the heard-like behavior of humans that gets us into trouble, you as an individual thinker and others listening to this, how can you, because all of us are mid crowds, we're influenced by the society that's around us, by the people that's around us, how can we think independently? How can we, you know, if you're in in the Soviet Union at the beginning of the 20th century, if you're in, I don't know, Nazi Germany at the end of the 30s and 40s, how can you think independently? Given first of all that it's hard to think independently just intellectually speaking, but also that there's it's just becomes more and more dangerous. So the incentive to think independently under the uncertainty that's usually involved with thinking is, I mean it's a silly thing to say, but on Twitter there's a cost to be paid for, yes, for going against the crowd on any silly thing. Well we can even talk about, you know, what is it? Will Smith slapping Chris Rock? You know, there's a crowd that believes that that was unjustified, I forget what the crowd decided, but I don't, crowd split on that when it's safe to have one opinion either way. Okay, it is, right, but there's this, you put it very nicely, that there's clearly a calculus here and that you can measure on Twitter, particularly you can measure kind of the crowd, a sense of where the crowd lays. Michael Jackson. Well, boy, I don't want to, this is not, this is not a legal discussion, what I've lawyer, I don't know my lawyer, I don't even have a lawyer. The man in question is dead, but I think most people who are not just diehard fans would concede that Michael Jackson had a strange relationship with children and was almost certainly a beautiful. Is that, was that, did the crowd agree on that? No, the crowd hasn't agreed because he's too famous and we all love thriller. Yeah, we do. So you said people who are not fans, I just don't know, I'm a fan of Michael Jackson, but I think he was almost certainly a beautiful. And I, but I've been, I've been nobody wants to give up dancing to bad at weddings. So they just kind of added in. It's fine. Seriously, it's, it's, it's your, your law has not applied to Bill Cosby. Oh, well, he wasn't, he was, of course, one of the most famous people in America, but maybe he wasn't regarded as talented. Oh, wow, there's, there's depth to this Oh, yeah, there's a genius opt out in all cultures. There's a genius opt out in all cultures. Look at Lord Byron, Lord Byron, Shagged his sister. Doesn't affect his reputation. In fact, if anything, it kind of adds to it. But then again, this kind of war against the West, genius is actually makes you more likely or no to get canceled. So if you look at the genius of Thomas Jefferson, or well, yes, because if you don't have done anything remarkable, nobody will come looking for you past it. I'll cast it. Yeah. I'll society genius can get you trouble alive. Okay. Sidel through life and nobody noticing. Be totally harmless and then, and then die and hope you haven't used any carbon. But, but you were asking about, you were asking about how to survive the, the era of social media as it were and the crowds. And, and there's a very simple answer to that. Don't don't overrate the significance of the unreal world. Oh, come on, but this is still human psychology because you want to fit in. There's a, you want to why? Because you're, you like people and you're just as a, why not just like a small number of people and ignore the rest? Yeah, that's, that's what I do. Well, I mean, I actually like most people. I'm not, this isn't a general thing. I don't have detestation for most people at all. I mostly like, I don't like, enjoy speaking with them, being with. But, in terms of storing your sense of self worth in absolute strangers, big mistake. Yeah. Well, me, that's, this is an understanding therapy session. This for me, and I think I represent some number of population is I'm pretty self-critical. I'm looking for myself in the world. And there is a depth of connection with people on the internet. I mean, I have some of the challenges of it. It's shallow connection. Interesting. I put it this way, if you, if you became very ultimaro, would any of them help? On the internet? No. No. Good. That's a good test. Yeah, that's a good test. But then at the end of the day, yeah, you're right. You're very close friends would help family would help. Yeah. Yeah. And perhaps that's the only thing you can't store. You can't store significant amounts of trust or faith or belief or self worth in places which will not return it to you. Okay. So let's talk about the more extreme case, the harsher case. When you talk about the things you talk about in the war on the west and madness of crowds, I mean, you're getting a lot of blowback. I'm sure. For the listener, you just shrugged lightly with a zen light. Look in your face. So you don't all you need is Sam Harris to say that you're brilliant and you're happy. No, I'm very, very, I love Sam. Yeah. I'm deeply pleased when he flanders me, but I mean, and he's nice about me, but no, I don't just rely on Sam. No, I mean, I, I don't, why would I mind? I mean, maybe it's self-selecting. If I didn't have the view I had about that or the whatever armory it is that I have on that, I wouldn't do what I did maybe. I mean, have you been to some dark places psychologically because of the challenging ideas you explore, like significant self-doubt, just kind of, I can't say I've been unaffected by everything in my life, by any means that would make me an automator or some kind. There's definitely times I've got things wrong and regretted that. There's times I've, there was a period around the time I wrote my book, The Strange Death of Europe, which I was very, very dark time. And it wasn't because I was having a dark time in my life, but because of the book I was writing. Oh, because of the place you had to go in order to write. Yeah. And while I was contemplating the end of a civilization, so occasionally, now I have maybe slightly too pat at this stage, but sometimes readers come up to me in the street or whatever and say, you know, I'd love The Strange Death of Europe. And we'll say, you know, very depressing book to read, however. And I would say, you should have tried writing it. But it was because I mean, I was, it was, it has chunks of it, which I'm very proud of in particular about the death of religion, the death guard, the loss of meaning and the void. And that's difficult stuff to write about and to grapple with. And there is a sort of, I haven't reread that book since it came out, but I think there are passages in it which reveal what I was thinking very clearly in the poetry of it as it was, as well as the detail. But yeah, I can't say, I'm used to saying what I think and what I see. And if there's any pushback I've got from that, I'm completely consoled that I'm saying what I see with my own eyes. That's your source of strength is that you're always seeking the truth, this best you see it. Well, I can't agree to go along with a lie if I've seen something with my own eyes. Do you ever, so speaking of Sam Harris, and I mentioned to you offline, a lot of people, I talked to a lot of smart people in my private life on this podcast and a lot of them will reference you as a, as their example of a very smart person. So given that a compliment, do you ever worry that your sort of ego grows to a level where you're not what you think is the truth is no longer the truth? Is this kind of, it blinds you. And also on top of that, the fact that you stand against the crowd often, that there's part of it that appeals to you, that you like to point out the Emperor is not closed. Now get a certain thrill from the friction. Yeah, that sometimes both your ego and the thrill of friction will get you to deviate from the truth and instead just look for the friction. Could do, could do for sure. I try to keep alive for that. I mean, I try, early in my career, I realized that for instance, I didn't want to make on enemies unnecessarily, any more than strictly necessary because there was a very large number of already necessary enemies. And I remember one, so I'm going to the details, but I already had one sort of thing I'd done that we, and then another thing came out. I just thought I can't, I can't do. And I remember thinking don't be the sort of person who's forever creating storms. And I'm trying to make sure I wasn't. And I think I pretty much stuck to that. But to answer your question, well the first thing is I'm, I'm as confident I can be that I wouldn't fall into the trap you describe. It's two reasons. I mean, one is that I don't think of myself as a wildly intelligent person. Partly because I'm very, very aware of the things I know nothing about. I mean, for instance, I have an almost no knowledge of the details of finance. Or economic theory. I mean, the real details, I don't mean the big picture of the kind that we were just discussing earlier, but I have, if you put the periodic table in front of me, I would struggle to do more than, um, hand forward. Yeah. I am very conscious of huge gaps in my knowledge. And where I have gaps or chasms, I tend to find I have a disproportionate admiration for the people who know that stuff. Like I'm wildly impressed by people who understand money, really understand it. You know, I think, how the hell do you do that? And the same thing with biologists, medics, stuff I just know very little about. And that's a source of humility for you just knowing that. Yes. I mean, I think, well, I can get that stuff, but I'm like, Jesus, if you got me a general knowledge, I would say that thing. At some years ago, there's a thing in the UK called University Challenge, I didn't know. And I was asked some years ago on to, there's a sort of like celebrity, one of former students of the University of Zorcolleges, asked to go back for the Christmas special. And I was asked to be one of the people from my old college to go back and compete in the sort of celebrity alumni one. And the only thing I actually wanted to do it was go discover the Louis Thoreau had been to my college before my time. And he was on, he'd agreed to be on the team. And I thought I'd love to meet Louis Thoreau. That'd be great fun. And anyhow, and I said, I really don't want to do it. And they said, come on, you'd be great. I said, I wouldn't. I'd show myself up. I'd be a total asshole on the ignoramus. And as it was, I sat down my flat and I watched some past episodes for University Challenge. And I realized I just sat mute for the whole hour. I just couldn't, I think the first question was about physics and the second one was about, as it was, I watched the one and I could answer the first two or three questions of the one that actually went out because they made it a bit simpler. But I mean, I'm terribly conscious of the, and I said to the producers, I said, I can't go on because I mean, I just couldn't answer the questions. He's unbelievably smart. Students seem to be able to answer one whole range of things. So I'm perfectly aware of my limitations and you can't to plate your limitations. Yeah. And they're forever before me, you know, not hard to find in every day. And then on top of that, I suppose it's, you know, that line from Rudyard Kippling's alternative brilliant and slightly nauseating poem, if there's a line, it just enjoy a good poem, can you? Well, no, it's, it's, it's not, I can enjoy a great poem. Yes, but I mean, a good poem. Yeah, this is, you know, sight you off. But, wait, this is, this is, this goes to your criticism of Dusty Eski. Yeah, take, take, take, take, uh, dog, this is criticism with a grain of salt. I maybe I've heard it read it too many memorial services and things. Sure. But, uh, that line of, it's a good piece of rice. If you can learn to meet triumphant disaster and meet these, greet these two imposter's just the same. That's a good line. It's a good line as, as, as, as, keeping off of an amazing turn of line. But I, I do think that it's a very sensible thing to try to greet, uh, um, triumphant disaster and regard them as imposter's and greet them just the same. And actually anyone who knows me knows that I never, uh, partly it's because I have a sort of belief in the old gods and at the moment that I thought that I was at the moment of triumph, the fates would hitch up their skirts and run at me at a million miles an hour. Um, but it's also because I gen, anyone who knows me knows, I never have a moment when I say, um, that's just great. I feel totally fulfilled and victorious. I mean, it happened to me recently when my, when the one in the West went straight to number one in the best cellar this. How long did that last in terms of your self-satisfaction? Didn't have, not even for a brief moment. No. When I first saw that it was selling, I had that moment of relation. I thought, good, I've done it. It's out. And I did have a moment of relation then definitely. But it doesn't last partly because I tell myself it mustn't last. Because as you said, fate hitches up its skirt. Is that skirts? I don't, this you, you brits with your, with your poetry, even when it's nauseating. As of 2022 this year, what's your final analysis of the political leadership and the human mind and the human being of Donald Trump? I sort of avoided this for years. Just talking about Trump. I tried to avoid talking about Trump for years. It's the same with what I tried to avoid writing about Brexit. Do you think that Trump, just sorry, on a small tangent? Do you think that Trump's story is over? We just done with volume one. I have no idea the people I know who know him say that he's running. And, and I think that in general Republicans have to do have a choice in front of them. And one friend put it to me recently said, you've got to go in with your toughest fighter. And I understand that instinct. And I also think it's a very dangerous instinct. Because what is your toughest fighter is also your biggest liability. What's the best way to get a Democrat vote than 2024, than no Donald Trump running? And the people that are doing the war in the West are pretty tough fighters. They are. And I'm cautious about this because I know every way I tread it's dangerous, but let me just just be trained gracefully. I'll tread as gracefully as I can. My Wellington boots. I am my glosses. Here's a thing. I think everybody knows what Trump is. I think we all knew for years. And I feel sorry for the conservatives who had to pretend that he was something he wasn't. I felt sorry for the ones who had to pretend that, for instance, he was a devout Christian or a man of faith or a man of great integrity or all of these sorts of things because I'm not in the public eye for years. I mean, obviously that wasn't the case. But he has something extraordinary. One thing is a method of communication that you've just got to say is was unbelievable. In one fundamental way, you can't look away for some reason. Can't look away. I mean, I've been watching him clear everyone out of the way in 2016. It was thrilling because those people needed clearing away. You know, I mean, it's just horrified what America is going to give us another bush. It was so great about this family. America is going to give us another Clinton. We're going to get to choose where any Clinton on the bush. Mark Stein said whatever was just wait for the day the Clinton's on the bushes into Marriott and then we can really have a monarchy again. So I was very pleased to see him clear them away. I was very pleased to see him sort of raise some of the issues that needed raising. I thought it was a sort of breath of fresh air and I wished it wasn't him doing it. And then there was a question of him governing and it was just perfectly clear. He didn't know how to govern. He what he did have, however, what he does have is an incredible ability to fight. And some of the forces he was arraigned against were arraigned against him. My gosh, they would have taken down anyone else. I mean, they'd have probably done some similar BS against Ted Cruz if he, you know, or Marco Rubio. You know, they'd have said some people admit that they'd have accused all these people of racism and misogyny everything else as well just so they didn't make Romney just so they did John McCain. But Trump was the one ugly enough and bruisey enough to fight. And also a willingness or a lack of willingness to play sort of the civil game of politics sort of in a party when like politeness gets you in trouble. Yeah, I mean show up in every polite and you just out of momentum when it be being polite and all of a sudden you're in an island with Jeffrey Epstein and you get you into huge amount of trouble. But so Trump has these extraordinary qualities but I just, you know, look, he screwed up during his time in office because he didn't achieve as much as he should have done. And you could say they're about every president but I refused to acknowledge that two years when he had both houses in the first beginning, he just didn't know what leave us to pull. You know, I mean he was sitting in the office behind the Oval Office tweeting, watching the news. Sorry, that's not a president. And he couldn't fill and didn't fill positions because people knew, I mean people who were very loyal to him, he would just, you know, he'd get them to do something loyal and then destroy them. And I think, and then we get onto the thing about I'm here we get onto the, you know, what of course is very, very fractures to rain. But you know, I covered the 2020 election and I was traveling all around the states and I went to Trump rally and all sorts of stuff. And I, I was in DC on election night and went and it got very ugly at one point in so called Black Lives Matter Plaza. When it looked like Trump I'd win, which Florida came in and got really I could feel the air were very, very heated and like some antifus people started getting into Black Locke and this sort of stuff. And I thought this town is going to burn, you know, if Trump wins. And in the aftermath of the vote, I was willing to hang around and watching for a bit and then I saw it was going to drag on and I saw some of his people and others and people told me they had great evidence of vote ringing and all this sort of thing. And I'm afraid I'm one of those people who doesn't believe that the evidence that they've presented is good enough to justify the claim that he won the election. And I and people say, have you seen 2000 mules and have you seen it? Look, the evidence isn't there that the election was won by Donald Trump. And I think that what he did on January the 6th was unbelievably dangerous. And you know, here it is possible for us to hold two ideas on our head at the same time. January the 6th was not nothing nor was it an insurrection and attempt to stage a coup. And there's a vanishing number of people in the US. Or as Eric Weinstein said, this is the roof that you have to walk along. And the sides are very steep if you fall off either side. Is there some sense given the forces that are waging war in the West, you said this feeling perhaps because of antifor or something else that this town is going to burn and maybe a continued feeling that this town is going to burn with the January 6th events. Are you worried about the future of the United States in the coming years because of the feeling of escalation? Is that just a war of Twitter or is there real brewing of something? Oh, it's real. And how, well, let me then respond to that. How, what is the hopeful? If you if you 10 years from now look back at the United States and say we turned it around, what would be the reason? What would be the ways the mechanisms that we do so? Tell you, since I wrote in this book, there are two things in particular that I've been really pleased that a specific type of specialist has approached me on to say that things I've written about actually have more application than I realized. One is the gratitude issue. A number of people who have approached me who have gone through AA or alcoholics anonymous. They sometimes say, have you ever been to AA? And that's a bit personal question. But they say, but the reason they ask it is because they say, well, because if you go to drug rehabilitation or alcohol anonymous, a normal, a normal, it doesn't sound very anonymous. You stand up and you say your name and you tell I've found the worst things you've ever done. That's the opposite of anonymous. Anyhow, but they say, look, because if you go to these things apparently, you're asked to, as part of your recovery, say what you're grateful for, like list what you're grateful for. I didn't know that by the way, until the book was out. And so it turned out to have more application than I knew. The other thing, though, is that I say that it's absolutely crucial in America that we try to find things that we agree on. And a couple of times since I've come out, I've been approached by people who have marriage counsellors, but they've also said to me we've been through marriage counselling. I think again, that's a very personal question. No, but they say that they say, and I say, well, why? Because this is one of the things that we do in couples therapy is try to find things you agree on. And I think this is very important in America. And it's made much harder by the fact, and I said it's many times, but forgive me if I'm repeating myself, but it's made much harder by the fact that having different opinions is very last century. Now we all have different facts, or at least the two sides have different facts. One half of the country roughly, or let's say 40%, 30%, whatever you want to put it, with a tired minority in the middle. One segment of the country believes that Hillary Clinton won the 2016 election, and that the Russians interfere and got Donald Trump into power. Another half of the country believes that Donald Trump won the 2020 election. If you can't agree on who wins elections, it's very hard to see what you agree on as a country. That's one of the reasons I mind the war on American history and Western history is one of the things you have to agree on is at least some attitude towards your past. You don't have to go and everything. But like the public square has to have public heroes who are agreed to be heroes to some extent. What's an all? If you don't have that, if actually you think, for instance, like half the country thinks founding fathers were pretty good, the other half thinks they were absolutely rotten racists and so on. If half the country basically thinks it would have been better if Columbus had taken a different turn, never found America, gone back home and said, I don't know, nothing out there. That would have been better. And the other half's pretty glad in the end that we've got America. You know, you've got to agree on something and I just see an American. So I do think we've got to try to find things to agree on like a reasonable attitude towards the past. That's why that matters. And again, I stress, I'm not trying to say that everything in the American past was good. God knows that wouldn't stand up to a second scrutiny or self-scrutiny. But nor was it all bad. This wasn't a country formed in sin and in a radical sin. It wasn't founded in 1619 in order to make the country wicked and incapable of escaping that wickedness. You know, these are things that will matter enormously in the years ahead because if you can't agree on anything, including who your heroes are, like the whole thing is just one massive division and we'll see what I think we're already seeing, which is people basically going to states where it's more like the life they want to live. And some people say to me, well, that's okay and the genius of the founding is that it allows for that. That's possible, but it also eradicates part of what has been American public life, which is the ability to look at each other and discuss face to face. And I see things like this bomb placed under America the other week with the Supreme Court League, the draft league, as being just a further example of that. I'm very, very worried about it in America. And because if America screws up everything, everything else in the world goes. Yeah, there's the degree to which America is still the beacon of these ideas on which the country was founded and it's been able to live out in better and better forms, sort of live out the actual ideals of the founding principle versus like with the desire to improve. Yeah, constant. An imperfect union. Yeah. Well, I generally have hope that people want to sort of in terms of gratitude, people are aware of how good it feels to be grateful. That it's the better life psychologically. The resentment is a thing that destroys you from within. So I just feel that people will long for that and will find that. And that's the America way. Some of the division that we reveal now has to do with new technologies like social media. Yeah. That kind of is a small kind of deviation from the path we're on because it's a new, we've got a new toy. But we're new clear weapons. Yeah. We're relatively new. But we need to find reasonable attitudes towards these things. And I that's why I say like it matters how you and buy feedback on social media because we're all going through it to some extent. We're learning. And we're learning and we've got to learn how to do this without going mad. I say this, there's my minimalist call to friends in this era was the main job is not to go insane. Yeah. Yeah. And yeah, like walk towards sanity. Because you know, I'm sure there's a hundred of stumps in court in there. Like insanity and the weekends can be at least fun. Okay. Do you have advice for young people that just put down their TikTok and are listening to this podcast in high school and college about how to have a career, how to have a life they can be part of. So I have a question, but of course, I mean, I can give specific advice for people who want to be writers and so on, but that's a bit niche, maybe. The writers will be very interesting. Sorry to interrupt. Also, how to put your ideas down on paper and ideas develop them and have the guts to go to a large audience. Well, especially when the ideas are sort of controversial or dangerous or difficult. One of the main thing to do is to breed. When I was a schoolboy, I've ever have a book in my pocket, the side pocket and my jacket on the side pocket and would read and that wasn't just because I was swatish in some way, but because I discovered, probably at some point in my early teens, I discovered something I read about this one, I discovered the books were dangerous, which was a thrilling discovery. I discovered that they could contain anything and also people didn't know what you were reading. I remember I could fart a young age, I read the doors of perception of all this actually. Didn't make head or tail a bit, probably, but I knew that it was about something really interesting and dangerous. I thought constantly when I read poetry or read history, I was just constantly thrilled and wanted to know more. If you want to become a writer, you have to be a reader. You have to read the best stuff. Obviously, people disagree or agree on what that is and you'll find the people that really impress you. But I know that I just came across certain writers who just knocked me off my feet. When you find those people, read everything and cling on to them and find other people like that. Find other writers like that where people were connected by history or scholarship or circles or whatever. For you, was it fiction or nonfiction? Is there a particular book that you just remember or just give you pause? Well, I remember that the first book that absolutely threw me was The Lord of the Flies of William Golding, which used to be a sign text and everyone's a bit snotty about because it's so popular. But I was thrown because I think it was the first adult book I read in that I had been used to the world of children's literature, of everything ends up fine in the end. The lost all get found. You know, and this was the first book I read where that's not the case where the world turns out differently. And I remember for days afterwards, I was just in a state of shock. I couldn't believe what I'd just discovered. And partly because I sort of intuitive, it must be true. And of course, that is not to say that the Lord of the Flies had lots of scholarship on what children do in the situation of being on the island when they do congregate. And anyhow, but yes, that was a sort of introduction to the adult world. And it was shocking and thrilling. And I wanted more of it. It was dangerous. And it was dangerous. And then of course, when I became interested in sex, the Lone River I was gay, I read books were a very, very good way to learn about what I was. And that was even more dangerous in a way. Nobody knows what I know. And did you discovered sex? That was an invention in books. What do you mean? No, what I mean is, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. What I mean is that one of the things that gay people have when they're growing up is that you have this terribly big secret. And you don't think the world will ever know, you hope the world will never know. And it's been called by one psychologist, the little boy with a big secret. And so if you discover that other people have the same secret, there's a sort of, thank God for that. But I mean, that's just a version of what everybody gets in reading in a way, which is the thrill of discovery that somebody else thought, something you thought only you'd thought. I mean, one of the greatest, one of the greatest thrill in all of literature is when a voice comes across the centuries and seems to leave a handprint, you know. It makes you feel a little bit less alone because somebody else feels, yeah, this is the world the same way, is the same way. That's what you see at Lewis says, it says, said to have said, we read to know and not alone. But we don't only read to know and not alone, we read to become other people. I mean, I think I saw in books a version of the life I wanted to live and then I decided to live it. And unfortunately, enough to have done so. I wanted to live in the world of ideas and books and debate. And I wanted to live in the debates of my time, you know. And I remember when I make a lot of people, I read Orden when I was young. And you know, certain lines obviously stuck with me. But I that poem of his which everybody, you know, knows on which he hated September 1, 1939. I remember certain lines in that just like, whacked me. I was sitting on a dive for a second, it's really degraded and alone. The end of a load is honest decade. Of course, there's a problem with that line which is you kind of want to be living at the end of a load is honest decade as well. It sounds sort of cool in a way. You're the only person who sees it. But so yeah, anyhow, there's a diversion. But the point is, if you want to be a writer, you've got to be a reader. And part from anything else, you discover the the lilt of language and the things you can do. And I've read people who, and I still do, I think, my god, I didn't know. How did you do that? In fact, books, books for me now and articles and other things, fall into two categories. One is, I know how you did that. And the other is, I don't know how you did that. And the best feeling as a writer is when you do the second one. And it happens occasion in my writing life. Will you almost like return to something you've written or like right after you? No, the moment you write it, you wonder how did I do that? Yes. That's the most, I've never said that before. That's the happiest thing in writing. Very occasion in his sounds. But I mean, I've occasionally finished something. Finally, it happened to some years ago in a long piece I wrote about the artist, Bask Yet. I finished the piece and I gasped. I didn't know. Because that's also a thing with writing is, it's not, sometimes people say you need to write in order to know what you think. That's not quite true. Sometimes that's a very bad piece of advice for some writers who don't know what they think and it's not going to become clear if they just start typing. But sometimes it is true that you, there's a thought that's just waiting there and a clarity that comes across and suddenly the sentence emerges in your brain. And by the time you typed it, you just go, yes. That's the greatest feeling of writing. Almost like you came from somewhere else. That's what Bacunin says about, what's the moment, Tom Stopper's favorite quote about, you know, Bacunin's saying what happens in the moment where the writer's pen when he pauses, where does he go in that moment? That's so interesting. That's, that's so because I think the answer to that question will help us explain consciousness and all those other weird things about the human mind. Yeah. So that was advice for writers. I didn't really give any advice to people in general, but is that, oh, you want to give health advice to your channel, Churchill? No, I don't give health advice. Clearly, because you implied that Churchill was one of your early guides in that aspect. So when you discovered your sexuality, let me ask about love. Two per, far two personal go for question to ask a, a Brit, but what was that like and broadly speaking, what's the role of love in the human condition? Sex and love. And for you personally, discovering that you were and maybe telling the world that you were okay. I'm very perilously personal. I do actually have a sort of rule that I didn't talk about with personal life, but I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll break it a little bit. The, the, the one of the ways in which growing up and rising your gay differs from growing up being straight is that it's almost inevitable that your first passions will be unrequited. Oh, wow, I never thought about that. Yeah. Now, that's not to say, I mean, you know, there's plenty of unrequited love among young men for young women, young women for young men, there's plenty of, yeah, you know that. But it's almost inevitable if you're gay that your first passions will be totally unrequited because the odds are that the person in question will not be gay. So the experience of love is mostly heartbreak. It's heartbreak and disappointment. And that heartbreak can be beautiful too. Of course. Well, as again, it comes back to the thing, if if you're a writer, it was something you can always do something with it. That's why all writers are sort of not to be trusted. I didn't trust you the moment you walked in here. No, I mean, it's a famous problem with the writers, because you always think why could you use that? It's a dangerous thing and all writers should write it. It's somewhat like a drug. No, it's not like a drug. It's the fear that all things, even the greatest suffering, it could be material. What's the danger in that exactly? That's seen the material in human experience, you don't experience it fully and you might be using it. I had a friend who wrote a poem about a friend who died in a most like accident in the 17 to 60s and he said, he knew the moment he was told that his friend is deaf, a tiny bit of him thought I could use this for a poem. And he did and the poem was wonderful, but there's always a slight guilt for writers. Am I going to use that? Anyhow, that's a divergent. Life is full of guilty pleasures. And I think that's one of them because if you feel that guilt, really what you're doing is you're capturing that moment and you're going to impact the lives of many, many people by writing about that moment because it's going to stimulate something that resonates with those people because they had similar kinds of memories about a loss and a passion towards somebody that they had to lose. But there's a good sign, maybe. More obvious, perhaps problem is reporting from war zones or bad places and wanting to find bad stories because it's useful. And there's a definite guilt you get from that sort of thing like the worst situation, the more useful and anyhow. So that's sort of the only difference that happens from growing up in gay and it means that most certainly in my generation most gay men came to sexual or romantic maturity later. And there's lots of explanations of that maybe being one of the reasons for perceived or otherwise promiscuative on gay men, which is I think more easily persuaded by the fact that gay men behave like men would if women were men. That's one explanation. But it's both a feature and a bug that you come to sexual flourishing later in life that could be seen as a in the trajectory of human life that could be positive or negative. But what's broadly speaking is the role of love in the human condition, Douglas? Well, it's the nearest thing we have to finding the point. What is the point? What's the meaning of life? Let's go there. So what's the meaning is a hard one, of course. Where is the meaning as slightly easier? And I say that everyone can find that. You gravitate towards the places you find meaning. Now there's a conservative answer to this, which is quite useful and it's certainly more useful than any others because the conservative answer is find meaning where people have found it before. Which is a very good answer. Yeah. If your ancestors have found meaning in a place of worship or a particular canon of work go there because it's been proven by time to be able to give you the goods. It's much more sensible than saying, hey, I don't know, discover new ways of meaning. But love is probably the nearest thing we can have to the divine on earth. And of course, the problem of what exactly what type of love we mean is an issue. Well, that goes to the fact that you don't like definitions anyway. I do like definitions. I just think they need to be pinned down. But let's not go there because it's that's not pinned down love at the moment. Well, no, because the different varieties of love in the fact that we have one word for it in our culture and it means an awful lot of things and we don't delineate it. Yeah. Well, but let's say human love with the greatest fulfillment in sexual fulfillment in sexual love with another person is probably the greatest intimation you can have of what might otherwise only be superseded by divine love. And it's the the sense that all young lovers have, which is that they've just walked through the low door in the garden and found themselves in bliss and that this is... There's a beautiful, beautiful poem of... Can I read it to you? Yes, please. I'll try to find... There's a beautiful poem of Philip Larkin's, which slightly says what I'm... I'm trying not to document question by referring to other people, but... Maybe that's the best way to answer the question. Could be it's to read a poem. So there's a poem by Philip Larkin called High Windows, which is which is remarkable because he came to sexual... Straightly, he hadn't had a rather happy sex life, but he came to sexual fruition in the 40s and 50s and all the hell that involved. And he took a... he took what I remember, regardless of being a really remarkable and important view on the sexual revolution in the 60s, which is that most people are as generous, most older people resented the young. They resented the freedom they had and actually they've... they've attended the freedom was terrible and it was always getting likely to... And Philip Larkin, rather surprisingly, he's a very conservative person, took a different view and he says it in his poem and the opening of the poem, as he says, when I see a couple of kids and guess he's fucking her and she's taking pills or wearing a diaphragm. I know this is paradise. Everyone old is dreamed of all their lives. Bonds and gestures pushed to one side like an outdated combine harvester, and everyone young going down the long slide to happiness endlessly. I wonder if anyone looked at me 40 years back and thought, that will be the life, no god anymore, or sweating in the dark about hell and that, or having to hide what you think of the priest. He and his lot will all go down the long slide like free bloody birds. And immediately, rather than words, comes the thought of high windows, the sun comprehending glass, and beyond it the deep blue air that shows nothing and is nowhere and is endless. The divine, he found it. He found it in seeing a couple of young kids and knowing that one of them was wearing a diaphragm. It's first of all it's very kind of intuitive, but secondly, this is the point that sex had been so tied up with misery. I mean, people don't remember this now when they talk about the past. I mean, there's one of my favorite books, Stefan's Vagas, The World of Yesterday, in descriptions of what it was like, I think, trying to have sex in pre-first world war Vienna. All the men ended up going to female prostitutes, so many of them got syphilis. This was their first experience of sex. It was so god damn awful, and they were stuck with it all their lives. There's lots of stuff that's conventing on our sense, and that's one of them. But you ask about love. Yes, I do think that love is basically the thing that gives us the best glimpse of the divine. And by the way, sex, liberating sex doesn't buy you love. No. I mean, it throws in an entirely, it threw in another set of problems. If there's any meaning on top of all that, is we like to find problems and solve that as a human species, and sometimes we even create problems. Douglas, thank you for highlighting all the problems of human civilization and giving us a glimmer of hope for the future. This is an incredible conversation. Thank you for talking today. It's a huge honor. Thank you. This is very kind of you to say that. Thank you. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Douglas Murray. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from Douglas Murray himself. This agreement is not oppression. Argument is not assault. Words, even provocative and repugnant ones, are not violence. The answer to speech we do not like is more speech. Thank you for listening. I hope to see you next time.