Whenever we start a new project, it has to have these ingredients of simultaneous complexity. It has to be novel in terms of the synthetic biology, material science, robotics, engineering, all of these elements that are disciplined, based or rooted must be novel. If you can combine novelty in synthetic biology with a novelty in robotics, with a novelty in material science, with a novelty in computational design, you are bound to create something novel. The following is a conversation with Neri Oxman, an engineer, scientist, designer, architect, artist, and one of the kindest, most thoughtful, and brilliant human beings of Evergarden to know. For a long time, she led the mediated matter group at MIT that did research and built incredible stuff at the intersection of computational design, digital fabrication, material science, and synthetic biology. Doing so at all scales, from the micro scale to the building scale. Now, she's continuing this work at a very new company for now called Oxman, looking to revolutionize how humans design and build products, working with nature, not against it. On a personal note, let me say that Neri has for a long time been a friend, and someone who, in my darker moments, has always been there with the note of kindness and support. I am forever grateful to her. She's a brilliant and a beautiful human being. And she also brought me a present, worn piece by Dolstoy and meditations by Marcus Aurelius. It doesn't get better than that. This is the Lex Rebend podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Neri Oxman. Let's start with the universe. The other thing is the universe is a kind of machine that designs beautiful things at multiple scales. I do. And I think of nature in that way, in general, in the context of design, specifically. I think of nature as everything that isn't antropomous, everything that is not produced by humankind. The birds and the rocks and everything in between fungi, elephants, whales. Do you think there's an intricate ways in which there's a connection between humans and nature? Yes. And we're looking for it. I think that from, let's say, from the beginning of mankind going back 200,000 years, the products that we have designed have separated us from nature. And it's ironic that the things that we design and produce as humankind, those are exactly the things that separated us. Before that, we were totally completely connected. And I want to return to that world. But bring the tools of engineering and computation to them. Yes. Yes. I absolutely believe that there is so much to nature that that we still have not leveraged. And we still have not understood. And we still have. And so, much of our work is designed, but a lot of it is science is unveiling and finding new truths about the natural world that we were not aware before. Everybody talks about intelligence these days, but I like to think that nature has kind of wisdom that exists beyond intelligence or above intelligence. And it's that wisdom that we're trying to tap into through technology. If you think about humans versus nature, at least in the realm, at least in the context of definition of nature as everything, but anthropomass. And I'm using Ron Milo, who is an incredible professor from the Weissmann Institute, who came up with this definition of anthropomass in 2020. When he identified that 2020 was the cross over year when anthropomass exceeded biomass on the planet. So all of the design goods that we have created and brought into the world now outweigh all of the biomass, including of course, all plastics and wearables building cities, but also as felt and concrete all outweigh the scale of the biomass. And actually that was a moment. You know how in life there are moments that be a handful of moments that get you to course correct. And my, it was a Zoom conversation with Ron. And that was a moment for me when I realized that that imbalance now we've superseded the biomass on the planet. Where do we go from here? And you've heard the expression more, more phones than bones and the anthropomass and the anthropocene. And the technosphere sort of outweighing the biosphere. But now we are really trying to look at is, is there a way in which all things technosphere are designed as if, as if they are part of the biosphere. Meaning if you could today grow instead of build everything and anything, if you could grow an iPhone, if you could grow a car, what would that world look like? Where the touring test for sort of this, this kind of, I call this material ecology approach, but this this notion that everything material, everything that you design in the physical universe can be read and written to as or thought of or perceived of as nature grown. That's sort of the touring test for it for the company or at least that's how I started. I thought well, grow everything, that's sort of the slogan. Let's grow everything. And if we grow everything, is there a world in which driving a car is better for nature than a world in which there are no cars? Is there, is it possible that a world in which you build buildings in cities, that those buildings in cities actually augment and heal nature, as opposed to their absence? Is there a world in which we now go back to that kind of synergy between nature and humans where you cannot separate between grown and made? And it doesn't even matter. Is there a good term for the intersection between biomass and anthropomass, like things that are grown? Yes, in 2005, I called this material ecology. I thought what if all things materials would be considered part of the ecology and would have an impact, a positive impact on the ecology, where we work together to help each other, all things nature, all things human. And again, you can say that that wisdom in nature exists in fungi. Many mushroom lovers always contest my thesis here saying, well, we have the mushroom network and we have the mother trees and they're all connected. And why don't we just simply hack into mushroom soil? First of all, yes, they're connected, but that network stops when there is a physical gap. That network does not necessarily enable the whales in the Dominican to connect with an olive tree in Israel to connect with the weeping willow in Montana. And that's sort of a world that I'm dreaming about. What does it mean for nature to have access to the cloud? At the kind of bandwidth that we're talking about, sort of think, neural link for nature, you know, since the first computer, the, and you know this by heart, probably better than I do, but we're both MIT lifers. We today have computational power that is one trillion times the power that we had in those times. We have 26.5 trillion times the bandwidth and 11.5 quintillion times the memory, which is incredible. So humankind, since the, since the first computer, has approached and accessed such incredible bandwidth. And we're asking, well, what if nature had that bandwidth? So beyond genes and evolution, if there was a way to augment nature and allow it access to the world of bits, what does nature look like now? And can nature make decisions for herself as opposed to being guided and guarded and abused by, by humankind? So nature has this inherent wisdom that you spoke to, but you're also referring to augmenting that inherent wisdom with something like a large language model. So compare, compare human knowledge, but also maintain whatever is that intricate wisdom that allows plants, bacteria, fungi to grow incredible things at arbitrary scales, adapting to whatever environment and just surviving and thriving, no matter where and no matter how. Exactly. So I think of it is large molecule models and those large molecule models, of course, large language models are based on Google and search engines and so on and so forth. And we don't have this data currently. And part of our mission is to do just that, trying to quantify and understand the language that exists across all kingdoms of life, across all five kingdoms of life. And if we can understand that language, is there a way for us to first make sense of it, find logic in it, and then generate certain computational tools that empower nature to build better crops, to increase the level of biodiversity? In the company we're closely asking, what does nature want? Like, what does nature want from a compute view? If it knew it, what could aid it in whatever the heck is wanting to do? Yeah, so we keep coming back to this answer of nature wants to increase information, but decrease entropy, right? So find order, but constantly increase the information scale. And this is true for what our work also tries to do because we're constantly trying to fight against the dimensional mismatch between things made in things grown, right? And as designers, we are educated to think in x, y, and z, and that's pretty much where architectural education ends and biological education begins. So in reducing that dimensional mismatch, we're missing out on opportunities to create things made as if grown. But in the natural environment, we're asking, can we provide nature with these extra dimensions? And again, I'm not sure what nature wants, but I'm curious as to what happens when you provide these tools to the natural environments, obviously with responsibility, obviously with control, obviously with ethics and moral code. But is there a world in which nature can help fix itself using those tools? And by the way, we're talking about a company called Oxman. Yeah, I'll just a few words about the team. Yeah, what kind of humans work at a place like this? They're trying to figure out when nature wants. You know, I think they're first like you. They're humanists first. They come from different disciplines and different disciplinary backgrounds. And just as an example, we have a brilliant designer who is just a mathematical genius and a computer scientist and a mechanical engineer who is trained as a synthetic biologist and now we're hiring a microbiologist and a chemist, architects, of course, and designers, roboticists. So it's really, it's no as arc, right, to and always dancing between this line of the artificial, the synthetic and the real was the term for and the natural. Yeah, the built in the grown nature and culture, technology and biology, but we're constantly seeking to ask how can we build design and deploy products in three scales, the molecular scale, which I've really handed to and there in the molecular scale, we're really looking to understand whether there's a universal language to nature and what that language is and then build a tool that I think and dream of it is the iPhone for nature. If nature had an iPhone, what would that iPhone look like? That means creating an interface between nature and the computational tools we have. Exactly. It goes back to that 11.5 quintillion times the bandwidth that humans have now arrived at and giving that to nature and seeing what happens there. Can animals actually use this interface to know that they need to run away from fire? Can plants use this interface to increase the rate of photosynthesis in the presence of a smoke cloud? Can they do this? Quonquot automatically without a kind of a top-down brute force policy-based method that's authored and deployed by humans? And so this work really relates to that interface with the natural world. And then there's a second area in the company which focuses on growing products and here we're focusing on a single product that starts from CO2. It becomes a product, it's consumed, it's used, it's worn by a human and then it goes back to the soil and it grows an edible fruit plant. So we're talking about from CO2 to fruit? Yeah, it starts from CO2 and it ends with something that you can literally eat. So the world's first entirely biodegradable, biocompatible, bioreneuable product. That's grown. Yes, either using plant matter or using bacteria, but we are really looking at carbon recycling technologies that start with methane or wastewater and end with this wonderful reincarnation of a thing that doesn't need to end up in a composting site but can just be thrown into the ground and grow olive and find peace. And there's a lot of textile-based work out there that is focused on one single element in this long chain. Like, let's create leather out of mycelium or let's create textile out of cellulose but then it stops there and you get to assembling the shoe or the wearable and you need a little bit of glue and you need a little bit of this material and a little bit of that material to make it water resistant and then it's over. So that's one thing that we're trying to solve for is how to create a product that is materially, computationally, robotically novel and goes through all of these phases from the creation, from this carbon recycling technology to the product. To literally how do you think about reinventing an industry that is focused on assembly and putting things together and using humans to do that? Can that happen just using robots and microbes and that's it? And doing it at the end. I would love to see what this factory looks like. And the factory is great too. I'm very, very excited in October. We'll share first first renditions of some of this work in in February. We'll invite you to the lab. I'm there. I've already applied. I can't have her back. I don't understand. Okay, I mean, it's just before we get to number three. It'd be amazing to just talk about what it takes with robotic arms or in general the whole process of how to build the life form. Stuff you've done in the past, maybe stuff you're doing now, how to use bacteria. It's kind of synthetic biology. How to grow stuff by leveraging bacteria. Is there examples from the past? Yes. And just take a step back over the 10 years of the mediated matter group, which was my group at MIT, has sort of dedicated itself to bi-based design, would be a suitcase word, but sort of thinking about that synergy between nature and culture, biology and technology. And we attempted to build a suite of embodiments, let's say, that they ended up in amazing museums and amazing shows. And and we wrote patents and papers on them, but they were still end of ones. Again, the challenges, you say, was to grow them. And we classified them into fibers, cellular solids, biopolymers, pigments. And in each of the examples, although the material was different, sometimes we used fibers, sometimes we used silk with silkworms and honey with bees and or comb as the structural material with vaspers we used, synthetically engineered bacteria to produce pigments. Although the materials were different and the hero organisms were different, the philosophy was always the same. The approach was really an approach of computational templating. That templating allowed us to create templates for the natural environment where nature and technology could do it, could dance together to create these products. So just a few examples with silk pavilion, we've had a couple of pavilions made of silk. And the second one, which was the bigger one, which ended up at the Museum of Modern Art with my friend, an incredible mentor, Paul Antonelli, that pavilion was six meter tall, and it was produced by silkworms. And there we had different types of templates. There were physical templates that were basically just these water soluble meshes upon which the silkworms were spinning. And then there were environmental templates, which was a robot basically applying variation of environmental conditions such as heat and light to guide the movement of the silkworm. You're saying so many amazing things and I'm trying not to interrupt you. But like one of the things you've learned by observing, by doing science on these is that the environment defines the shape that they create or contributes or intricately plays with the shape they create. And so like, and you get to, that's one of the ways you can get to guide their work is by defining that environment. By the way, you said hero organism, which is an epic term. That means like, is whatever is the biological living system that's doing the creation. And that's what's happening in pharma and in biomaterials. And by the way, precision ag and food, new food design technologies as people are betting on a hero organism is the sort of how I'm thinking of it. And the hero organism is sometimes it's the palm oil or, or it's the mycelium. There's a lot of mushrooms around for good and bad and and it's cellulose or it's fake bananas or the workhorse E. coli. But these hero organisms are being betted on as like the what's the one answer that solves everything to Chikers guide 42 42. Yeah. These are sort of the 42s of of the enchanted new universe. And back at at MIT, we said, instead of betting on all of these organisms, let's approach them as almost like movement in a symphony. And that's kind of lean into what we can learn from each of these organisms in the context of building a project in an architectural scale. And those usually were pavilions. And then the competition templating is the way you guide the work of this. How many did you say 17,000? 17,532. So each of these silkworms threads are about, you know, one one mile in distance and and they're beautiful. And just thinking about the amount of material, you know, it's a bit like thinking about the you know, the length of capillary vessels that grow in your belly when you're pregnant to feed that incredible new life form. It's just nature is amazing. But back to the silkworms, I think I had three months to build this incredible pavilion. But we couldn't figure out how we were thinking of emulating the process of how a silkworm goes about building its incredible architecture, this cocoon over the period of 24 to 72 hours. And it builds a cocoon basically to protect itself. It's a beautiful form of architecture. And it uses pretty much just two materials, two chemical compounds, serison and fiber in. The serison is sort of the glue of the cocoon. The fiber in is the fiber based material of the cocoon through fibers and glue. And that's true for so many systems in nature, lots of fiber and glue. And that architecture allows them to metamorphose size. And in the process, they vary the properties of that silk thread. So it's stiffer or softer depending on where it is in the section of the cocoon. And so we were trying to emulate this robotically with a 3D printer that was six axis kukka arm one of these baby kukas. And we were trying to emulate that process computationally and build something very large when one of my students now, a brilliant industrial engineer robotist is on my team, Marcus said, well, you know, we were just playing with those silkworms and enjoying their presence. When we realized that if they're placed on a desk or a horizontal surface, they will go about creating their cocoon. Only the cocoon would be flat. Because they're constantly looking for a vertical post in order to use that post as an anchor to spin the cocoon. But in the absence of that post, on surfaces that are less than 21 millimeters and flat, they will spin flat patches. And we say, aha, let's work with them to produce this dome as a set of flat patches. And a silkworm mind you is quite an ego centric creature. And actually, the furthest you go, you move forward in evolution by natural selection, the more egoism you find in creatures. So when you think about termites, right, they their material sophistication is is is actually very primitive, but they have incredible ability to communicate and connect with each other. So if you think about the entire all of nature, let's say all of living systems as like a matrix that runs across two axes, one is material sophistication, which is terribly relevant for designers and the other is communication. The termites ace on communication, but their material sophistication is crap, right? It's just saliva and feces and some soil particles that are built to create these incredible termite mounds at the scale that when compared to humans, skyscrapers, transcend all of buildable scales, at least in in terms of what we have today in architectural practice, just relative to the size of the termite. But when you look at the silkworm, the silkworm has zero connection communication across silkworms. They were not designed to connect and communicate with each other. They're sort of a human designed species because the domesticated silk moth creates the cocoon. We then produce the silk of it and then it dies. So it has dysfunctional wings, it cannot fly. It's not so, and that's another problem that the sericulture industry has is why did we in the first place author this organism 4,000 years ago that is unable to fly and is just there to basically live as to serve a human need, which is textiles. And so here we were fascinated by the computational kind of biology dimension of silkworms, but along the way, by the way, this is great. I never get to tell the full story. I'm always like people say, I always speak in Nietzschean paragraphs. They're way too long and this is wonderful. This is like heaven. It's here. You drive so many good lines. But really those silkworms are not, yes, they're not designed to be like humans. They're not designed to connect, communicate and build things that are bigger than themselves through connection and communication. So what happens when you get 17,000 of them communicating? That's a really great question. What happens is that at some point, the templating strategies, as you said correctly, there were geometrical templating, material templating, environmental templating, chemical templating, if you're using pheromones to guide the movement of bees in the absence of a queen, where you have a robotic queen. But whenever you have these templating strategies, you have control over nature. But the question is, is there a world in which we can move from templating, from providing these computational material and immaterial physical and molecular platforms that guide nature, almost guiding a product, almost like a gardener, to a problem or an opportunity of emergence, where that biological organism assumes agency by virtue of accessing the robotic code and saying, now I own the code, I get to do what I want with this code. Let me show you what this pavilion may look like or this product may look like. And I think one of the exciting moments for us is when we realized that these robotic platforms that were designed initially as templates actually inspired, if I may, a kind of collaboration and cooperation between silkworms that are not a swarm-based organism. They're not like the bees in the termites. They don't work together and they don't have, social orders amongst them, the queen and the drones, etc. They're all the same in a way. And here, what was so exciting for us is that these computational and fabrication technologies enable the silkworm to kind of hop from the branch in ecology of worms to the branch in ecology of maybe human-like intelligence where they could connect and communicate by virtue of feeling or rubbing against each other in an area that was hotter or colder. And they were, so the product that we got at the end, the variation of density of fiber and the distribution of the fiber and the transparency, the product at the end seems like it was produced by a swarm silk community. But of course, it wasn't. It's a bunch of biological agents working together to assemble this thing. That's really, really fascinating to us. How can technology augment or enable a swarm-like behavior and creatures that have not been designed to work as swarms? So how do you construct a computational template from which a certain kind of thing emerges? How can you predict what emerges, I suppose? So if you can predict it, it doesn't count as emergence actually. That's a deeply poetic line. We can talk about it. I mean, it's a bit like it's kind of... It's a bit like it's a bit like it's a bit like it's a bit like it's kind of... That's right, right. Speaking of emergence, an empowerment because we're constantly moving between those as if there are equals on the team. One of them, Christoph, shared with me a mathematically equation for what does it mean to empower nature and what does empowerment in nature look like? And that relates to emergence and we can go back to emergence in a few moments. But I want to say it so that I know that I've learned it. And if I've learned it, I can use it later. Yeah. Maybe you'll figure something out as you say it also. Of course, Christoph is the master here, but really, we were thinking, again, what does nature want? Nature wants... Nature wants to increase the information dimension and reduce entropy. What do we want? We kind of want the same thing. We want more, but we want order, right? And this goes back to your conversation with Yoshia about stochastic versus deterministic languages or processes. His definition or the definition he found was that an agent is empowered. If the entropy of the distribution of all of its states is high, while the entropy of the distribution of a single state given a choice, given an action is low. Meaning it's that kind of duality between opportunity, like starting like this and going like this, opening and closing. And this really, I think, is analogous to human empowerment, given infinite wide array of choices. What is the choice that you make to enable to empower to provide you with the agency that you need? How much does that make in that choice actually control the trajectory of the system? That's really nice. So this applies to all the kinds of systems you're talking about. Yeah, and the cool thing is it can apply to a human on an individual basis, or a silkworm, or a bee, or a microbe. A microbe that has agency, or by virtue of a template. But it also applies to a community of organisms, likely bees. And so we've done a lot of work, sort of moving from, you've asked how to grow things. So we've grown things using co-fabrication, where we're digitally fabricating with other organisms that live across the various kingdoms of life, and those were silkworms and bees. And with bees, which we've sent to outer space and returned healthily, and they were reproductive. Okay, you're going to have to tell that story. You're going to have to talk about the robotic queen and the pharaohs. Come on. So we built what we call a synthetic APRE. And the synthetic APRE was designed as an environment that was a perpetual spring environment for the bees of Massachusetts. They go on hibernation, of course, during the winter season. And then we lose 80% of them or more during that period. We're thinking, okay, what if we created this environment where before you template, before you can design with, you have to design for. You have to create this space of mutualism, space of sort of shared connection between you and the organism. And with bees, it started as the synthetic APRE. And we have proven that that curated environment where designed the space with high levels of control of temperature, humidity, and light. And we've proven that they were reproductive and alive and we realized, wow, this environment that we created can help augment bees in the winter season in any city around the world, where bees survive and thrive in the summer and spring seasons. And could this be a kind of a new urban typology, an architectural typology of symbiosis of mutualism between organisms and humans? Were these, by the way, the synthetic APRE was in a co-op in nearby Somerville. We had robots, our team, we slept there every day with our tools and machines and we made it happen. And the neighbors were very happy. And they got to get a ton of honey at the end of the winter. And those bees, of course, were released into the wild at the end of the winter alive and kicking. So then in order to actually experiment with the robotic queen and idea or concept, we had to prove, obviously, that we can create this space for bees. And then after that, we had this amazing opportunity to send the bees to space on Blue Shepherd Mission, that is part of the origin. And we of course said, yes, we'll take a slot. We said, okay, can we outdo NASA? So NASA in 1982 had an experiment worth, they sent bees to to outer space. The bees returned, they were not reproductive. And some of them died. And we thought, well, is there a way in which we can create a life support system, almost like a small mini biolab of a queen and her retinue that would be sent in this blue origin, new shepherd mission, in this one cell. And so that, if the synthetic APU was an architectural project, in this case, this second synthetic APURI was a product. It was, right? So from an architectural controlled environment to a product scale controlled environment. And this biolab, this life support system for bees, was designed to provide the bees with all the conditions that they needed. And we looked at that time at the National Fairmon that the queen uses to guide the other bees. And we looked at fairmons that are associated with a bee and thinking of those fairmons being released inside the capsules that go, that capsule that goes to outer space. They returned back to our the medial abroof. And those bees were alive and kicking and reproductive. And, you know, and they continued to create comb. And it ended with a beautiful nature paper that the team and I published together. We gave them gold nanoparticles and silver nanoparticles because we were interested if bees recycle wax. It was known forever that bees do not recycle the wax. And by feeding them these gold nanoparticles, we were able to prove that the bees actually do recycle the wax. The reason I'm bringing this forward is because we don't view ourselves as designers of consumable products and an architectural environment only. But we love that moment where these technologies and by the way, every one of these projects that we created involve the creation of a new technology, whether it be a glass printer or the spinning robot or or the life support system for for the bee colony, they all involved a technology that was associated with the project. And I never ever ever ever want to let that part go because I love love technology so much. And but also another element of this is it always these projects. If they're great, they reveal new knowledge about or new science about the topic that that you're investigating, be it, you know, silkworms or or bees or or glass. That's why I say I always tell my team it should be at MoMA and the cover of nature or science at the same time. We don't separate between the art and the science. It's one of the same. So as you're creating the art, you're going to learn something about these organisms or something about these materials. I mean, is there something that stands out to you about these hero organisms like bees silkworms? You mentioned E. coli has its pros and cons, its bacteria. What have you learned that smaller, big, that's interesting about these organisms? Yeah, that's a beautiful question. What have I learned? I've learned that, you know, we did, we also worked with Shim Shels with Aguah, how we built this tower on the roof of SF MoMA, which by a couple of months ago until it was on the roof, we've shown the structure completely biodegrade into then, well, not completely, but almost completely biodegrade to the soil and this notion that a product or part of an organism or part of that organism can re-incarnate is very, very moving, thought to me because I want to believe that I believe in reincarnation. I want to believe that I believe. Yeah, that's my relationship with God. I want to, I want, I like to believe in believing. Most great things in life are second derivatives of things, but that's part of another conversation. I feel like that's a quote that's going to take weeks to really internalize. That notion of I want you to want or I need you to need or that there's always something a deeper truth behind what is on the surface and so I like to go to the second and tertiary derivative of things and discover new truths about them through that, but what have I learned about organisms? And why don't you like E. coli? I like E. coli and a lot of the work that we've done was not possible without our working on E. coli or other workhorse organisms like cyanobacteria. How are bacteria used? Death masks. The death masks. So what are death masks? So we did this project called Vespers and those were basically death masks that was said as a process for designing a living product. What happens and we looked at it, I looked at it and remember looking at Beethoven's death mask and I got Memnon's death mask and just studying how they were created and really they were sort of geometrically attuned to the face of the dead. And what we wanted to do is create a death mask that was not based on the shape of the wearer but rather was based on their legacy and their biology. And maybe we could harness a few stem cells there for future generations or contain the last breath, Lazarus which preceded Vespers was a project where we designed a mask to contain a single breath, the last breath of the wear. And again, if I had access to these technologies today, I would totally incorporate my grandmother's last breath in a product. So it was like an air memento. So with Vespers, we actually used E. coli to create pigmented masks, masks whose pigments would be recreated at the surface of the mask. And I'm skipping over a lot of content but basically there were 15 masks and they were created as three sets, the masks of the past, the mask of the present and the mask of the future. The masks, there were 55 and five and the masks of the past were based on ornaments and they were embedded with natural minerals like gold. Yes, yes, yes. And we're looking at pictures of these and are gorgeous. Yes. Extremely delicate and interesting fractal patterns that are symmetrical. They look symmetrical but they're not. This is intended. This is we intended for you to be tricked and think that they're all symmetrical. There's imperfections. There are imperfections by design. All of these forms and shapes and distribution of matter that you're looking at was entirely designed using a computational program. So none of it is manual. But long story short, the first collection is about the surface of the mask and the second collection which you're looking at is about the volume of the mask and and what happens to the mask when all the colors from the surface yes, enter the volume of the mask inside, create pockets and channels to guide life through them. They were incorporated with pigment producing living organisms and then those organisms were templated to recreate the patterns of the original death masks and so life recycles and rebegins and so on and so forth. The past meets the future, the future meets the past from the surface to the volume from death to life to death to life to death to life and that again is a recurring theme in the project set that we take on. But there from a technological perspective what was interesting is that we embedded chemical signals in the jet in the printer and those chemical signals basically interacted with the pigment producing bacteria in this case E. coli that were introduced on the surface of the mask and those interactions between the chemical signals inside the resins and the bacteria at the surface of the mask at the resolution that is native to the printer in this case 20 microns per voxel allowed us to compute the exact patterns that we wanted to achieve and we thought well if we can do this with pigments can we do this with antibiotics if we can do this with antibiotics could we do it with melanin and what are the implications again this is a platform technology now that we have it what are the actual real world implications and potential applications for this technology and we started a new area of one of my students Rachel her PhD thesis was entitled after this new class of materials that we created through this project vespers hybrid living materials HLMs and these hybrid living materials really paved the way towards a whole other set of products that we've designed like like the work that we did with melanin for for the mandela pavilion that we presented at sifmoma where again we're using the same principles of templating in this case not silkworms or not bees but we're templating bacteria at a much much much a more finer resolution and now instead of templating using using a robot we're templating using a printer but compute is very very much part of it and the what's nice about bacteria of course is that from an ethical perspective I think there's a range right so at the end of the silk pavilion I got an email from professor in japan who has been working on transgenic silk and said well if you did this this create amazing silk pavilion why don't we create you know glow in the light silk dresses and and in order to create this glow in the light silk we need to you know to to to to apply genes that are taken from a spider to a silkworm and this is what is known as a transgenic operation and we said no and that was for us a clear decision that no we will work with these organisms as long as we know that what we are doing with them is not only better for humans but it's also better for them and and again just to remind you where I forget the exact number but it's around a thousand cocoons per single shirt that are exterminated in in india and China in those sericulture industries that are being abused now yes this this organism this organism was designed to serve the human species and maybe we should maybe it's time you know to to to retire that you know that conception of of organisms that are designed for a human centric world or human centric set of applications I don't feel the same way about ecoli I'm not that I'm agnostic organism agnostic but but still I believe there's so much for us to do on this planet with with with bacteria and so in general your design principle is to grow cool stuff as a byproduct of the organism flourishing so not not using the organism the win win the synergy a whole that's bigger than the sum of its parts it's interesting I mean it's it's just feels like a gray area where genetic modification of an organism it just feels like I don't know if you if you genetically modified me to make me glow in the light kind of kind of like it I think you have enough of an aura all right thank you that was I was just fishing for compliments thank you I appreciate so absolutely right and by the way the gray area is you know is where some of us like to live and and like to thrive and and that's okay and and thank goodness that there's so many of us that that like the black and white and that thrive in the black and white my husband is a good example for that well but just to clarify in this case you're also trying to thrive in the black and white in that you're saying like the silkworm is a beautiful wonderful creature let us not modify it is that the idea or is it okay to modify a little bit as long as we can see that it benefits the organism as well as the final creation so with silkworms absolutely let's not modify genetically let's not modify genetically and and then some because why did we why did we get there to begin with 4,000 years ago in the silk road and and we should never get to a point where we evolve life for the service of mankind at the risk of these wonderful creatures across the kingdoms across the kingdom of life I don't think about the same kind of ethical range when I think about bacteria nevertheless bacteria are pretty wonderful organisms I'm moving to my second cup here take take two this thing's again serious now bacteria are yeah for sure let's give bacteria all the love that deserve we wouldn't be here without them they they were here for I don't know what it is like a billion years before anything else showed up but in a way if you think about it they create the matter that we consume and then and then re reincarnate or dissolve into the soil and then creates a tree and then that tree creates more bacteria and then that bacteria I mean again again that's why I like to think about not recycling but reincarnating because that assumes a kind of imparting upon nature that dimension of agency and and maybe awareness but yeah lots of really interesting work happening with bacteria um directed evolution is one of them we're looking we're looking at directed evolution so high throughput directed evolution of of bacteria for the production of products and again those products can be a shoe um wearables biomaterials therapeutic therapeutics and doing that direction computationally totally computationally obviously in in the lab with with the hero organism the hero bacteria um and and and what's happening today in in um ecromycrobial synthetic biology synthetic biology that lends itself to ecology uh and again all of these fields are coming together it's such a wonderful time to be a designer I can think of a better time to be a designer in this world um but with um high throughput directed evolution and I should say that the physical space in our new lab will have these capsules which which we have designed um that are um that they are designed like growth chambers or grow rooms um and in those grow rooms we can uh basically um program um top down environmental templating where top down environmental control of lights humidity light etc so light humidity and temperature um while doing uh bottom up genetic regulation so it is a wet lab but in that wet lab you could do it the same time you know genetic genetic modulation uh regulation and and environmental templating um and then again the idea is that in one of those capsules maybe we grow transparent wood and in another capsule we you know we transparent wood for architectural application another capsule we grow a shoe and in another capsule we look at that language you know large language model that we talked talked about and there's a particular technology associated with that which we're hoping to reveal to the world in February um and in each of those capsules is basically a high throughput computational environment like a breadboard that has think of sort of a physical breadboard environment that has access to oxygen and nitrogen and CO2 and nutritional dispensing and these uh little capsules uh could be stressed they're sort of uh an ecology in a box um and they could be stressed to produce the food of the future or the products of the future or the construction materials of the future um food food is a very interesting one obviously because of food insecurity and and and the issues that we have around both in terms of food insecurity but also in terms of the future of food and what what will remain after we can't eat plants and animals anymore and all we can eat is these false bananas and and and um you know and insects as our protein source so there we're thinking you know can we design these capsules to stress an environment and see how that environment behaves think about a kind of an ecological a biodiversity chamber right a kind of a time capsule that is designed as a bi biodiversity chamber where you can program the exact temperature humidity and light um combination to emulate the environment from the past so Ohio 1981 December 31st at 5 a.m. in the morning what did tomatoes taste like to all the way in the future 200 years ago these are the the the environmental inputs these are some genetic regulations that i'm testing uh and what might be the food of the future or the products of the future or the construction materials of the future um feel like test like behave like etc and so these capsules are designed as part of a lab that's why it's been taking us such a long time to get to this point um because we started designing them in 2019 and they're currently literally as I speak to you under construction how well is it understood how to do this dance of controlling these different variables in order for various kinds of growth to happen it's not it's never been done before and these capsules have never been designed before so i you know when when when we first decided these are going to be environmental capsules people thought we're crazy what are you building what are you making so the answer is that we don't know but we know that there has never been a space like this where you have basically a wet lab and a grow room at that resolution um at that granularity of of of of of control over organisms there's a reason why there is this incredible evolution of products in the software space um the hardware space that's a more limiting space that because of the physical infrastructure that we have to test and experiment with things so we really wanted to push on creating a wet lab that is novel in every possible way what could you create in it you could create the future um you could create a you could create an environment of plants talking to each other with a robotic referee and the robotic referee we you know and you could you could set an objective function and let's say for for for for the uh um transaction driven individuals in the world let's say the objective function is carbon sequestration and um and all of those plants are are implemented with a gaming engine and they have this reward system right and they're constantly needing to uh optimize the way in which they carbon sequest um we read out the bad guys we leave the good guys and we end up with this like ideal ecology of carbon sequestering heroes that connect and communicate with each other and once we have that model this biodiversity chamber we send it out into the field um and we see what happens in nature and that that's sort of what i'm talking about augmenting plants with that extra a dimension of of bandwidth that they do not have and they're they're just just last week um i came across a paper um that discusses the in vivo neurons that are that are augmented with a pong game and uh and in a dish they basically present sentience and the beginning of awareness which is which is wonderful like that that you could actually take these neurons from a mouse brain and and you have the electrical circuits and the physiological circuits that enable uh these cells to connect and communicate and together arrive at sort of swarm uh situation that allows them to act as a system that is not only perceived to be sentient but is actually sentience um michael levin calls this a gentle material material that has agency right so uh so so so this this this this is of interest to us because this is sort of again this is emergence post templating you template until you don't need to template anymore because because the system has its own rules right what we don't want to happen with a GI we want to happen with synthetic biology what we don't want to have an online and software with language we want for it to happen with with bi-based materials because that will get us closer to growing things as opposed to assembly and and mechanically yeah putting them together with toxic materials and compounds if i can ask a pothead question for a second so you mentioned just like the silkworms the individualists silkworms got uh to actually learn how to collaborate or actually to collaborate like in a swarm like way you're talking about getting plants to communicate in some interesting way based on an objective function is it possible to have some kind of interface between another kind of organisms humans and nature so like a human to have a conversation with with a plant the already is you know that when we cut freshly cut grass i love the smell but it's a smell of actually it's a smell of distress that the leaves of grass are communicating to each other so the grass when it's cut emits green leaf uh volatile glvs and those glvs are basically one leaf of grass communicating to another leaf of grass be careful mind you you're about to be cut these incredible life forms are communicating using a different language than ours we use language models they use molecular models at the moment where we can parse we can we can decode these molecular moments is when we can start having a conversation with plants now of course there is a lot of work around plant neurobiology it's a real thing plants do not have nervous system but they have something akin to a nervous system it has a kind of a ecological intelligence that is focused on a particular timescale and the timescale is very very slow slow slow timescale so it is when we can melt these timescales and and and connect with these plants in terms of the content of the language in this case molecules the duration of the language and we can start having a conversation if not simply to understand what is happening in the plant kingdom precision agriculture i promise to you will look very very different right because right now we're using drones to take photos of crops of corn that look bad and when we take that photo it's already too late but if we understand these molecular footprints and things that they are trying to say the stress that they are trying to communicate then we could of course predict the physiological biological behavior of these crops both for for their own self perpetuation but also for the foods and and the pharma and and the type of molecules that we're seeking to grow for the benefit of humanity and so these languages that we are attempting now to quantify and qualify will really help us not only better nature and help nature in its striving to surviving but also help us design better wines and you know and and better foods and and and better medicine and better products again across all scales across all application domains. Is there intricacies to understanding the time scales like you mentioned at which these communications these languages like operate is there something different which in a way humans communicate in the way plants communicate in terms of time. Remember when we started the conversation talking about sort of definitions in the context of design and then in the context of being that question requires I think a kind of a shift and a humility that requires a kind of a humility towards nature understanding that it operates on different scales. We recently discovered that you know that the molecular footprint of a rose or of a plant in general during nighttime is different than its molecular footprint during daytime so these are circadian rhythms that are associated with what kind of molecules these plants emit given stress stresses and given you know there's a reason why why the Jasmine a Jasmine field smells so so delicious and for I am in the morning and then there's like there's there's peace and rest amongst you know amongst the plants and you have to sort of tune into that time dimension of the plant kingdom and that of course requires all this humility or in a single capsule to design a biodiversity chamber it will take years not months and definitely not days and to see these products and also that humility in design comes from simply you know looking at how we are today as a civilization how we use an abuse nature like just think of all these Christmas trees right these Christmas trees they take years to grow we use them for one night the holiest night of the year and then we let them go and think about in nature to design a quote unquote product an organism spends energy and time and thoughtfulness and many many many years and I'm thinking about the redwoods um to grow these channels these you know the cellulose layers and channels and reach these incredible heights takes sometimes hundreds of years sometimes thousands of years am I afraid of building a company that designs products in the scale of thousands of years no I'm not and the way of being in the physical world today is really not in tune with the time dimension of the natural world at all and um and that needs to change and that's obviously very very hard to do in a community in a of human beings that is at least in the western world that is based on capitalism and so here the wonderful challenge that we have ahead of us is how do we impart upon the capitalist movement we know that we need to produce now products that will enter the real world and be you know shared and used by others uh and still benefit the natural world while benefiting humans and that's a wonderful challenge to have so integrate technology with nature and that's a really difficult problem I see parallels here with another company of new or link which is uh is basically like you I think you mentioned new or link for nature uh that there are short term products you can come up with but it's ultimately a long term challenge of how do you integrate the machine with this creation of nature this intricate complex creation of nature which is the human brain and then you're speaking more generally nature you know how every company has an image like this one single image that embodies the spirit of the company and I think for Nurelink it was to me that chimpanzee playing a video game it was just unbelievable but with plants there potentially is a set of molecules that um impacts or inspires I like that word the plant to um behave or act in a certain way um and allows still the plant the possibility of deciding where it or she or he wants to go uh which is why our first product for this molecular space is going to be a functionalized fragrance so here we're thinking about the future fragrances and the future fragrances and flavors um you know these these products are in the industry as we know it today are designed for totally for a human centric use and and enjoyment and indulgence and luxury um they're used on the body for the sake of don't know attraction and and feeling good um and smelling good and we were asking ourselves is there a world in which um in which a fragrance can be not a functional fragrance because you could claim that all fragrances are functional but is there a world in which the fragrance becomes functionalized is again imparted upon or given agency to connect with another organism is there a world in which um you and I can go down to your garden and use a perfume that will interact with the rose garden downstairs um I've just been enamored with the statements that are being made in the media around oh this is completely biologically derived fragrance and it's biobased and but when you look into the fragrance and you understand it in order to get to this biode-derived fragrance fragrance you went through you blew through you know 10,000 10,000 bushes of rose to create 5 milliliters of of a rose fragrance and all these 10,000 bushes of rose they take space they take you know water management and and so much waste is this really what we want the future of our agriculture and molecular goods to look like and so when we did the agoha pavilion on the roof of asif mama we calculated that for that pavilion we had 40,000 calories embedded into this pavilion that was made of shrimp shells and kites and and um apple skins and and salilos from tree uh tree pulp and we calculated that overall the structure had 40,000 calories interesting way to think about a structure right from the from the point of view of of calories but as you left the gallery you saw these three clocks that were so beautifully designed by phelix on our team and these clocks measured temperature and humidity and we connected them to a weather channel so that we could directly um look at how the pavilion was bi degrading in real time and and and in our calculations i say this long-winded uh description of the pavilion to say that in the calculation we incorporated um you know how much electricity we used for our computers for the 3d printers that printed the pavilion and you know and these were called energy calculations right energy and materials and when you think about a product and you think about you know a shoe or a chair or a perfume or a building you don't stop at the object you want to go all the way to the system again instead of designing objects or singular embodiments of a the will of the designer you're really tabbing into an entire system that is interconnected and if you look at the energy budget that characterized the project agorcha it traverses the entire planet right some of these shrimp shells were brought from places in the world we haven't thought of in terms of the apples and and the shrimp shells and the tree pup and so going back to you know going back to to fragrances um it's really really important to understand the product in the context of the ecological system from which it's sourced and and how it's designed and that is the kind of thinking that is not only desired but is required if we are to achieve synergy between humanity and nature and it's interesting because the system level thinking is almost always going to take you to the entire earth to consider in the entire earth ecosystem which is why it's important to have a left brain and a right brain competing for attention and then to say yes you mentioned a fragrance that kind of sends out a message to the environment essentially a message in a bottle yeah a message in a bottle so like so you can go to a rose garden and trick the rose garden to think it's 4 a.m essentially you could if you wanted to but maybe that is not trick trick trick is a bad word right right inspire but inspire I like I like the idea of providing nature with a choice which is why I love that elegant mathematical equation of empowerment and agency empower the the rose garden to create a romantic moment for the for the wearer of the fragrance but now again you're you're again all of this to go back to back to that human centric notion of romance but maybe there's another way to do romance right that that we haven't yet you know that we haven't yet explored and and maybe you know there's a way to tap into what happens to the rose when it's dreaming assuming that plants are sentient and assuming that we can tap into that sentience what can we discover about what what does the rose want like what is what does it actually want and and what does it need and what are what what are the roses and you know dreams but do you think there's some correlation in terms of romance in terms of the word you sometimes use magic is there some similarities in what humans want and what roses want and what nature wants I think so I think there is and if I did not think so oh my goodness this would not be a nice world to live in I think we all want love I recently read this beautiful letter that was written by Einstein to his daughter and and was discovered Einstein asked his daughter to wait 20 years until she reveals these letters and so she did it's just one of the most beautiful letters I've ever read from a father to his daughter and the letter overall is imbued with a kind of a a sense of remorse or maybe even feelings of sadness and there is some kind of melancholy note in the letter where Einstein regrets not having spent enough time with his daughter having focused on you know the theory of general relativity and changing the world and then he goes on to talk about this beautiful and elegant equation of E equals mc square and he tells his daughter that he believes that love is actually the force that shapes the universe because it is like gravity right it attracts people it is like light it brings people together and connects between people and it's all empowering and and so if you multiply it by the speed of light you could really change the world for the better and I I call me a romanticist I know you are too which is why I so love being here I believe in this I I totally and utterly believe in in love but let me just excerpts from Einstein's letter there's an extremely powerful force that's so far science is not found a formal explanation to it is a force that includes and governs all others and is even behind any phenomena operating in the universe and is not yet been identified by us this universal force is love he also the last paragraph in the letter as you've mentioned I deeply regret not having been able to express what is in my heart which has quietly beaten for you all my life maybe it's too late to apologize but as time is relative that jokes the Einstein I need to tell you that I love you and thanks to you I reached the ultimate answer your father Albert Einstein yeah but that regret I deeply regret not having been able to express what is in my heart maybe that's the universal regret feeling your days with busyness and silly pursuits and not sitting down and expressing that but it is everything it is everything it is why I love that expression and I forget who said this but I I love my daughter more than evolution required right and I feel the same way towards my other half and and I feel that when you find that connection everything and anything is possible and it's a very very very magical and a magical moment so I I believe in love and I believe in the one it might be the same thing it might be a different thing but let me ask you ridiculously big philosophical question about beauty the stefsky said beauty will save the world in the idiot one my favorite books of his what is beauty to you you've created through this intersection of engineering and nature you've created some incredibly beautiful things what do you think is beauty that's a beautiful question maybe it is connected to the love question it is connected to the love question of course everything is connected to the love question to me beauty is agency to me something that has agency it is beautiful there is this special quote from Buckminster Fuller which I cannot remember word for word fast I remember the concept which goes something like this and when I work on a problem I never think about beauty but when I'm done solving the problem and I look at what I've created and it's not beautiful I know that I was wrong okay is it kind of an agency that speaks to court and court the objective function of the creation right whether for Bucky it's useless or useful so this idea of empowerment that you talked about yes they connected to comes back to that what's the difference that you hinted at between empowerment and emergence is a emergence completely lacks control and empowerment is more is more controlled there's an agent making decisions is there an interesting distinction there yes I think empowerment is a force with direction it has directionality to it emergence is I believe multi-directional again that depends on the application emergence is perhaps in terms of sort of a material definition is the is a tropic spirit when empowerment is at the end is a tropic counterpart I think they overlap because I think that empowerment is a way of inspiring emergence I think emergence does not happen without empowerment but empowerment can happen without emergence do you think of emergence is the loss of control like when you're thinking about these capsules and then the things create is emergence of things that is not a desirable conclusion I love that question because to some of us the loss of control is control in design we're used to like extreme levels of control over form and the shape of a thing and how it behaves and how it functions and that's something we've inherited from the industrial revolution but with nature there is this there's this diversity that happens without necessarily having a reward function right this is good or bad things just happen and some of them happen to have wings and some of them happen to have scales and you know you end up with this incredible potential for diversity so I think the future of design is in that soft control is in the ability to design highly controlled systems that enable that enable the loss of control and creativity is very much part of this because creativity is all about letting go and beginning again and beginning again and beginning again and when you cannot let go you cannot be creative and you can't you can't you can't find novelty but I think that letting go is a moment that enables empowerment agency creativity emergence and they're all connected they are sort of associate themselves with definition of destiny or the inevitable a good friend of mine shared with me elegant definition of fate which is the ratio of who you are and who you want to be ratio of who you are who you want to be exactly and that sort of ends up defining you yeah and those tools I think when when you let go you sort of find you you give peace to your will right to a sense of will and and and so I think that's very very important in design but also in life she said this fate is the ratio of who you are who you want to be do you think there's something to this whole manifestation thing like focusing on a vision of what you want the world to become and in in that focusing you manifest it like Paul O'Colo said in the alchemist when you want something all the universe conspires and helping you to achieve it is there something to do that I think so yes and I always think of you know what I do is this the culmination of energy information and matter and how to direct energy information and matter in the design of a thing or in the design of a life I think living is very much a process of channeling these energies to where they need to go I think that the manifestation or part of that manifestation is the pointing to the moon in order to get to the moon and and and that's why manifestation is also directional it has that vector quality to it that that I think of agency as have you in your own life is there been things you've done where you kind of direct that energy information and matter in a way that opens up new possibility yeah I mean you've also said somewhere I'm probably misquoting that your your your many things you're not here many things and you become new things every 10 years or so oh I did say that somewhere somewhere that every decade you've sort of switched that was an old that was a previous scenario that said that yeah I did say some time ago that you have to sort of reboot reboot every 10 years to to keep creative and keep inventive and and keep there are things you've done in your life we're just kind of doors opened I think everything everything everything good I've found in my life has been found in that way of letting go and suspending my sense of disbelief and often you will find me say to the team suspend your disbelief I don't care that this is impossible let's assume it is where does it take us and that suspension of disbelief is absolutely part and parcel of the creative act and you know I did so when I was in medical school I was in Hadassah and in the Hebrew University and I remember I left medical school for architecture the day my grandmother passed away and that was a moment of relief and that was a moment a door that was closing that opened other opportunities but that of course required letting go of the great vision of becoming a doctor and letting go of the dream of you know being surrounded by wonderful patients and the science of medicine and the research associated with that science and letting go of that dream to accomplish another and and it has happened throughout my life in different ways MIT was another experience like that where people pointed at me as you know the designer for whom the academic currency is not necessarily the citation index and of course in order to get tenure at MIT you have to look at the citation index but for me it was not that it was manifesting our work in shows and writing papers and writing patents and creating a celebration around the work and I never saw a distinction you know between those ways of being I also think that another kind of way of being or a modality of being that I found helpful is Victor Frankl wrote this incredible book man search for a meaning after the Holocaust and he writes different people pursue life for for different reasons according to Freud the the the goal of of life is to find pleasure and and according to Adler it's you know to find power and and for Victor Frankl it was about finding meaning and when you let go of the titles and the disciplines and the boundaries and the expectations and the perception you you are elevated to this really special yes spiritual but definitely very very creative plane where you you can sort of start a new look at the world through the lens of a bacterium or a robot or it or you know or look at ecology through the lens of chemistry and look at chemistry through the lens of robotics and look at robotics through the lens of you know my microbial ecologies and so on and so forth and and I feel that kind of rebooting not every 10 years but every minute every breath is very very important for a creative life and for for just maintaining this fresh mind to reboot reboot to begin again with every breath begin again and and that can be confusing for some right for my team members you know I I like to change my mind it's who I am it's how I think it's how I operate you know and and and they'll come and and we found another technique or another technology that's interesting and we thought that you know that we were working on this functionalized fragrance but now there's another opportunity and let's go there and to me I would much rather you know live life like if I had to pick sort of my favorite Broadway show to enter and live through it would be into the woods it's not a specific fairy tale it's not you know the sleeping beauty or or or little red riding hood or Rapunzel it's all of them it's sort of moving into the forest and seeing this wander and getting close and learning about that and then moving to another wander and life is really about tying all of these little fairy tales together in work and and also in life unafraid to leap into the unknown unafraid to leap into the unknown speaking of MIT you got a tenure in MIT and then you leaped to New York and started a new company that with a vision that doesn't span a couple of years but centuries I did it was my destiny to start a company and and do I have mornings when I wake up and ask myself what the hell am I doing yes I I have those mornings what do you do those mornings by the way I embrace them and I I find gratitude and I say to myself thank goodness I I'm so lucky to you know to have the the the ability to be frustrated in this way so I really really embrace these frustrations and I and I I take them I wrap them in a bubble and I look at it you know on the outside of my my uh uh aware mind and and and I laugh at them I smile at them if I could return actually to the question of beauty for a second I forgot to ask you something you mentioned imperfection in the death masks what role does imperfection play in our conception of beauty well role doesn't perfection play in in nature there's a there's this Japanese aesthetics concept of wabi-sabi which basically embraces imperfection nothing lasts nothing is finished and nothing is perfect what do you think of that I totally agree that changes the only permanence that imperfection is there if only to to signal that we are part of a bigger thing than ourselves that that we are on a journey that that we're that things are in movement and if they were perfect I of course when things are perfect it is just so boring we end up with stereotypes and as humans but I think just in general as living beings we're here to find meaning and that meaning cannot be found without struggle and without seeking to not to perfect but to build to to build towards something better um when I was a child my mother who who I who I love so much always explained to me how important it is to fall and to fail and to fight and to argue and um and that there is a way that there's a culture to to to failing and and and to imperfection um so I I think it is it is uh necessary for something beautiful to be imperfect and it is a sign that it is a sign of nature because nothing in nature is perfect what about human relations you mentioned finding love are the flaws in humans the imperfection in humans a component of love like what role do you think the the flaws play it's a that's a really profound question I think the flaws are there uh to the flaws are there to present a vulnerability and those flaws are um are um a sign of those vulnerabilities and I think love is very very gentle right love with bill we often talk about between the two of us about what drives all human behavior and for him it's incentive as you might expect and he will repeat this sentence to me all incentive drives all human behavior but I I would say to me it's love love very much so um and and I think flaws are part of that because flaws are a sign of that vulnerability whether physical whether emotional vulnerability and those vulnerabilities these vulnerabilities they either tear us apart or they bring us together um the vulnerability is what is the glue I think I think that the vulnerability enables connection the connection is the glue and that connection enables accessing a higher ground as a community as opposed to as an individual so if there is a society over the mind or if there are higher levels of awareness that can be accessed um in community as opposed to again going to the silkworm as opposed to on the individual level I think that those occur through the flaws and the vulnerabilities and without them we we cannot find connection community and without community we can't build what we have built as a civilization you know for the past hundreds of thousands of years so I think not only are they beautiful but they have a functional role in in building civilizations yeah there's a sense in which love requires vulnerability and maybe love is the leap into that vulnerability and I think yes I think a flaw think about it like physically I'm thinking about a brick that's flawed but in a way the I think of a flaw is it is an increased surface area yeah that's a good one that's a good line a surface area that like physically emotionally right it it sort of introduces this whole new dimension to a human or a brick and because you have more surface area you can you know use mortar and build a home and and yeah I think of it as accessing this additional dimension of surface area that could be used for good or bad right to to to connect to communicate to collaborate it makes me think of that quote from this incredible movie I've watched years ago particle fever I think it was called documentary about the large hydron collider an incredible film where they talk about the things that are least important for our survival are the things that make us human like the pure romantic act or you know the notion of and Victor Franco talks about that too he talks about feeling the sun on his arms as he's as he is working the soil in two degrees Fahrenheit without clothes and the officer berates him and says well what have you done have you been a businessman before you came here to the camp and he says I was a doctor and he said you you must have made a lot of money as a doctor and he said I all all my work I've done for free I've been helping the poor but he keeps his he keeps his humility and he he keeps his modesty and he keeps his preservation of the spirit and he says the things that actually make him able to or made him able to outlive the the terrible experience in the Holocaust was the really cherishing this moment when the sun hits his skin or when he can eat a grain of rice a single grain of rice so I think cherishing is a very important part of living a meaningful life being able to cherish those simple things Victor notice them and to notice them to pay attention to them in the moment and I I do this now more than ever I mean there is some some the Bukowski has this poem I like called Nirvana where it tells a story of a young man out of bus going through like North Carolina or something like this and they stop off in a cafe and he has this there's a waitress and just he talks about that he notices the magic something in this crybook which just knows it's the magic of it and he gets back on the bus with the rest of the passengers and none of them seem to have noticed the magic and I think if you just allow yourself to pause it just to feel whatever that is maybe maybe ultimately it's a kind of gratitude yes for I don't know what it is it's just that I'm sure it's just chemicals in the brain but it's just so incredible to be alive yes noticing that yes appreciating that and being one in that with others yes yes and and that goes back to you know to the fireplace right to the first technology what was the first technology it was fire first technology to have built community and it emerged out of a vulnerability of wanting to stay away from the cold and be warm together and and and of course that fire is associated with not only with comfort and the ability to form you know bio relevant nutrients in our food and and and and and and provide heat and comfort but also spirits and and I kind of a way to enter oh you know to enter a spiritual moment to enter a moment that can only be experienced as as in a community as a as a form of meditative moment there is a lot to be said about light light is I think an important part of these moments of I think I think it's a real thing I really truly believe that we're born with an with an with an aura surface area that is measurable I think we're we're born into the world with that you know with with an aura and and how do we channel that is really is sort of ends I mean and ends up sort of defining you know defining the light in our in our lives do you think we're all do you think we're all lonely there's loneliness in us humans oh yes yes loneliness is part yes I think we we all have that loneliness whether we're willing to access that loneliness and look at it in the eye or completely um you know completely avoid it or deny it it's like it feels like it's a some kind of foundation for longing and longing leads to this this combination of vulnerability and and connection with others yes feels like that's a really important part of being human as being lonely very it's very we are born into this world alone again being alone and being lonely are two different things right and you can be together but be lonely and you can be alone but not be lonely at all we often joke Bill and I that um he he cannot be lonely he cannot deal with being by himself he always needs people around him and I strive long um must have creative solitude must find pockets of solitude and loneliness in order to find creativity and reconnect with myself so loneliness is a recipe for um for community in my opinion and I think those things complement each other and their synergetic absolutely the in and yang of of of of of togetherness and they allow you I think to yeah to reset and to tune in to to that ratio we talked about of who you are and who you want to be if you if you go to this place of creative solitude what's your what's your creative process is there something you've noticed about what you do that leads to your to good work I love to be able not only to lose focus but kind of to focus on the peripheral view and to allow um different things to occur at once so I will often in my loneliness journeys I will often uh listen to like Leonard Bernstein anything I can find online by Lenny Bernstein it's reading a nature paper it's war and peace it's really revisiting all the texts that are so timeless for me with opportunities that are very very timely and I think for me the creative process is really about bringing timeless problems or concepts together with timely technologies to observe them I remember when we did the Mandela Pavilion we read Moby Dick the whiteness of the whale the albino the different the other and that got us to work on Melanie and Melanie and also sort of an output from the death mask so it's lots of things happening at the same time and really allowing them allowing them to come together to form this view about the world through the lens of a spirit being or a living being or a material and then focus on the world through the lens of that material the glasswork was another project like that where we were fascinated by glass because obviously it's super material for architecture but we created this new glass printing technology for the first time that was shedding light on the biomechanics of fluid glass the math and the physics of which was never done before which was so exciting to us but revealing new knowledge about the world through technology that's one theme the reincarnation between things material and immaterial that's another theme Lenny Bernstein war and peace Tolstoy you've tweeted a Tolstoy quote from war and peace as of course you would everything I know I know because of love love yeah I love this quote so you use these kind of inspirations to focus you and then finally actually idea in the periphery yes and then connect them with whatever it is that we're working on whether it's you know high throughput directed evolution of bacteria you know whether it's you know recreating that garden of Eden and the capsule and what it looks like the food of the future it is a little bit like directing a film creating a new project is a bit like creating a film and you have these heroes you have these characters and you put them together and there's a narrative and there's a story whenever we start a new project it has to have these these ingredients of simultaneous complexity it has to be novel in terms of the synthetic biology material science robotics engineering all of these elements that are discipline based or rooted must be novel if you can combine novelty in synthetic biology with a novelty in robotics with a novelty in material science with a novelty in computational design and you are bound to create something novel period and that's how I run the company and that's how I pick the people and so that's another very very important ingredient of the cutting edge across multiple disciplines that come together and then in the background in the periphery there's all these messages the whispers of the ancient oldies right the Beethoven's and the Picasso's and the Beethoven's those whispering to you yeah how could one not include Beethoven and the whispers I'm gonna ask you about Beethoven and the organic history of metrike's I'm a I've played piano my whole life of obviously know a lot of Beethoven and it's one of the private things for me I suppose because I don't think I've ever published a piano by the way me too I mean that I play in private only yeah yeah people sometimes even with guitar people ask me can you play something and it just feels like certain things are meant to be done privately yeah it's weird I mean it's a it's a difficult and some of the times I have performed publicly it is an ultimate leap in vulnerability it's very very very difficult for me and I'm sure I know it's not for a lot of people but it's for me anyway we've returned to that but since you've mentioned combination of novelty across multiple disciplines that's what you seek when you when you build teams or pick people you work with I just wanted to kind of linger on this idea of what kind of humans are you looking for in this endeavor that you're taking on this fascinating thing that you've been talking about want to think somewhere else a previous version version 5.7 of nary said somewhere that there's four fields that are combined to create this intersection of biology and engineering work in his computational design additive manufacturing material engineering synthetic biology I'm sure there's others but how do how do you find these humans machine learnings in the mix I manifest and they come yeah there are few approaches to manifest they show up okay you know send your message upon the water I mean those job descriptions that you saw the first ones I wrote by myself and you find interesting people and brilliant people when you look what we talked about second derivative when you look under and under and under and if you look deep enough and specialized enough and if you allow yourself to look at the cracks at the flaws at the the cracks between disciplines and between scales you find really really interesting diamonds in the rough and so I I I like for those job descriptions to yeah to be those messages in a bottle that bring those really interesting people are away I mean they have to have humility they have to have a shine in their eye they have to be hungry and foolish this job so famously said a friend of mine who's a dean of well-known architectural school said you know today architects don't want to be architects architects don't look up to the starkatex as role models starkatex are no longer role models architects want to build by virtue of not building right architects one it's she said it we're back in the 60s when we think about architecture back in the hippie movement I think I think that in a way they have to be somewhat of a hippie somewhat of a it kind of a jack of all trades master of all and yet with humility and yet with humility now that is hard to find and that is why you know when I start an interview I talk about childhood memories and I asked about music and I ask about connection and through these interviews you can learn a lot about a person's future by spending time hearing them talk about their past you find that educational back like a PhDs versus like what's the life trajectory yours is an interesting life trajectory too like what's the life trajectory that leads to the kind of person that would work with you um it's you know people who have um ideally had industry experience and know what it's like to be in the quote unquote real world they're dreamers that are addicted to reality as opposed to realists that are addicted to dreams meaning they have that innocence in them they have the hunger they have the idealism without um being entitled and with understanding the systems that govern our world and understanding how to utilize these systems as torgian horses to bring those values into the world there are individuals who are feel comfortable in this friction between between you know highly wondrous and dreamy and incredible fantasy renditions of what the world could be with extremely um and extremely brilliant skills in terms of their disciplinary background so PhD with industrial experience in a certain field or a double major in two fields that make no sense whatsoever in their combination yeah are things that really really attract me in especially that that spans the the technology biology yes technology biology nature culture I mean the secret to one thing is through the lens of another and I always believe in that kind of translational design ability to be able to see something through the lens of another and always allows you to think again begin again reestablish redefine suspend your disbelief revisit um and when you revisit enough times like a hundred times or like two hundred times and you revisit the same question through the lens of any possible discipline and any possible scenario you you you find you get eventually you get to the truth I have to ask you because you work at the interplay of the machine and the natural world is there a good definition for you of what is life what what is the living organism mm-hmm I think like four hundred and forty million years ago there were all these plants that um the cyanobacteria I believe actually that that God that that that was like the first extinction right there were six five extinctions we are apparently the six that we are in the eye of the storm we are in the six extinction we are going to be extinct as we speak I mean death is upon us whether we want to admit it or not and actually they found in Argentina and in in you know various places around the world they found these spores of the first plants that existed on the planet and they emerged out of these cyanobacteria were the first of course and then they found these spore-based plants and because they didn't have seeds there only spores the spores became sort of the fossils by which we've come to know of their existence and because of these spores we know that this first extinction existed but this extinction is actually what enabled plants to re-siract right so the death of these first plants because they clinked to the rocks and they they generated a ton of phosphorus that went into the ocean by clinging to the rocks like 60 times more phosphorus than without them and then all this phosphorus basically choked the oceans and made them super cold and a without oxygen a oxic and then then we lost the plant kingdom and then because of the death of these first plants they actually enriched the soil and created nutrients for these new plants to come to the planet and those planets had like more sophisticated vein systems and they were moving beyond spores to seeded plants etc and flowering plants and so in a way you one mass extinction sort of led in the or division periods sort of led to life as we know it and where would we be without plants in a way so I think the death is very much part of life and through that definition that kind of planetary wide definition in the context of hundreds of millions of years life gains a completely new sort of a new light and that's where that's when the particles become a wave right where humans are we are not alone and we are here because of those plants right so I think death is is very much part of life so in the context of you know the redwood tree perhaps you know life is defined as 10 generations and through the lens of a bacteria perhaps life is defined as a millisecond and perhaps through the lens of of an AGI life is defined as all of human civilization and so I think it really is a question of this time scale again the time scale and the organism life form that's asking the question through which we can answer what is life what do you think about this since you're if we think of ourselves in the eye of the storm of another extinction the natural question to ask here is you have all all of nature and then you have this new human creation that is currently being termed artificial intelligence how does your work play with the possibility of a future super intelligent ecosystem and AGI that either joins or supersedes humans yeah um so I'm glad you ask this question and I hope for a terrified both I'm hopeful and terrified I did watch your interview with Elias Ryudkowski and I loved it because you were scared or because you were excited or because there's a first of all I was both I was totally scared shamed excited and totally also inspired because he's just such an incredible thinker and I can agree or disagree with what he says but I just found his way of thinking about AGI and the perils of humanity as a result there's an inevitability to what he's saying his advice to young people is that prepare for short life he thinks it's very almost simple it's almost common sense that AGI would get rid of humans that he can't imagine that trajectory eventually that leads to a place that doesn't have AGI kill all humans there's just too many trajectories where a super intelligent systems gets rid of humans
