The following is a conversation with Jennifer Burns, a historian of ideas, including the evolution of economic, political, and social ideas in the United States in the 20th century to today. She wrote two biographies, one on Milton Friedman and the other on Iron Rand, both of which I highly recommend. This was a super technical and super fascinating conversation. At the end, I make a few comments about my previous conversation with President Zelensky for those of you who may be interested. This is Alex Friedman podcast to support it. We check out our sponsors in the description and now to your friends, here's Jennifer Burns. You have written two biographies, one on Milton Friedman and one on Iron Rand. So if we can, we will focus on each one separately. But first, let's talk about the ideas that two of them held in common. The value of individual freedom, skepticism of collectivism, and the ethics of capitalism. Can you talk about the big picture ideas they converge on? Yeah, so Milton Friedman and Iron Rand, in the biggest picture, they're both individualists and they're skeptical of collectivities and collectivism. So their unit of analysis is the individual, what's good for the individual, what works for the individual, and their understanding of society kind of flows from that. They also both use this focus on individualism to justify and to support capitalism as a social and economic system. So we can put them in a similar category. We can call them individualists. We could call them libertarians of a sort. They're also really different in how they approach capitalism, how they approach thinking. Iron Rand developed her own moral and philosophical system to justify individualism and to connect the individual to capitalism and to support capitalism as a social and economic system. Friedman struggles a bit more with how to justify capitalism and he'll ultimately come down to freedom as his core value, like his God, as he says. And so freedom does connect back to the individual, but he's not justifying capitalism for his own sake. He's justifying it for his ability to underwrite freedom in a social sense and also in the individual sense. At a high level, are there interesting differences between them? You already mentioned a few, maybe in terms of who they are personally, maybe in terms of how they approach the justification for capitalism, maybe other ways. Yeah, for sure. So beyond this idea that Milton Friedman takes a while to come to his justification of capitalism, Morzine Rand kind of has it from the start. She really focuses on the core quality of rationalism and rationality. Rationality is the defining feature of human beings. And so she works from there where as Friedman, Milton Friedman eventually converges on this idea of freedom. So that's one part of it. The other is their intellectual styles are really, really different. Their interpersonal styles are really different. So Friedman has big ideas, big principles that guide him, but he's also deeply empirical. He spends most of his career doing historical research, economic research, pulling data from how people actually make economic decisions and live in the world and using them to test and refine his theories. Where Rand, to some degree, we could say she's empirical and that she lives through the Russian Revolution and takes a very big lesson from that. But her style of thinking is really first principles, an axiomatic approach going from the basic idea of rationality and then playing it out in different spheres. And so those are just very different intellectual approaches. And then they lead in some ways to really different ways of thinking about how you get things done in the world. Rand is a purist. She wants to start with the pure belief. She doesn't want it to be diluted. One of her favorite sayings was it's earlier than you think. In other words, we're still moving towards a place where we can really hold and express these ideals purely. Friedman, although he didn't use this terminology, was much more half a loaf guy. I'll take what I can get and then I'll try to move to where I really want to be. But he is able to compromise, especially when he moves from being an economist into being more of a political thinker. And so that's a really different intellectual style. And then it also plays out in their lives in that Iran is incredibly schismatic. I mean, she wants her friends to believe what she believes and support what she supports. And she's willing to break a relationship if it doesn't match. Milton Friedman, he also does tend to have friends who agree with him. Yet he's always willing to debate his opponents and he's willing to do so with a smile on his face. He's the happy warrior. And he actually will win a lot of debates simply by his emotional affect and his cheerfulness and his confidence, where Rand will lose debates because she gets so angry in the face of disagreement. So they have a lot of similarities and a lot of differences and it's been really fascinating to kind of dive deep into both of them. I just relisten to Iran's last lecture or at least it's called that. The confrontation on nature of how she answers questions or how she addresses critics and so on. There is a kind of charisma to that. So I think both of them are very effective at winning over sort of popular support, but in very different styles. It seems like Iran is very cranky. But there is, I mean, it's the most charismatic cranky person I think I've ever listened to. Yeah, I mean, people talked about her, meeting her and coming to believe in her ideas in a similar way as I did with Marxism in that suddenly everything made sense and that when they came to believe in objectiveism, they felt they had this engine for understanding the entire world. Now after a while, for most people that then became confining, but yeah, that certainty. And Friedman had some of that as well. He clothed it differently. He clothed it in happiness where Iran kind of closed it as you said in crankiness or anger. I mean, there's also an arc to ran. She gets kind of anger and anger and crankier and crankier over the course of her life. What I enjoyed about my research is I was able to get into this early moment when she was different and a little more open. And then I kind of watched her close and her heart and over time. What would be fair to say that Milton Friedman had a bit more intellectual humility where he would be able to sort of evolve over time and be convinced by the reality of the world to change sort of the nuances of policies, the nuances of how he thought about economics or about the world. Yeah, absolutely. Friedman believed in being able to say I was wrong. And there are some things he said he was wrong about. Well, Delve more into monetism and monetary policy, but he was able to talk about the ways his ideas hadn't mapped onto the world the way he thought they would. He does a really interesting interview at the end of his life where he's beginning to voice some doubts about globalization, which was he was sort of a profit of globalization, a cheerleader of globalization. He really thought it would lead to a better world in all respects. And towards the end of his life, it's about two years before he dies. There's a note of doubt about how globalization unfolded and what it would mean, particularly for the American worker. And so you can see him still thinking and that to me, I had sort of assumed he became crankier and crankier and more and more set in his ways. And of course, there's a phase where he does become that way, especially since he's in the public eye and there's not room for nuance. But to find in the last years of his life, of his life, him being so reflective, that was absolutely not something Rand could do. I think there's a thread throughout this conversation where we should actually also say that you're kind of a historian of ideas. I am a historian of ideas, yes. And so we're talking about today, in part, about two people who kind of fought for ideas, for an idea, like we mentioned freedom for capitalism, and they did it in very different ways. And it's so interesting to see sort of the impact they both had and how their elucidation, explanation of those ideas, like reverberated through all society, and how we together as a society figure out what works, you know, the degree to which they have influence on the public, the degree to which they have influence on individual administrations, like the Reagan administration, Nixon and so on, and how it might return like fade away and then come back in the modern time. And it's so interesting if you just see this whole world as a game of ideas where we are like pushing and pulling and trying to figure stuff out. A bunch of people got real excited. Over a hundred years ago about communism and then they tried stuff out and then the implementation broke down and we keep playing with ideas. So these are the two grates of playing with ideas. I think that's a thread that just runs through this. Yeah. And kind of pushing back against that movement towards communism, social democracy. But one difference that I really should emphasize, Rand is the writer of fiction. She's a philosopher, but she's also a writer of fiction. So she is working almost in the mythic register, much more in the psychological register. She's creating characters that people identify with and people relate to experiences they've had. And that's one of the reasons she hits so deep. And she's also offering people, you know, I read all the fan letters to her people would say things like I read the fountain head and now I'm getting a divorce. You know, having just these incredible realizations. Milton Friedman didn't get such a thing. Milton Friedman didn't get such things. Or I'll meet someone and they'll say to me, you know, I'm Rand is the reason I went to medical school. You know, like a woman, a couple of women said this to me a few years back. I never even occurred to me that I could be a doctor until I read I'm Rand. And I said, I'm going to go to medical school. And so she has that really intense impact on people. So she thought of herself as rational. She thought of rationality as kind of what she was doing, but she was actually doing a kind of mythopoetic psychological work as well. Whereas Friedman on the one hand was much more rational. There's a whole set of economic thinking and he provides a rational framework for understanding the world. And it's the framework of, you know, neoclassical economics. At the same time, he does pull on the thologies, you know, of the idea of America and the gilded age, the frontier mythology, the individual immigrant, the settler mythology. He pulls on these, but he doesn't create them and they are, he's more kind of playing a tune he already has. Whereas I think Rand really does something a little bit deeper in her ability to reach into people's psyche and then take that emotional psychological experience and fuse it to an intellectual world and a political world. And that's really what makes her so powerful. And so I think she comes back in to relevancy in a different way than Friedman does because I think in some way she's tapped into a kind of more universal human longing for independence and autonomy and kind of self creation and self discovery. Nevertheless, there are still pragmatic ideas that are still important today for Milton Friedman, even just on the economics level. So let's dig in. Let me try, I took some notes. Let me try to summarize who Milton Friedman is and then you can correct me. Okay. So he is widely considered to be one of the greatest and most influential economists in history, not just the 20th century, I think ever. He was an advocate of economic freedom, like we said, and just individual freedom in general. He strongly advocated for free market capitalism and limited government intervention in the economy. Though you do give, I've listened to basically everything you have on the internet. You give some more depth and nuance on his views on this and in your books. He led the famed Chicago School of Economics and he won the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1976. He greatly influenced economic policies during the Reagan administration and other administrations. He was an influential public intellectual, highly influential, not just among economists. He lived 1912 to 2006. So that means he lived and worked through some major world events where his ideas were really important, the Great Depression, with the New Deal, World War II, with the post-war reconstruction, the rise and fall of the Bretton Woods monetary system, as we may talk about, the Cold War and all the conflicts involved in that, sort of the tensions around communism and so on. So the fall of the Soviet Union and also he has some interesting relationships to China's economic transformation. Yeah. 1970s, the stack flation of the 1970s and I'm sure there's a lot more. Can you maybe continue this thread and give a big picture overview of the ideas he is known for? Yeah, sure. And that's a great summary. You learn fast. So let me start with the economics and then I can kind of transition to how he used those economic ideas to become a real voice in the American Conservative movement. The American political realm. So I'll kind of highlight four ideas or contributions or episodes. One was his work with Anna Schwartz in revising our understanding of the Great Depression. And that's tightly related to the second, which is the School of Monaturism that he and Schwartz really become founders of. Then there is the prediction of stack flation and the explanation of that in the 1970s, which really is one of these sort of career making predictions. And we can dig into that. And then in terms of technical economics, he's known for the permanent income hypothesis, which he develops with a group of female collaborators that I can talk about. So those are kind of four technical pieces and being really brought together in what becomes the Chicago School of Economics. He's undoubtedly the head and the leader of the Chicago School of Economics. There's an earlier generation that he learns from. There's his generation. There's also a Chicago School of Law on Economics that's really profoundly influential. And then there'll be kind of a third generation that he's somewhat distinct from, but that goes on to really shape economics. But let me go back to these kind of four pieces and let me start with Great Depression. So Milton Friedman actually lives through the Great Depression. He's in college when it hits. And he is, so he's in college, it's in 1928 to 1932. And he's aware of the depression and he's deciding, should I study mathematics or should I study economics? And he hasn't, he's had some good economics teachers, but it's really the context. It's looking around at the slow, you know, dissolving of economic prosperity. So he decides to go to Chicago. He decides to study economics. And what's really interesting is that the Great Depression is so unexpected, it's unprojected, it's unprecedented, and economists are really struggling to know how to respond to it. And so he's going to arrive at the University of Chicago when the field is struggling to know what to do. So he's in this kind of really open space where the institutional economics of the 1920s has failed to predict, which was focused on business cycles. This is the irony, their big thing was charting and understanding business cycles. And then we have the biggest business cycle of all time and they haven't seen it coming and they don't have a good explanation for it. And what he will get at Chicago is the remnants of the monetary understanding of the economy. And so his teachers, they don't know exactly what's going on, but they look first to the banking crisis. They look first to the 1933, it's bank runs, failures of maybe it's up to a third of American banks, it's huge thousands of banks are failing per week. So they are focused on that. So that's the first kind of imprint he will have. The Great Depression has something to do with the banking system. The second imprint he will have is that all of his professors are profoundly concerned about the social crisis. They want relief programs, they want them now, they want bank regulation and financial reform. And so that's very active, this is not as fair by any stretch of the imagination. So Friedman has that imprinting and then about so that's he gets there in 32, 36, 37, the ideas of John Maynard Keynes from Britain, which has a different explanation. Keynes has a different explanation, the Great Depression will kind of make landfall in American economics and be very profoundly influential on most American economists, but Friedman already it's too late for Friedman. He already has a different perspective. So Keynesianism unfolds, I can say more about that, but it basically leads to more active federal government participation in the economy. And what underlies a lot of that, its adaptation in America particularly is the idea that capitalism has failed, capitalism has revealed itself to have a profound flaw in that it's too, it's cycles of boom and bust create social instability chaos, it needs to be tamed, it needs to be regulated. And so that becomes the kind of baseline of politics in the United States, the understanding of the New Deal, the understanding of the Democratic Party, even to some extent the understanding of the Republican Party and Friedman never quite, never quite sure about that. He has a hunch that there's something else going on and he does not buy that capitalism has sort of ground to a halt or the other ideas that capitalism has gone through some sort of phase transition. And it worked great, maybe while we had a frontier, this is a very serious argument that people were making. The United States used to have a frontier, a place where Europeans hadn't fully settled. Of course they're pushing out the native tribes, that's another story, but that this frontier is the engine of economic growth and the frontier is now over, it's closed and we're going to stagnate. And there's a theory of secular stagnation. And so to deal with secular stagnation, we're just going to have to have a more active state. So Friedman is suspicious of all these assumptions and he has this idea that it is something to do with money. Money is somehow important. And so he joins together with Anna Schwartz, who is an economist, she doesn't at this time hold a PhD, she's working for the National Bureau of Economic Research and they come together to do this study of money in the U.S. economy. And it takes some 12 years to write the book and they're releasing their ideas and they're arguing and Friedman is writing papers, giving talks, saying money is really important. And nobody's really believing him, he's a crank. He's at Chicago, Chicago is a well-known university, but he's sort of considered a crank. And then in 63 he and Anna Schwartz published this book and it's 800 pages, it's a reinterpretation of the history of the United States through money. Like the central character is money, whether it's species, greenback or the U.S. currency. And they have a whole chapter on the Great Depression and they, what they've literally done, Schwartz has done most of this. They've gone, Schwartz has gone to banks and said, show me your books and then she's added up, column by column. How much money is in your vault? How much money is on deposit? How much money is circulating? And so they literally have graphs, you can see them in the book of how much money has been circulating in the U.S. at various different points in time. And when they get to the Great Depression, they find the quantity of money available and the economy goes down by a third. And in some ways this is completely obvious because so many banks have failed and we don't have any type of bank insurance at that point. So if your bank goes under, your savings are there, the money essentially vanishes. And it's fractional reserve banking, right? So you've put in, they can loan up to 90% on their deposits. And so Friedman and Schwartz present this argument that what really made the Great Depression so bad was this drop in the amount of money, the 30% drop in the money, they called the Great Contraction. And then they go further and they say, well, how did this happen? And why? And they pinpoint the Federal Reserve, which is a fairly new institution at that time. And they say, what did the Federal Reserve do? The lender of last resort, what did it do in the face of what they're depicting as a massive unprecedented liquidity crisis? And they find it's not really doing much. And they really dig into the details and they find that the Federal Reserve has gone through a sort of personnel change and some of the key leaders in the 1920s, Benjamin Strong is one of them. And now deceased. And the dominance of the New York Federal Reserve, which in their telling is global, it's interconnected, it's seen a lot of financial things come and go. And they believe that the New York Fed had the understanding to recognize this as a liquidity crisis. We should be very generous. We should support all the banks. Their influence has diminished for the kind of banks that are more, they don't say like the robes and the Hicks, but it basically is. People in charge don't know what they're doing. And so the Fed pursues this kind of policy of masterly inactivity. They don't see it as a problem. They don't do much. There's an enormous liquidity crisis. And that's their version of what the Great Depression is all about. That it's a financial system meltdown. It's a liquidity crisis. And that in some ways, well in many ways, they argue very strong counterfactual argument. The Federal Reserve could have prevented it. And it did not. And so it becomes then an institutional failure and a political failure, not a failure of capitalism as a system. And so this book comes out. It's a blockbuster. And even those economists, you've been like, Friedman is a crank. I don't buy it. Are like Friedman and Schwartz are onto something. Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz are onto something. And so that really changes the game. And this is also one of his most influential contributions because Friedman and Schwartz becomes the playbook for the Federal Reserve. And we have lived through this, right? The financial crisis, the Federal Reserve is ready to loan. COVID, the Federal Reserve is all kinds of new things because no Federal Reserve chair wants to be in Friedman and Schwartz 2.0 that somebody writes. Or they're the bad guy who left the economy melt down. So the specifics of what they say to do have obviously evolved as the system has changed. But this is a playbook for how to deal with economic crisis. It's Friedman and Schwartz. And so it's absolutely fundamental. And that is really going to be the place he makes his mark. There's a lot of things to say here. So first the book we're talking about is the monetary history of the United States in part for which Milton Friedman won the Nobel Prize. You've also mentioned the influence of the Great Depression. If you're going to even just rewind to that. Yes. So he went to I guess college and Rutgers. That's right. And he was, you know, mathematical percolivities. So he was kind of wanted to be a mathematician. And so it's kind of a cool crossroads. It's interesting how the right time, the right person arrives. So you describe this really well. So he had his choice to be a mathematician or an economist. An economist is a university of Chicago. Mathematician is a Brown University, whichever. And then this is also the beginnings as you've described of mathematical economics. So he fits in nicely into this using what I think you said the number of equations started going up. Yes. Which is a really nice way to put it. So really the right person at the right time to try to solve this puzzle of the economy melting down. It's so interesting. It's just one human. It's just from just zooming in. I know a single human making a decision about life. And it's it's hard to know when you're in it that the world is melting down from an economic perspective. And then I could do something about this to figure out what it is. And also I'm going to reject the mainstream narrative about why this happened. Yeah. So the other piece of the puzzle when he goes to Rutgers, he thinks he'll be an actuary. So Milton Friedman's family, his parents are immigrants, Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe. They're pretty atypical and that they don't stay in New York, you know, and they move to Rauwe, New Jersey. And they put together a fairly middle class life as kind of they have a shop, they do some wholesale buying and selling. And then his father dies when he's 16. His life becomes more precarious. But it's never as precarious as he makes it up to be. He's got three older sisters. They are in a good living. And suddenly they all have better grades in high school than he does. But he's the one that goes to college. And but it's actually really important that he loses his father figure because he's then looking for other father figures. And he meets two at Rutgers. And is Arthur Burns who will go on to have a huge influence in his career. No relation to me, by the way. But Arthur Burns is like him, a fellow Jewish immigrant boy on the make. He's older. And he's making a career as an economist. And then there's Homer Jones who has gone to the University of Chicago and is studying with Frank and I at Chicago and says you have to go to Chicago. So he has these two mentors and and Burns in particular suggests, oh, I could be an economist. That could be my career path. You know, the idea to be an actuary for an insurance company. I'm not sure where he got that idea, but he just thought that was something he could do as someone who was good at math. And so the college really opens the perspective opens the door. And then I think it's really key that he again, he's he doesn't get. He doesn't get an explanation that he buys for the great depression. So then he's looking for one. And the math part is really interesting aspect of his career. Now he actually comes to Chicago to study with a mathematical economist, Henry Schultz, but he gets there and he thinks Schultz is kind of dumb. He really does. He's incredibly arrogant and he just thinks this guy's not that smart. And it seems that I mean, Schultz did some really important work in the early stages of mathematical economics, but a lot of the oral histories about him are like, yeah, he wasn't that bright. Yeah. So Friedman's maybe onto something. So he falls into the set of students who are really enthralled with his other professor of Frank Knight. And Frank Knight is against math and economics. Frank Knight is like, you know, a neoclassical economist, but not a mathematical economist. He's an old school liberal. He's really concerned about liberal democracy, economic liberalism. And Friedman is very deeply influenced by night. And he continues to pursue mathematical economics. So he'll go for part of his graduate career. He goes to Columbia University where he actually gets his PhD from and he works with a mathematical economist there. And so he comes out trained in what will eventually be econometrics, statistics and economics, his early publications or in statistics, but it's not really where his intellectual heart and soul are. And eventually he will turn very profoundly against mathematics in economics and become a sort of heterodox strain throughout 20th century economics. It says simple models are better. We need to work on empirical work often, empirical data, not construct elegant models. And and becomes really sort of countercultural within economics in that way. And the test of a good model is it should actually predict stuff that happened. It should predict stuff that happened. It should tie back to what's going on. I'm wondering which direction to go. So first, actually, if we could zoom out on the different schools of economics, just the basics. You mentioned neoclassical, we mentioned Kenziean economics, we mentioned, what else do we mention? Well, the Chicago School of Economics, where does Austrian economics fit into that pile and Marxian economics? And can we just even just linger and try to redefine Kenziean economics and Chicago School of Economics, neoclassical economics and Austrian economics? There's some overlap and tension. Okay, so schools of economics. So we could start with classical economics. Classical economics, we could think of Adam Smith is kind of your classic classical. Economist, the founder of the discipline, classical economics does not really use math is very close to political economy. It's concerned with as Smith puts it, the wealth of nations. It's concerned to some degree with distribution, it's concerned to some degree with what makes a good political system. And what tends to really define classical economics when you're looking from a great distance is what's called the labor theory of value. So where does value come from in classical economics? It comes from the labor that a person puts into it. So maybe this in some ways comes from locks notion of property that you kind of mingle, your labor with the natural world. We can say labor theory of value. So classical economics concerned with Smith is arguing against mercantilism for more free trade. Often goes by the name of political economy to show it's more capacious. It's thinking of politics and economics. You can still read these books today. The sentences are long, the words are different, but you can still follow along. So the real big transition from classical economics and political economy to economics as it's understood today comes with the marginal revolution. And the marginal revolution is a scientific revolution that happens in a couple of different places simultaneously. This is one of these things that you see in the history of science. There'll be some breakthrough. Like Darwin has a breakthrough, but like somebody else has sort of the same breakthrough at the same time. So there's a version of marginalism that's continental. There's a version in the German speaking lands in the French speaking lands and in Britain. And they all kind of come together. And the shift is in the theory of value. So the theory of value in marginalism is on the margin. So say you have one apple and you want a second one. How much is getting going from one apple to two apple worth for you? Probably quite a bit. If you had ten apples, maybe going to eleven apples doesn't matter that much. The marginal value is less. So what marginalism does, though most importantly is it opens the door to math and economics. Because it means you can graph this. Now you can depict this relationship graphically. And there's some really interesting work in the history of economics that shows a lot of the people who developed marginalism were looking to physics as a model, physics, the queen of the sciences. And so they were thinking they imported terms from the natural world to describe the social world through the lens of economics terms like equilibrium. So the idea being that if you looked at a market, a market would reach equilibrium when everybody is bought and sold all that they want or the price will settle at an equilibrium price when it's really the demand and supply are matching up. And some of these ideas are things we pick up at a microeconomics class? Oh yes. This is still out there. This is sort of the basic foundation of microeconomics, marginal analysis. And so in the German speaking intellectual tradition, this is the root of Austrian economics. And people picking up the marginal revolution in the German speaking lens are opposed to the historicists who are thinking in a more evolutionary way about how societies kind of grow and change. And they have a vision of economic ideas as applying differently to different types of social arrangements. Or the marginalists remember are inspired by physics. And this is a set of natural laws that applies anywhere to any sort of human society. So that's his first really big fissure that we'll see again and again. Are you historically minded? Do certain traits of economic life in here, ad here, and become expressed in certain types of societies? Or are there universal economic laws that flow through any type of society? So that's kind of a juncture, a break. And so marginalism, first, people start using really geometry to kind of graph things, but marginalism is also opening up to the possibility of calculus and the possibility of creating models. But at that point in time, late 19th century, a model is something like a physicist does. Think of like an incline plane and how fast is a ball roll from one to the other. It's a physical representation of the world. And eventually economists will start to create mathematical representations of the world. But we're not quite there yet. So we're late 19th century. We have this fissure. We have this introduction of marginal analysis that marks the juncture from classical economics to economics. So let's say now we have economics. But we still have this fissure between historical thinking and let's call it natural law thinking. That's not quite right. Physical laws versus contingency. And then in the United States, this ends up mapping onto debates about capitalism. And so more historically minded economists tend to be interested in the progressive movement, and which is invested in taming and regulating industrial capitalism and changing its excesses, you know, factory safety laws, wage laws, working conditions laws. Yet in general, American economists all use marginal analysis just in different ways. The ones who are more drawn to marginal analysis become known as neoclassical economists. Their neoclassical, the neo is because they're using marginal analysis. The classical is because they don't think we need to change the way the economy operates or the government operates. They're not progressive. Whereas the progressives are saying things like the we need to use social control. The state and the people collectively and democratically need to control the way economics unfolds and make sure things are fair and equal. So that school of thought becomes known as institutional economics in the United States by the 20th century. So it's part of the progressive movement late 19th century into the 20th century really becomes institutional economics. And it's quite dominant. And the neoclassical economists are still there, but they're very much a minority. And Frank Knight, Milton Friedman's teacher, is one of the minority neoclassical economists. And the institutionalists are much more progressive still. Is it fair to say that the neoclassical folks and even the classical folks versus the institutional economics folks, is they have a disagreement about how much government intervention that should be in the economy. So neoclassical is less intervention. And then an institutional economist, the progressive folks, is more intervention. Yes, yes, exactly right. So this is a situation in the 1920s. But the other piece I should mention is the first generation of progressive economists were very radical. They were closely allied with the socialist movement with labor radicalism. And many of them lost their jobs at universities. This is kind of connects to the early, the dawn of academic freedom. This is before academic freedom. And they became, they were chasing it became much more mainstream. By the time we get to the 1920s, we don't really have radical critiques of society coming from economists. Much smaller profession, much less important than it is today. Fairly peaceful, because the 1920s are a fairly peaceful decade in the United States. So this is a situation when the Great Depression hits. And as I mentioned before, the head, the kind of most important institutional economist is Wesley Mitchell. And he has said, he's written a whole book on business cycles. He doesn't see this business cycle coming and it hits and he doesn't have a good explanation for it. Perhaps the preeminent neoclassical economist was Irving Fisher. Now, Irving Fisher is big into the stock market and Irving Fisher says some time in late summer, 1929, stocks are going ever higher and will continue to go ever higher forever. And so he loses his reputation after the stock market crash. So Milton Friedman is stepping into a field in which the greats have been discredited and there's an enormous economic crisis all around. Everybody's struggling to figure out why the crisis happened. Yes. And the other thing he's stepping into is a world where in the United States, there's a great deal of anger at capitalism, at the system, unemployed people on the street in Europe. There's rising fascist movements in Asia. There's rising fascist movements. And so everyone's very concerned about this. And Friedman is seeing a lot of this through the lens of Frank Knight, who feels like we are maybe reaching the end of what he calls liberalism. He calls himself an old fashioned liberalism. We're reaching the end of representative democratic government because representative democratic government cannot solve these social problems. And capitalism, as it has developed, Knight is very pro-capitalist, but he says it's generating inequality and this is putting too many strains on the system. So Knight will become one of the people who helps Friedman think, how do I develop a new theory of capitalism that works in an era of mass democracy where people can vote and people can express at the ballot box their unhappiness with what's happening economically. So this larger movement will generate of which, if a hi-hack is a part, Friedman is a part that becomes the very early stirings of trying to think about a new sort of liberalism, which will eventually be called neoliberalism. OK. So if we can just linger on definitions of things. So we mentioned what neo-classical is in the institutional economics is what's Kenzie in economics? And the Chicago School of Economics, I guess, is a branch of neo-classical that's a little bit more empirical versus maybe model-based. And Kenzie in this very model, model heavy, more intervention of government. And so the real battle is Kenzie versus everybody else. That is what eventually comes to pass in the United States and in the kind of overall developed, kind of developed profession of economics. The other piece of the puzzle here is the introduction of mathematics. And it's been around the edges, but it will pick up speed in the 1930s, like the econometrics society has founded. They start publishing. People start using more statistical and mathematical tools to think about economics. And they're given a boost inadvertently by the rise of Kenzie in economics. So Kenzie is trained in the neo-classical tradition. He's an absolutely fascinating figure. He's been there in peace negotiations at Versailles. He basically calls World War II. He's like, hey, we're going to have another war here. It's caused by Germany because this peace treaty has been done in such a vindictive way. And people have made such bad decisions. He's there. He sees it happening. And so when the Great Depression unfolds, he basically comes up with a new theory for explaining what's going on. And the previous neo-classical understanding is sort of things go up and things go down. And when they go down, there's a natural mechanism to bring them back up. So when the economy's going down, prices are going down. Everyone's losing money, but eventually firms are going to realize, hey, I can hire people cheap. Hey, I can buy stuff cheap. I don't have a lot of competition. Maybe I should get in the game here. And then others will start to get in and then you regenerate prosperity in that way. And so Kenzie says, sure, that's one theory, but something different is happening right now. Part of why it's happening is because we have the working class is more empowered now. They're not simply going to just take low wages and ride them down to the floor. We might not hit the floor. But also he says people might become too anxious to spend. They might not want to invest. And you know, Kenzie has these discussions of animal spirits, right? He's still enough of a political economist to think not just in terms of human rationality, but what are some other things going on in human beings? And people might decide to sit on their money. They might not invest it. And so what happens then is you could get stuck in a bad equilibrium. So in the neoclassical model of equilibrium kind of restarts and resets itself. And he says, no, we could get stuck here. We get stuck in the depression. And in that case, what has to happen? He says the government stimulates investment and the government itself invests. And then he argues that, you know, this is a student of his Richard Cons. As a government invests a dollar, it has like a multiplier effect. A dollar spent by the government kind of ramifies out throughout the economy. So it takes the government and puts it in the center, as opposed to say the banking system or the financial system, which would be the more freedman analysis. And for many economists of freedman's generation, and he's a weird generation, because it's the generation that becomes dominant is just like four years older. The men who become Canesian economics, but that four years is really important. Because they come in to graduate school in economics and they get exposed to the new ideas of John Maynard Canes. And they, you know, I think it's Paul St. Amuse and calls it like it was like a South Sea virus. That that attacked all of the young, all of the younger economists immediately succumbed and like no one under 50 ever got the disease, right? Because they're, they're thinking is already set. And so Canesianism, Canes himself is very suspicious of math and economics. And he and freedman is fascinating. One of the first books by Jan Tangerman, a Dutch economist, to use math and economics. He used huge volumes. Volume one, Canes Pansett, volume two, freedman Pansett. So they're in the same page, but what happens is as Canesianism arrives in the United States. Franklin Roosevelt is not really a Canesian. He's kind of an accidental or experimental Canesian is Canesian. And there's a bunch of different ideas in the United States that are very similar to Canesianism. They're not theorized, but there's similar ideas that the government has to do something. So this all comes together and American economists realize that you can construct models in the Canesian perspective. And if you can use numbers in these models, you can go to Washington, DC with numbers. And you seem like you have a lot more authority. And so math becomes really twin into Canesian economics. So the numbers are used as a kind of a symbol of expertise. We really know what the hell is going on because we have some numbers, right? And we can create a model. And so we can say, OK, in the model, the interest rate is here and taxes are here. So let's play with government spending. Let's make it up. Let's make it down. And then we can get an estimation. It'll spit out. Here's predicted GDP. So the other piece of the Canesian revolution, is it really gets people thinking kind of holistically about the economy as one conceptual unit. And you then have what, a policy, I'm going to call the neoclassical synthesis. And this is still in economics today. If you take micro, you're going to get supply and demand, scarcity, marginal analysis. If you take macro, you're going to get a very different approach. And that's more Canesian based. And so the idea is that, and this makes sense. I mean, you can think of this from statistics, right? The way things act individually versus when they're all added together, it can be very different. So there's this kind of uneasy piece where economists are using kind of neoclassical tools to analyze individual behavior and individual market behavior. And they're shifting to a different paradigm when they think about the economy as a whole. And in this paradigm of the economy as a whole, the federal budget, the taxing and spending power of the federal government become paramount. And that is called the fiscal revolution. And that's really the essence of Canesianism. But the key thing to remember is that Canesianism and Canes are different. And there's this famous episode where John Maynard Canes comes to DC and he goes to dinner. And he comes back and he says to one of his friends in London, he's like, yeah, it was really interesting. I was the only non-Canesian in there. Yeah. Yeah. So Canesianism is more government intervention, fiscal policy. So put the government at the center of influencing the economy. And then the different flavors of whether it's Austrian economics or Chicago School of Economics is saying no, we have to put less government intervention and trust the market more. And the formulation of that from the freedom is trust the money more, though, not trust. The money supply is the thing that should be focused on. Yes. So the Austrians and the Chicago School see economic prosperity and growth comes from individual initiative, individual entrepreneurship, kind of private sources. The private market is what drives economic growth, not the public sector. And so for Friedman, then the question is, what is a government's role? And because he's lived through the Great Depression, he's not laissez-faire. And he won't ever be laissez-faire. And now interestingly, Hayek living through the Great Depression at first is laissez-faire. And he's like, sure, like, let it rip. And things get so bad that Hayek's like, okay, that's not going to work. Can we actually define laissez-faire? So what do we mean? Like, what's the free market? What's laissez-faire? What's the extreme version here? So yeah, laissez-faire means leave a B in France. More often used as an insult than as an actual. Very few people are completely and totally laissez-faire. That would be like the pure laissez-faire would be the sort of pure, maybe pure anarchist position, like the state does nothing, or the state isn't even there. But it tends to, if I could maybe make it more precise, it would be focused on freedom of contract, would be essential. And that means like the buyer of labor and the seller of labor must have absolute freedom to contract. So that means no minimum wage law, no working hours law, no employment law, things like that. That was, and this is all pre-progressive movement. A lot of things are that way, right? You know, imagine you're in 19th century America and you have a farm and you hire someone to help you in the farm. You offer the money, they take it. If they fall off a ladder and break their back, maybe you help them out, maybe you don't. Right, but there's not a whole apparatus of legal liability and safety and things like that. So that would be one piece. Another piece of laissez-faire would be free trade amongst nations. So no regulation of who can invest in a nation or who can take money out of a nation. So Nippon Steel could come and invest in US Steel and there would be no grounds in which to reject that. Or you could as a billionaire in the United States relocate you and all your money to another country and the United States couldn't try to keep you and nobody else could stop you from coming in. And so, and then in the context of economic crisis, laissez-faire would not encompass centrally provided relief because in the pure theory, again, very seldom applied purely, but in the pure theory, the wages need to come down far enough and people need to be desperate enough to start taking work and to start the machine again. So the theory would be if you give people relief, they might not go back to work. Now, almost nobody says that in the Great Depression because the situation is so bad and it's, you know, people are starving on the street and people feel for humanitarian and ethical reasons, it's not okay to say that. The Austrians, though at first, Hayek and Lionel Robbins are like, this is a business.
