every star in the sky probably has planets. Yep. And life is probably emerging on these planets, but I think the commentorial space associated with these planets is so different. Our causal cones are never going to overlap or not easily. And this is a thing that makes me sad about alien life, why it's why we have to create alien life in the lab as quickly as possible. Because I don't know if we are going to be able to be able to build architectures that will intersect with alien intelligence architectures. Intersect, you don't mean in time or space. Time and the ability to communicate. The ability to communicate. Yeah. My biggest fear in a way is that life is everywhere, but we've become infinitely more lonely because of our scaffolding in that commentorial space. The following is a conversation with Lee Cronin, his third time in this podcast. He is a chemist from University of Glasgow, who is one of the most fascinating, brilliant and fun to talk to scientists, have ever had the pleasure of getting to know. This is Alex Frieden podcast, the supported, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Lee Cronin. So your big assembly theory paper was published in Nature. Yeah. Congratulations. We created, I think it's fair to say a lot of controversy, but also a lot of interesting discussion. So maybe I can try to summarize a assembly theory and you tell me if I'm wrong. Sorry for it. So assembly theory says that if we look at any object in the universe, any object that we can quantify how complex it is by trying to find the number of steps it took to create it and also we can determine if it was built by a process akin to evolution by looking at how many copies of the object there are. Yeah, that's spot on spot on. I was not expecting that. Okay. So let's go through definitions. So there's a central equation I'd love to talk about, but definition wise, what is an object? Yeah, an object. So if I'm going to try to be as meticulous as possible, objects need to be finite and they need to be decomposable into subunits. All human-made artifacts are objects. Is a planet an object? Probably yes, if you scale out. So an object is finite and countable and decomposable. I suppose mathematically, but yeah, I still wake up some days ago to think to myself, what is an object? Because it's a non-trivial question. Persists over time, I'm quoting from the paper here. An object that's finite is distinguishable. I'm sure that's a weird adjective, distinguishable. So many people help offering to rewrite the paper after it came out. You wouldn't believe it's so funny. Persists over time and is breakable such that the set of constraints to constructed from elementary building blocks is quantifiable such that the set of constraints to constructed from elementary building blocks is quantifiable. The history is in the objects. It's kind of cool, right? So what defines the object is its history or memory, whichever is the sexier word? I'm happy with both, depending on the day. So the set of steps that took to create the object, so there's a sense in which every object in the universe has a history. And that is part of the thing that is used to describe its complexity, how complicated it is. What is an assembly index? So the assembly index, if you take the object apart and be super lazy about it, or minimal, say what it, because it's like you've got a really short term memory. So what you do is you lay all the parts on the path and you find the minimum number of steps you take on the path to add the parts together to reproduce the object. And that minimum number is the assembly index. It's a minimum bound. And it was always my intuition, the minimum bound in assembly theory was really important. That only worked out a few weeks ago, which was kind of funny, because I was just like, no, this is sacrosanct. I don't know why. It will come to me one day. And then when I was pushed by a bunch of mathematicians, we came up with the correct physical explanation which I can get to. But it's the minimum. And it's really important to some minimum. And the reason I knew the minimum was right is because we could measure it. So almost before this paper came out, with published papers explain how you can measure the assembly index of molecules. Okay. So that's not so trivial to figure out. So when you look at an object, we can say molecule, we can say object more generally, to figure out the minimum number of steps that takes to create that object. That doesn't seem like a trivial thing to do. So with molecules, it's not trivial, but it is possible because what you can do, and because I'm a chemist, I'm kind of like, I see the lens of the world for just chemistry. I break the molecule part and break bonds. And if you break up, if you take a molecule and you break it all apart, you have a bunch of atoms. And then you say, okay, I'm going to then form bond, take the atoms and form bonds and go up the chain of events to make the molecule. And that's what made me realize, take a toy example, literally toy example, take a Lego object, which is broken up of Lego blocks. So you could do exactly the same thing. In this case, the Lego blocks are naturally the smallest, they're the atoms in the actual composite Lego architecture. But then if you maybe take a couple of blocks and put them together in a certain way, maybe they're offset in some way, that offset is on the memory. You can use that offset again with only a penalty of one and you can then make a square, triangle, and keep going. And you remember those motifs on the chain. So you can then leap from the start with all the Lego blocks or atoms, just lay it out in front of you and say, right, I'll take you, you connect and do the least amount of work. So it's really like the smallest steps you can take on the graph to make the object. And so for molecules, it came relatively intuitively. And then we started to apply it to language. We've even started to apply it to mathematical theorems. But I'm so out of my depth, but it looks like you can take minimum set of axioms and then start to build up kind of mathematical architectures in the same way. And then the shortest path to get there is something interesting that I don't yet understand. So what's the computational complexity of figuring out the shortest path in molecules, with language, with mathematical theorems? It seems that once you have the fully constructed Lego castle or whatever your favorite Lego world is figuring out how to get there from the basic building blocks. Isn't like a, is that an NP hard problem? It's a hard problem, but actually if you look at it, so the best way to look at it for this take a molecule. So if the molecule has 13 bonds, first of all, take 13 copies of the molecule and just cut all the bonds. So take cut 12 bonds. And then you just put them in order. And then that's how it works. So you keep looking for symmetry or copies. So you can then shorten it as you go down. And that becomes combinatorially quite hard. For some natural product molecules, it comes very hard. It's not impossible, but we're looking at the bounds on that at the moment. But as the object gets bigger, it becomes really hard. And that's the bad news, but the good news is there are shortcuts. And we might even be able to physically measure the complexity without computationally calculating it, which is kind of insane. Where would you do that? Well, in the case of molecule, so if you shine light on the molecule, let's take an infrared, the molecule has each of the bonds absorbs the infrared differently, and that's what we call the fingerprint region. And so it's a bit like, because it's quantized as well, you have all these discrete kind of absorbencers. And my intuition after we realized we could cut molecules up in mass spec, that was the first go at this. We did it with using infrared, and the infrared gave us an even better correlation, assembly index, and we used another technique as well. In addition to infrared called NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance, which tells you about the number of different magnetic environments in the molecule. And that also worked out. So we have three techniques, which each of them independently gives us the same or tending towards the same assembly index from molecule that we can calculate mathematically. Okay, so these are all methods of mass spectrometry, mass spec. You scan a molecule, it gives you data in the form of a mass spectrum, and you're saying that the data correlates to the assembly index. Yeah. So how generalizable is that shortcut? First of all, to chemistry. And second, I'll be on that. Because that seems like a nice hack. And you're extremely knowledgeable about various aspects of chemistry, so you can say, okay, it kind of correlates. But the whole idea behind a assembly theory paper, and perhaps why it's so controversial, is that it reaches bigger. It reaches for the bigger general theory of objects in the universe. Yeah, I'd say so. I'd agree. So I've started assembly theory of emoticons with my lab, believe it or not. So you take emojis, pixelate them, and work out the assembly index of emoji, and then work out how many emojis you can make on the path of emoji. So there's the uber emoji from which all other emojis emerge. And then you can, so you can then take a photograph and by looking at the shortest path on, by reproducing the pixels to make the image you want, you can measure that. So then you start to be able to take spatial data. Now there's some problems there. What is then the definition of the object? How many pixels? How do you break it down? And so we're just learning all this right now. So how do you compute the, how would you begin to compute the assembly index of a graphical, like a set of pixels on a 2D plane that form a thing? So you would, first of all, determine the resolution. So then how, how, how is your xy and what the number on the x and y plane? And then look at the surface area and then you take all your emojis and make sure they're all looked at the same resolution. Yes. And then we were basically then do the exactly the same thing we would do for cutting the bonds. You'd cut bits out of the emoji on and look at the, you'd have a bag of pixels. So, and you would then add those pixels together to make the overall emoji. But like, first of all, not every pixels, I mean, this is at the core sort of machine learning and computer vision. Not every pixels that important. And there's like macro features, there's micro features and all that kind of stuff. Exactly. What, like, you know, the eyes appear in a lot of them. The smile appears in a lot of them. So in the same way in chemistry, we assume the bond is fundamental. What we do in there here is we assume the resolution at the scale that we should do it is fundamental. And we're just working that out and that you're right, that will change, right? Because as you take your lens out a bit, it will change dramatically. But it's just a new way of looking at not just compression. What we do right now in computer science and data. One big kind of misunderstanding is assembly theory is telling you about how compressed the object is. That's not right. It's a how much information is required on a chain of events. Because the nice thing is if in when you do compression and computer science, we're wandering a bit here, but it's kind of worth wondering, I think. And you assume you have instantaneous access to all the information in the memory. Yeah. In assembly theory, you say, no, you don't get access to that memory until you've done the work. And then you don't access that memory. You can have access, but not to the next one. And this is how in assembly theory, we talk about the four universes, the assembly universe, the assembly possible and the assembly contingent and then the assembly observed. And they're all all scales in this combinatorial universe. Yeah. Can you explain each one of them? Yeah. So the assembly universe is like anything goes just is just combinatorial kind of explosion and everything. That's the biggest one. That's the biggest one's massive. Assembly universe, assembly possible, assembly contingent, assembly observed. And on the y-axis is assembly steps in time. Yeah. And you know, in the x-axis, as the thing expands through time, more and more unique objects appear. So yeah, so assembly universe, everything goes. Yeah. Assembly possible laws of physics come in in this case in chemistry bonds. In assembly, so that means those are actually constraints, I guess. Yes. And they're the only constraints, they're the constraints of the base. So the way to look at it, you've got all your atoms, their conties, you can just bung them together. So then you can become a kind of so in the way in computer science, speak, I suppose the assembly universe is just like no laws of physics. Things can fly through mountains, beyond the speed of light. In the assembly possible, you have to apply the laws of physics. But you can get access to all the motifs instantaneously with no effort. That means you could make anything. Then the assembly contingent says, no, you can't have access to the highly assembled object in the future until you've done the work in the past on the causal chain. And that's really the really interesting shift where you go from assembly, possible to assembly contingent. That is really the key thing in assembly theory that says you cannot just have instantaneous access to all those memories. You have to have done the work somehow. The universe has to somehow built a system that allows you to select that path. Rather than other paths. And then the final thing, the assembly observed is basically you're saying, oh, these are the things we actually see. We can go backwards now and understand that they have been created by this this causal process. Wait a minute. So when you say the universe has to construct the system that does the work. Is that like the environment that that allows for like selection? Yeah. Yeah. That's the thing that does the selection. You could think about in terms of a von Neumann constructor, first of selection, a ribosome, Tesla, a plant assembling Teslas, you know, the difference between the assembly universe in Tesla land. And the the test of factory is everyone says, no, Teslas are just easy. They just spring out. You know how I make them all the test of factory. You have to put things in sequence and out comes a Tesla. Do you talk about the factory? Yes. This is this is really nice. Super important point is that when I talk about the universe having a memory or there's some magic. It's not that it's that tells you that there must be a process encoded. Somewhere in physical reality, be it a cell, a Tesla factory, or something else is making that object. I'm not saying there's some kind of woo, woo memory in the universe, you know, morphic resonance or something. I'm saying that there is an actual causal process that is being directed constrained in some way. And so it's not kind of just making everything. Yeah, but Lee, what's the factory that made the factory? So what is the so first of all, you assume the laws of physics is just sprung to existence at the beginning. Those are constraints, but what what makes the factory the environment that doesn't selection? This is the question or well, it's the first interesting question that I want to answer out of four. I think the factory emerges in the environment, the interplay between the environment and the objects that are being built. And and here, let me, I'll have a go at explaining to you the shortest path. So why is the shortest path important? Imagine you've got, I'm going to have to go chemistry for a moment and abstract it. So imagine you've got an environment, a given environment that you have a budget of atoms, you're just flinging together. And the objective of those atoms that being flung together and say molecule A, have to make that they have it, they decompose. So molecules decompose over time. So the molecules in this environment, in this magic environment have to not die, but they do die. There's a, there's a, they have a half life. So the only way the molecules can get through that environment out the other side that's pretend the environment is a box and go in and out without dying. And there's a, there's just an infinite supply of atoms coming or a, well, a large supply. The, the molecule gets built, but the molecule that is able to template itself being built and survives in the environment will, will basically rain supreme. Now, let's say that that molecule takes 10 steps. Now, and it, and it's using a finite set of atoms, right? Now, let's say another molecule, smart-ass molecule will call it comes in. And can survive in that environment and can copy itself, but it only needs five steps. The molecule that only needs five steps, because it's continued, both molecules have been destroyed, but they're creating themselves faster. They can be destroyed. You can see that the shortest path, rain supreme. So the shortest path tells us something super interesting about the minimal amount of information required to propagate that motif in time and space. And it's just like a kind of, it seems to be like some kind of conservation law. So one of the intuitions you have is the propagation of motifs in time will be done by the things that construct themselves in the shortest path. So like, you're going to assume that most of the objects in the universe are built in the shortest in the most efficient way. So big leap I just took there. Yeah, no, yes and no, because there are other things. So in the limit, yes, because you want to tell the difference between things that have required a factory to build them and just random processes. But you can find instances where the shortest path isn't taken for an individual object, an individual function. And people go, ah, that means the shortest path isn't right. And then I say, well, I don't know. I think it's right still because so of course, because there are other driving forces. It's not just one molecule. Now when you start to now you start to consider two objects, you have a joint assembly space. And it's not now it's a compromise between not just making a and b in the shortest path. You want to make a and b in the shortest path, which might mean that a is slightly longer. You have compromise. So when you stay slightly more nesting in the construction, when you take a given object, that can look longer. Well, that's because the overall function is the object is still trying to be efficient. Yeah. And this is still very hand wavy. Um, and maybe I have no legs to stand on. We think we're getting somewhere with that. And there's probably some parallelization. Yeah, right. So this is all this nice sequential. The building is. Yeah, I guess when you're talking about complex objects, you don't have to work sequentially. You can work in parallel. You can get your friends together. And they can. Yeah. And the thing we're working on right now is how to understand these parallel processes. Now there's a new thing we've introduced called assembly depth. And assembly depth can be lower than the assembly index for a molecule when they're cooperating together. Because exactly this parallel processing is going on. And my team have been working this out in the last few weeks because we're looking at what compromises does nature need to make when it's making molecules in the cell. And I wonder if you know, I maybe like well, I'm always leaping out of my compass. But in economics, I'm just wondering if you could apply this in economic process. It seems like capitalism is very good at finding shortest path. You know, every time. And there are ludicrous things that happen because actually the cost function has been minimized. And so I keep seeing parallels everywhere where there are complex nested systems where if you give it enough time and you introduce a bit of heterogeneity, the system readjusts and finds a new shortest path. But the shortest path isn't fixed on just one molecule now. It's in the actual existence of the object over time. And that object could be a city. It could be a cell. It could be a factory. But I think we're going way beyond molecules and my competence and probably should go back to molecules. But hey, before we get too far, let's talk about the assembly equation. Okay. How should we do this? Now, let me just even read that part of the paper. We define assembly as the total amount of selection necessary to produce an ensemble of observed objects, quantified using equation one. The equation basically has A on one side, which is the assembly of the ensemble. And then a sum from one to N, where N is the total number of unique objects. And then there is a few variables in there that include the assembly index, the copy number, which we'll talk about. That's an interesting. I don't remember you talking about that. That's an interesting addition and a thing of powerful one. It has to do with what that you can create pretty complex objects randomly. And in order to know that they're not random, that there's a factory involved, you need to see a bunch of them. That's the intuition there. It's an interesting intuition. And then some normalization. What else is it? In minus one, just to make sure that I'm more than one object, one object could be a one-off and random. And then you have more than one identical object. That's interesting. When there's two over thing. Two over thing is super important, especially if the assembly index is high. So we could say several questions here. Why don't we talk about selection? What is this term selection? What is this term evolution that we're referring to? Which aspect of Darwinian evolution that we're referring to? That's interesting here. So, yeah, so this is probably what you know the paper. We should talk about the paper second to paper. What it did is it kind of annoyed. We didn't know it. I mean, it got intention. And obviously angry people. The angry people were annoyed. There's angry people in the world. That's good. So what happened is the evolutionary biology has got angry. We were not expecting that because the evolutionary biology would be cool. I knew that some, not many, computational, complexity people will get angry because I've kind of been poking them. And maybe I deserved it. But I was trying to poke them in a productive way. And then the physicist kind of got grumpy because the initial conditions tell everything. The pre-bodied chemist got slightly grumpy because there's no enough chemistry in there. And then finally when the creationist said it wasn't creationist enough, I was like, no. I've done my job. The physics, what you see in the physics they say, because you're basically saying that physics is not enough to tell the story of how biology emerges. I think so, Cass. And then they said a few physics is the beginning in the end of the story. Yeah. So what happened is the reason why people put the phone down on the call of the paper. If you've you've been reading the paper like a phone call, they got to the abstract. Yep. And in the abstract, the first two sentences caused everybody. Scientists have grappled with reconciling biological evolution with the immutable laws of the universe defined by physics. True, right? There's nothing wrong with that statement. Totally true. Yeah. These laws underpin life's origin. Evolution and the development of human culture and technology yet they do not predict the emergence of these phenomena. Wow. First of all, we should say the title of the paper. This is paper was accepted and published in Nature. The title is a subtly theory explains and quantifies selection and evolution, very humble title. And the entirety of the paper I think presents interesting ideas but reaches high. I am not. I would do it all again. This paper was actually on the pre-print server for over a year. You regret nothing. Yeah, I think, yeah. I don't regret anything. You and Frank Sinatra did it your way. What I love about being a scientist is kind of sometimes I'm because I'm a bit dim. I'm like, and I don't understand what people tell me. I want to get to the point. This paper says, hey, laws of physics are really cool. The universe is great. But they don't really, it's not intuitive that you just run the standard model and get life out. I think most physicists might go, yeah, there's, you know, it's not just, we can't just go back and say that's what happened. Because physics can't explain the origin of life yet. There's a, doesn't mean it won't or can't. Okay, just to be clear, sorry intelligent designers, we are going to get there. Second point, we say that evolution works, but we don't know how evolution got going. So biological evolution and biological selection. So for me, this seems like a simple continuum. So when I mentioned selection and evolution in the title, I think, and in the abstract, we should have maybe prefaced that and said non-biological selection and non-biological evolution. And then that might have made it even more crystal clear, but I didn't think that biology, evolutionary biology should be so bold to claim ownership of selection and evolution. And secondly, a lot of evolutionary biologists seem to dismiss the origin of life questions, just say it's obvious. And that causes a real problem scientifically. Because when two different, when the physicists are like, we own the universe, the universe is good, we explain all of it, look at us. And the biologists say we can explain biology. And the poor chemistry in the middle, going, but hang on. And this paper kind of says, hey, there is an interesting disconnect between physics and biology. And that's at the point in which memories get made in chemistry through bonds. And hey, let's look at this closely if we can quantify it. So, yeah, I mean, I never expected the paper to kind of get that much interest. And still, I mean, it's only been published just over a month ago now. So just the link on the selection. What is the broader sense of what selection means? Yeah, that's really good. For selection, selection, so I think for selection, you need, so this is where for me, the concept of an object is something that can persist in time and not die, but basically can be broken up. So if I was going to kind of bolster the definition of an object. So if something can form and persist for a long period of time, under an existing environment that could destroy other, and I'm going to use anthropomorphic terms, I apologize, that weaker objects, or less robust, then the environment could have selected that. So good chemistry examples, if you took some carbon and you made a chain of carbon atoms, whereas if you took some, I don't know, some carbon nitrogen and oxygen and made chains from those, you'd start to get different reactions and rearrangements. So a chain of carbon atoms might be more resistant to falling apart under acidic or basic conditions versus another set of molecules. So survives in that environment. So the acid pond, the molecule, the resistant molecule can get through. And then that molecule goes into another environment. So that environment now maybe being an acid pond is a basic pond, or maybe it's an oxidizing pond. And so if you've got carbon and it goes an oxidizing pond, maybe the carbon starts to oxidize and break apart. So you go through all these kind of obstacle courses, if you like, given by reality. So selection is the ability happens when an object survives in an environment for some time. But, and this is the thing that's super subtle, the object has to be continually being destroyed and made by process. So it's not just about the process, the object now is about the process and time that makes it, because a rock could just stand on the mountain side for four billion years and nothing happened to it. And that's not necessarily really advanced selection. So for selection to get really interesting, you need to have a turn over in time. You need to be continually creating objects, producing them, what we call discovery time. So there's a discovery time for an object. When that object is discovered, if it's say a molecule, that can then act on itself, or the chain of events that caused itself to bolster its formation, then you go from discovery time to production time. And suddenly you have more of it in the universe. So it could be a self-replicating molecule. And the interaction of the molecule in the environment in the warm little pond or in the sea or wherever in the bubble, could then start to build a proto-factory, the environment. So really, to answer your question, what the factory is, the factory is the environment, but it's not very autonomous. It's not very redundant. There's lots of things that could go wrong. So once you get high enough up the hierarchy of networks of interactions, something needs to happen. That needs to be compressed into a small, a volume of made resistant robusts. Because in biology, selection and evolution is robust. That you have error correction built in. You have really, you know, that there's good ways of basically making sure propagation goes on. So really the difference between inorganic, abiotic selection and evolution, and evolution and stuff in biology is robustness. The ability to kind of propagate over, over in the ability survive in lots of different environments. Whereas our poor little inorganic, so molecule, whatever, just dies in lots of different environments. So there's something super special that happens from the inorganic molecule in the environment that kills it to where you've got evolution and cells can survive everywhere. How special is that? How do you know those kinds of evolution factors are everywhere in the universe? I don't, and I'm excited because I think selection isn't special at all. I think what is special is the history of the environments on Earth that gave rise to the first cell that now has taken all those environments and is now more autonomous. And I would like to think that, you know, this paper could be very wrong. But I don't think it's very wrong. It means certainly wrong, but it's less wrong than some other ideas I know. And if this allows us to go and look for selection in the universe, because we now have an equation where we can say we can look for selection going on and say, oh, that's interesting. We seem to have a process that's giving us high copy number objects, also a highly complex. But that doesn't look like life as we know it. And we use that. So there's a hydrophermal vent. All there's a process going on, there's molecular networks, because the assembly equation is not only meant to identify at the higher end advanced selection, what you get, I record in biology, you super advanced selection. And even, I mean, you could use the assembly equation to look for technology and go for a bid we could talk about consciousness and abstraction. But let's keep it primitive, molecules and biology. So I think the real power of the assembly equation is to say how much selection is going on in this space. And there's a really simple thought experiment I could do. You know, have a little petri dish and on that petri dish you put some simple food. So the assembly index of all the sugars and everything is quite low. So then and you put a single sell of the colye sell. And then you say, I'm going to I'm going to measure the assembly and this amount of assembly in the box. So it's quite low. But the rate of change of assembly, DADT will go, VUM sigmoidal, as it eats all the food. And the number of colye sales will replicate because they take all the food, they can copy themselves, the assembly index of all the molecules goes up, up, up and up until the food is exhausted in the box. So now the, now the E. coli's stop, I mean, die is probably a strong way. They stop respiring because all the food is gone. But suddenly in the amount of assembly in the box has gone up gigantically because of that one E. coli factory has just eaten fruit. And so that looking at that. So in the initial box, although the amount of assembly was really small, it was able to replicate and use all the food and go up. And that's what we're trying to do in the lab actually is kind of make those kind of experiments and see if we can spot the emergence of molecular networks that are producing complexity as we feed in raw materials and we feed a challenge and environment. You know, we try and kill the molecules and then and really that's the main kind of idea for the entire paper. Yeah, and see if you can measure the changes in the assembly index throughout the whole system. Yeah. OK, what about if I show up to a new planet, we go to Mars or some other planet from a different solar system. And how do we use a somebody index there to discover alien life? In very simply actually if we let's say we'll go to Mars with a mass spectrometer with a sufficiently high resolution. So what you have to be able to do. So good thing about mass spec. Is that you can select the molecule from the mass and then if it's high enough resolution, you can be more and more sure that you're just seeing identical copies. And then you can count them and then you fragment them and you count the number of fragments and look at the molecular weight and the higher the molecular weight and the higher the number of fragments of highly assembly index. So if you go to Mars and you take a mass spec or high enough resolution and you can find molecules. I'll give you guide on earth if you could find molecules say greater than 350 molecular weight or more than 15 fragments. You have found artifacts that can only be produced at least on earth by life. Now you would say, oh, maybe the geological process, I would argue very vehemently that that is not the case. But we can say, look, if you don't like the cut off on earth, go up higher, 30, 100. Right? Because there's going to be a point where you can find the molecule with so many different parts. The chances of you getting a molecule that has a hundred different parts and finding a million identical copies. You know, that's just impossible. That could never happen in an infinite set of universes. Can you just linger on this copy number thing? A million different copies. What do you mean by copies and why is the number of copies important? Yeah, that was so interesting. And I always understood the copy number was really important but I never explained it properly for ages. I kept having this, it goes back to this, if I give you a, I don't know, a really complicated molecule and I say it's complicated. You could say, hey, that's really complicated. But is it just really random? And so I realized that ultimate randomness and ultimate complexity are indistinguishable until you can see a structure in the randomness. So you can see copies. So copies implies structure. Yeah. The fact that there's a deeper found thing in there. Because if you just have a random, random process, you go into get a lot of complex, beautiful sophisticated things. And what makes them complex in the way we think life is complex or something like a factory that's operating under a selection process is there should be copies. Is there like some looseness about copies? What does it mean for two objects to be equal? It's all to do with the telescope or the microscope you're using. So at the maximum resolution. So in the nice thing about the nice thing about chemists is they have this concept of the molecule and they're all familiar with the molecule and molecules you can hold, you know, on your hand and lots of them identical copies are molecules actually a super important thing in chemistry to say, look, you can have a mole of a molecule, an avogadro is number of molecules and they're identical. That means that they're molecular composition, the bonding and so on. The configuration is all is indistinguishable. You can hold them together. You can overlay them. So the way of do it is if I say, here's a bag of 10 identical molecules. Let's prove they're identical. You pick one out of the out of the bag and you basically observe it using some technique. And then you put it, you take it away and then you take another one out. If you observe it using technique, you can see no differences there identical. It's really interesting to get right because if you take say to molecules, molecules can be in different vibrational or rotational states and moving all the time. So through this respect, identical molecules have identical bonding. In this case, we don't even talk about chirality because we don't have a chirality detector. So two identical molecules in one conception assembly theory basically considers both hands as being the same. But of course, they're not. They're different. As soon as you have a chiral to distinguish it, detect the left and the right hand, they become different. And so it's to do with the detection system that you have and the resolution. So I wonder if there's an art and science to the which detection system is used when you show up to a new planet. Yeah, yeah. So like you're talking about chemistry a lot today. We have kind of standardized detection systems, right? Of how to compare molecules. So when you start to talk about emojis and language and mathematical theorems and I don't know, more sophisticated things at a different scale, a smaller scale than molecules that are largest scale than molecules. Like what detection. Like if we look at the difference between you and me, like suddenly, are we the same? Are we different? Sure. I mean, of course we're different close up. But if you zoom out a little bit, morphologically look the same. Yeah. You know, high characteristics, hair lengths, stuff like that. Well, also like the species and. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And also there's a sense why we're both from Earth. Yeah, I agree. I mean, this is the power of assembly theory in that regard that you if you so if everything so the way to look at it, if you have a box of objects. If they're all if they're all indistinguishable, then using your technique, you then you that what you then do is you then look at the assembly index. Now, if the assembly index of them is really low, right? And they're all in distinguishable. Then you then it's telling you that you have to go to another resolution. So that would be it. It's kind of a sliding scale. It's kind of nice. So you got it. So those two kind of are attention with each other. Yeah, the number of copies on the assembly index. Yeah. That's really, really interesting. So, okay. So you show up when you plan it, you'll be doing what? I would do mass back. I would bring it on a sample of what like first of all, like how big of a scoop do you take? Did you just take a scoop? Like what? So we're looking for primitive life. I would I would look. Yeah. So if you're just going to Mars or Titan or in cellar, just somewhere. So a number of ways are doing it. So you could take a large scoop or you could go for the atmosphere and detect stuff. So you could make a life, a life meter. Right. So one of Sarah's colleagues at ASU pool Davis keeps calling it a life meter. A life meter, which is quite a nice idea because you think about it. If you've got a living system that's producing these highly complex molecules and they drift away and they're in a highly kind of demanding environment, they could be burnt, right. So they could just be falling apart. So you want to sniff a little bit of complexity and say warmer, warmer, warmer. Oh, we found life. We found the alien. We found we found the alien Elon Musk smoking a joint in the bottom of the cave on Mars or Elon himself. Whatever. Right. So okay, found it. So what you can do is a mass spectrometer. You could just look for things in the gas phase or you go on the surface drill down because you want to find molecules that are where you've either got to find the source living system because the problem with just looking for complexity is it gets burnt away. So in a harsh environment on, on, on say on the Mars surface of Mars, there's a very low probability that you're going to find really complex molecules because of all the radiation and so on. If you drill down a little bit, you could drill down a bit into into soil that's billions of years old. Then I would put in some solvent, water alcohol or something or take a scoop. Put it in, put it, make it volatile, put it into the mass spectrometer and just trying to detect high complexity, high abundant molecules. And if you get them, hey, presto, you can have evidence of life. Wouldn't that then be great if you could say, okay, we've found evidence of life. Now we want to keep the life meat to keep searching for more and more complexity until you actually find living cells. You can get those new living cells and then, and then you can bring them back to earth or you could try and see the sequence of them. You could see that they have different DNA and proteins. Go along the gradient of the life meter. How would you build a life meter? Let's say we're together, sorry. The mass spectrometer, you're company launching a life meter. Mass spectrometer would be the first way of doing it. Just take it. No, no, but that's, that's, that's one of the major components of it. But I'm talking about like, I would, if it's a device, we got it and branding logo, we got to talk about that later. What's the input? What's the, like, how do you get to the meter output? I would take a life meter, my life meter, our life meter. Thank you. You're welcome. I would have both infrared and mass spectrometer. It would have two ports so it could shine the light. And so what it would do is you would have a vacuum chamber and you would have an electrostatic analyzer and you'd have a monochromator to producing infrared. You'd add the sum so you'd take a scoop of the sample, put it in the life meter. It would then add a solvent or heat up the sample. So some volatiles come off. The volatiles would then be put into the, into the mass spectrometer into the electrostatic trap and you'd weigh the molecules and fragment them. Alternatively, you'd shine infrared light on them, you'd count number of bands, but you'd have to. In that case, do some separation because you want to separate in, and so in mass spectr, it's really nice and convenient because you can separate electrostatically. But you need to have that. Can you do it in real time? Yeah, pretty much. Pretty much. Yeah. So let's go all the way back. So this, okay, we're really going to get this. Let's go. The Lexus life meter, Lexus leaves. No, absolutely. It's a good, good, good ring to it. All right. So you have a, you have a vacuum chamber, you have a little nose, the nose would have some, a packing material. So you would take your sample, add it onto the nose, add a solvent or a gas, it would then be sucked up the nose. And that would be separated using chrome, what we call chromatography. And then as each band comes off the nose, we would then do mass spec and infrared. And in the, in the case of infrared count the number of bands in the case of mass spec count the number fragments and weigh it. And then a further up in molecular weight range for the mass spec and number of bands, you go up and up and up from the, you know, dead. Interesting, interesting, over the threshold. Oh my gosh, earth life. And then right up to the batshit crazy. This is definitely, you know, alien intelligence that's made this life, right? You could almost go all the way there. Same in infrared. And it's pretty simple. The thing that is really problematic is that for many years, decades, what people have done, and I can't blame them, is that rather than been obsessing about small biomarkers on that we find on earth, or amino acids, like single amino acids or evidence of small molecules and these things and looking for those run looking for complexity. That would be, if that beautiful thing about this is you can look for complexity without earth chemistry bias or earth biology bias. So assembly theory is just a way of saying, hey, complexity and abundance is evidence selection. That's how our universal life meter will work. So, complexity and abundance is evidence of selection. Okay, so let's apply our life meter to earth. So, what, you know, if we were just to apply assembly index measurements to earth, what kind of stuff are going to be going to get? What's impressive? So, some of the complexity on earth. So, we did this a few years ago in the when I was trying to convince NASA and colleagues that this technique could work. And honestly, it's so funny because everyone's like, no, I'm going to work. And it was just like, because the chemists were saying, of course, there are complicated molecules out there you can detect that just form randomly. And it was like, really? That's like, that was like, you know, as a bit like a, I don't know, someone saying, of course Darwin textbook was just written randomly by some monkeys and a typewriter. It was just for me, it was like, really? And I pushed a lot on the chemist now. And I think most of them are on board, but not totally. It really had some big arguments, but the copy number caught there. Because I think I confused the chemists by saying one off. And then when I made clear about the copy number, I think that made it a little bit easier. Just to clarify, chemists might say that, of course, out there, outside of earth, there's complex molecules. Yes. Okay. And then you're saying, wait a minute, that's like saying, of course, there's aliens out there. Yeah, exactly that. Yeah, exactly. But you're saying you clarify that that's actually a very interesting question. And we should be looking for complex molecules of which the copy number is two or greater. Yeah, exactly. So one earth, the coming back to earth, what we did is we took a whole bunch of samples. And we were running pre-bodic chemistry experiments in the lab. We took various inorganic minerals and extracted them. Look at the volatile because there's a special way of treating minerals and polymers in assembly theory. In this, in our life machine, we're looking at molecules. We don't care about polymers because they don't volatile. You can't hold them. How can you make, if you can't discern that they are identical, then it's very difficult for you to work out. If they're undergone selection or they're just around a mess, same with some minerals, but we can come back to that. So basically what you do, we got a whole load of samples inorganic ones. We got a load of, we got Scotch whiskey and also got, took a hard beg, which is one of my favorite whiskeys, which is very peaty. And another whisks, peaty mean, is like, so the way that on, in Scotland in Eilor, which is a little island, the Scotch, the whiskeys, let to mature in barrels. And it said that the peat, the complex molecules in the peat, find their way through into the whisky. And that's what gives it this intense brown color and really complex flavor. It's literally molecular complexity that does that. And so, you know, vulca is the complete opposite. It's just pure, right? So the better the whisky, the higher the summing in next to it. The higher the summing in next, the better the whisky. I mean, I really love deep peaties, Scottish whiskeys. Near my house, there is a, one of the lowland distilleries called Glengoyne. It's still beautiful whisky, but not as complex. So for fun, I cooked up some Glengoyne whisky in our bag and put them into the mass spec at measure of the assembly index. I also got Ecoli. So the way we do it, take the Ecoli, break the cellapart, take it all apart. And also got some beer. And people were ridiculing us saying, oh, beer is evidence of complexity. One of the computational complexity people was just throwing... Yeah, we were kind of, kind of he's very vigorous in his disagreement of assembly theory. We were just saying, you know, you don't know what you're doing. Even beer is more complicated than human. We didn't realize it's not beer, per se. It's taking the East extract, taking the extract, breaking the cells, extracting the molecules, and just looking at the profile of the molecules, you'll see there's nothing over the fresh old. And we also put in a really complex molecule tax on. So we took all of these, but also NASA gave us, I think, five samples. And they wouldn't tell us what they are. They said, no, we don't believe you can get this to work. And they really, you know, they gave us some super complex samples. And they gave us two fossils, one that was a million years old, and one was at 10,000 years old. Something from Antarctica, C.B.A.D. They gave us an emergency meter, right, and a few others. Put them through the system. So we took all the samples, treated them all identically, put them into mass spec, fragmented them, and in this case, implicit in the measurement was, you're in mass spec, you only detect peaks when you've got more than, say, let's say, 10,000 identical molecules. So the copy numbers already baked in. There wasn't quantified, which is super important there. This is in the first paper, because I guess abundant, of course. And when you then took it all out, we found that the biological samples gave you molecules that had an assembly index greater than 15. And all the A-bought examples were less than 15. And then we took the NASA samples, and we looked at the ones that were more than 15 and less than 15. And we gave them back to NASA and they're like, oh gosh. Yeah, dead living, dead living, you got it. And that's what we found on Earth. That's a success. Yeah. Oh yeah, resounding success. Can you just go back to the beer and the E. coli? So what's the assembly index on those? So what you were able to do is like the assembly index of, we found high assembly index molecules originating from the beer sample and the E. coli sample. So the yeast and the beer. I mean, I didn't know which one was higher. We wouldn't really do any detail there, because now we are doing that, because one of the things we've done, it's a secret, but I can tell you. I think it's a... No, nobody's listening. Well, is that we've just mapped the tree of life using a assembly theory, because everyone said, oh, you can't do an infin biology. And what we're able to do is, so I think there's three way... Well, two ways of doing tree of life... Well, three ways, actually. What's the tree of life? So the tree of life is basically tracing back the history of life on earth or all the different species going back, what, who evolved from what, and it all goes all the way back to the first kind of life forms. And they branch off, and like you have plant kingdom, the animal kingdom, the fungi, exist the kingdom, you know, and different branches all the way up. And the way this was classically done, and I'm no evolutionary biologist, the evolution biologist, very, tell me every day, at least 10 times. I want to be one, though. I kind of like biologists, kind of cool, but... Yeah, it's very cool. But basically, what Darwin and Mendelay have and all these people do, is just they draw pictures, right? And they're taxa. They were able to draw pictures and say, and say, oh, these look like common classes. Yeah. Then... They're artists, really. They're just... But they're, they're, they're, they're able to find out a lot, right? And looking at verbrates, inverbrates, camera explosion, and all this stuff. And then, then came the genomic revolution. And suddenly everyone used gene sequencing. And Craig Ventors, a good example, we, I think, has gone around the world in his yacht, just taking up samples, looking for new species, where he's just found new species of life, just from sequencing. It's amazing. So you have taxonomy, you have sequencing. And you can also do a little bit of kind of molecular kind of archaeology, like, you know, measure the samples, and, and kind of form some inference. What we did, is we were able to fingerprint, through to the load of random samples, from all of biology. And we use mass spectrometry. And what we did now is not just look for individual molecules, but we looked for coexisting molecules, where they had to look at their joint assembly space. And where we, where we were able to cut them apart, and undergo recursion in the mass spec, and infer some relationships, and we were able to recapitulate the tree of life using mass spectroscopy, no sequencing, and no drawing. All right. Can you try to say that again, with a little more detail? So recreating, what does it take to recreate the tree of life? What does the reverse engineering process look like here? So what you do is you take an unknown sample, you pung it into the mass spec, because this comes from what you're asking, like what you see in E. coli. And so in E. coli, you don't just see, it's not, it's not that the most sophisticated cells on on Earth make the most sophisticated molecules. It is the coexistence of lots of complex molecules above a threshold. And so what we realized is you could fingerprint different life forms. So fungi make really complicated molecules. Why? Because they can't move. And so what you do is you look at the, so you take, I don't know, the fingerprint, maybe the top number of high molecular white molecules you find in the sample, you fragment them to get their assembly indices. And then what you can do is you can infer common origins of molecules. You can do a kind of molecular, when the reverse engineering of the assembly space, you can infer common roots. And look at what's called the joint assembly space. But what let's translate that into the experiment. Take a sample, bung it into the mass spec. Take the top, say, 10 molecules, fragment them. And then, and that gives you one fingerprint. Then you do it for another sample. You get another sample. And then you do it for another sample. And then you do it for another sample. You get another fingerprint. Now the question is you say, Hey, are these samples the same or different? And that's what we may what to do. And by basically looking at the assembly spaces, these molecules create. Without any knowledge of assembly theory, you are unable to do it. With an knowledge of assembly theory, you can reconstruct the tree. How does knowing if they're the same or different, give you the tree? Let's go to two leaves on different branches on the tree. Right? What you can do by counting the number of differences, you can estimate how far away that origin was. And that's all we do. And it just works. But when we realized you could even use a assembly theory to recapitulate the tree of life from no gene sequencing, we were like, So this is looking at samples that exist today in the world. What about things that are not longer exist? I mean, the tree contains information about the past. I went to the same level. I mean, it contains information about the past. I would, some of it is gone. Yeah, yeah. Absolutely. I would love to get old fossil samples and apply a assembly theory in my spec and see if we can find new forms of life. That have, there are no longer amenable to gene sequencing because the DNA is all gone. There's DNA, DNA and RNA is quite unstable. But some of them are complex molecules. It might be there. It might give you a hint, something new. Or wouldn't it be great if you, if you find a sample that's worth really persevering and doing, you know, doing the proper extraction to wreak, to, you know, PCR and so on and then sequence it and then put it together. So one thing dies you can still get some information about this complexity. Yeah. And we can, and it appears that you can do some dating. Now, there are really good techniques. There's radio carbon dating. There is longer dating, going looking at radioactive minerals and so on. And you can also, in bone, you can look at the, what happens in, after something dies, is the, you get what's called rastomization where the chirality in the polymers basically changes and you just get, you get decomposition. And the rate of, the deviation from the pure, in anti-myr to the mixture, you can have a, you give you a time, time scale on it, half life. So you can date when it died. I want to use assembly theory to see if I can date, use it, date death and things and trace the tree of life and also decomposition of molecules. You think it's possible? Oh, yeah. Then without doubt. It may not be better than what, because like, the, I was just at a conference where some brilliant people were looking at isotope and wrenchment and, and looking at how life in, in riches isotopes and they're really sophisticated stuff that they're doing. But I think there's some fun to be had there, because it gives you another dimension of dating. How old is this molecule? In terms of, in, or more importantly, how long ago was this molecule produced by life? More complex, the molecule, the more prospect for decomposition, oxidation, reorganization, loss of chirality, and all that jazz. But what life also does is it enriches, as you get older, the amount of carbon 13 and you goes up, because of the, because of the way the metabolite, because of the way the bonding is in, in carbon 13. So it has a slightly different strength, bond strength, and you, is called a kinetic isotope effect. So you can literally date how old you are, you know, or when you stop metabolizing. So you could date someone as dead. How old they are, I think, are making this up. This might be right. But I think it's roughly right. The amount of carbon 13 you have in you, you can kind of estimate how old you are. How old living organs are, living organs. Yeah, like, you could say, all this person is 10 years old, and this person is 30 years old, because they've been metabolizing more carbon and they've accumulated it. That's the basic idea. It's probably completely wrong timescale. Signatures of chemistry are fascinating. So you've been seeing a lot of chemistry examples for a summary theory. What if we zoom out and look at a bigger scale of an object? You know, like really complex objects, like humans, or living organisms that are made up of, you know, millions or billions of other organisms. How do you try to apply a summary theory to that? At the moment, we should be able to do this to morphology in cells. So we're looking at cell surfaces and really trying to extend further. It's just that, you know, we work so hard to get this paper out and people to start discussing the ideas. But it's kind of funny, because I think the penny is falling on this. So, yeah, so... Was it mean for a penny? I mean, no, the penny's dropped, right? Because a lot of people are like, it's rubbish, it's rubbish, you've insulted me, it's wrong. And I'm... And then, you know, I mean, the paper got published on the fourth of October. It had 2.3 million engagements on Twitter, right? And it's been downloaded over a few hundred thousand times. And someone actually said to me, wrote to me, and said, this is an example of really bad writing and what not to do. And I was like, if all of my papers got read this much, because that's the objective, if I have a publishing, and people want people to read it, I want to write that badly again. Yeah. I don't know what's the deep inside here about the negativity in the space. It's probably the immune system of the scientific community making sure that there's no bullshit that gets published. And then it can overfile, it can do a lot of damage, it can shut down conversations in a way that's not productive. We go back, coming on, to your question about the hierarchy and assembly. But let's go back to the perception. People saying that paper was badly written. I mean, of course we could improve it. We could always improve the clarity. Let's go there before we go to the hierarchy. Yeah. You know, it has been criticized quite a bit. The paper, what has been some criticism that you found most powerful? Like, that you can understand. And can you explain it? Yes. The most exciting criticism came from the evolutionary biologist telling me that they thought that, that a origin of life was a solve problem. And I was like, whoa, we're really on something, because it's clearly not. And when you poke them on that, they just said, no, you don't understand evolution. And I said, no, no, I don't think you understand the evolution had to occur before biology. And there's a gap. That was really, for me, that misunderstanding and that that did cause an immune response, which was really interesting. The second thing was the fact that physicists, the physicists were actually really polite, right? Really nice about it. But they just said, we're not really sure about the initial conditions thing. But this is a really big debate that we should certainly get into because, you know, the emergence of life was not encoded in the initial conditions of the universe. And it can't, and I think assembly theory shows why it can't be. I'll say that. Sure. If you could say that again. The origin of the emergence of life was not and cannot, in principle, be encoded in the initial conditions of the universe. Just a clear follow me in my life is like, what high assembly index objects? Yeah. And this goes back to your favorite subject. What's that? Time. Right. So why? So why, what does time have to do with it? I mean, probably we can come back to it later. But I think it might be, if we have time. But I think that, I think I now understand how to explain how, you know, lots of people got angry with the assembly paper. But also the ramifications of this is how time is fundamental in the universe. And there's notion of combinatorial spaces. And there are so many layers on this. But you have to become an intuition. I think you have to become an intuitionist mathematician. And you have to abandon platonic mathematics. And also platonic mathematics is left physics astray. But there's a lot of them back there. So we can go to the... Atonic mathematics. Okay. There's a... Okay. The evolution of biologists criticized because the origin of life is understood. And not... It doesn't require an explanation of the involves physics. Yeah. It makes their statement. Well, I mean, they said lots of confusing statements. Basically, I realized the evolutionary biology community that were vocal and some of them really rude, really spiteful and needlessly so, right? Because look, you know, I didn't... People misunderstand publication as well. Some of the people have said, how dare this be published in nature. This is... You know, what a terrible journal. And I... And it really... And I'm sorry that people look... This is a brand new idea that's not only potentially going to change the way we look at biology. It's going to change the way we look at the universe. And everyone's like saying, how dare you? How dare you be so grandiose? I'm like, no, no, no, this is not hype. We're not... We're not like saying we've invented some... I don't know. We've discovered an alien in a closet somewhere just for hype. We've genuinely mean this to genuinely have the impact. Or ask the question. And the way people jumped on that was a really bad precedent for young people who want to actually do something new. Because this makes a bold claim. And the chances are that it's not correct. But what I wanted to do is a couple of things. I wanted to make a bold claim that was precise and testable and correctable. Not a woolly, another woolly information in biology argument information, a pureing machine blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. A concrete series of statements that can be falsified and explored. And either the theory could be destroyed or built upon. What about the criticism of... You're just putting a bunch of sexy names on something that's already obvious. Yeah, that's really good. So the assembly index of a molecule is not obvious. It's not a measure it before. And no one has thought to quantify selection complexity and copy number before in such a primitive quantifiable way. I think the nice thing about this paper, this paper is a tribute to all... To all the people that understand that the biology does something very interesting. Some people call it neg entropy. Think about organizational principles that lots of people were not shocked by the paper because they've done it before. A lot of the arguments we got, some people said, oh, it's rubbish. Oh, by the way, I had this idea 20 years before. I was like, which one? Is it the rubbish part or the really revolutionary part? So this kind of clocked two strings at once. There is something interesting that biology is as we can see around this. But we haven't quantified yet. And what this is, the first stab at quantifying that. So the fact that people said this is obvious, but it's also... So with this obvious, why have you not done it? Sure, but there's a few things to say there. One is, you know, this is in part of philosophical framework because... You know, it's not like you can apply this generally to any object in the universe. It's very chemistry focused. Yeah, well, I think you will be able to. We just haven't got their robustness. So if we can say, how can we... Let's go up a level. So we go up from level. We go up, let's go up from molecules to cells because you jump to people. And I jumped from motorcons and both are good. And they will be assemblies. Let's look at what cells are. If we go from... So if we go from molecules to assemblies, and let's take a cellar assembly, a nice thing about a cell is you can tell the difference between a eukaryote and a prokaryote. Right? The organelles are specialized differently. We then look at the cell surface. And the cell surface has different glycosolation patterns. And these cells will stick together. Now let's go up a level with multicellular creatures. You have cellular differentiation. Now, if you think about how embryos develop, you go all the way back. Those cells undergo differentiation in a causal way that's biomechanically a feedback between the genetics and biomechanics. I think we can use assembly theory to apply tissue types. We can even apply it to different cell disease types. So that's what we're doing next. But we're trying to walk... You know, the thing is, I'm trying to leap ahead... I want to leap ahead to go, whoa, we'll apply it to culture. Clearly you can apply it to memes and culture. And we've also applied assembly theory to CAs. And not as you think. Cellular otomative. Yeah, yeah. Not just as you think. Different CAs rules were invented by different people at different times. And one of my co-workers, very talented chap, basically, was like, oh, I can realize that different people had different ideas with different rules. And they copied each other. And made slightly different different cellular automata rules. And they and public and looked at them online. And so he was able to author an assembly index and copy number of rule whatever doing this thing. But I digress. But it does show you can apply it at higher scale. So what do we need to do to apply assembly theory to things? We need to agree there's a common set of building blocks. So in a cell, well, in a multi-cellular creature, you need to look back in time. So there is the initial cell, which the creature is fertilized and then starts to grow. And then there is cell differentiation. And you have to then make that causal chain both on those are requires. Development of the organism in time. Or if you look at the cell surfaces and the cell types, they've got different features on the cell, what rules and inside the cell. So we're building up. But obviously I want a leap to things like emoticons, language, mathematical theory. But that's a very large number of steps to get from a molecule to the human brain. Yeah. And I think they are related, but in hierarchies of emergence, right? So you shouldn't compare them. I mean, the assembly index of a human brain, what does that even mean? Well, maybe we can look at the morphology of the human brain. Say all human brains have these number of features in common. If they have those numbers and then let's look at a brain in a whale or a dolphin or a chimpanzee or a bird. Say, okay, let's look at the assembly indices, number of features in these. And now the copy number is just a number of what how many birds are there, how many chimpanzees are there, how many humans are there. But then you have to discover for that the features that you would be looking for. Yeah. And that means you need to have a unit of some idea of the anatomy. Is there an automated way to discover features? I guess so. I mean, and I think this is a good way to apply machine learning and image recognition to the basic characterised things. So fly compression to it to see what emerges and then use the thing. The features used as part of the compression as the measurement of as the thing that is searched for when you're measuring assembly index and copy number. And the compression has to be remember the assembly universe, which is you have to go from assembly possible to assembly contingent. And that jump from a because assembly possible, all possible brains, all possible features all the time. But we know that on the tree of life and also on the lineage of life going back to Luca, the human brain just didn't spring into existence yesterday. It is a long lineage of brains going all the way back. And so if we could do assembly theory to understand the development, not just an evolutionary history, but in biological development as you grow, we're going to learn something more. What would be amazing is if you can use assembly theory, this framework to show the increase in the assembly index, associated with, I don't know, cultures or pieces of text like language or images and so on and illustrate without knowing the data ahead of time, just kind of like you do with NASA that you're able to demonstrate that it applies in those other contexts. I mean, and that, you know, probably wouldn't at first need to evolve the theory somehow, you have to change it, you have to expand it. I think so. But like that, I guess this is as a paper of first step in saying, okay, can we create a general framework for measuring complexity of objects for measuring life, the complexity of living organisms. Yeah, that's what this is reaching for. That is the first step and also to say, look, we have a way of quantifying selection and evolution in a fairly, in a fairly not mundane, but a fairly mechanical way. Because before now is, you know, this, it wasn't very, the ground truth for it was very subjective. Whereas here we're talking about clean observables. And there's going to be layers on that. I mean, we're, we've collaborators right now, we already think we can do assembly theory on language. And not only that wouldn't it be great if we can put so the if we can figure out how under pressure language is going to evolve and be more efficient because you're going to want to transmit things. And again, it's not just about compression, it is about understanding how you can make the most of the in the architecture, you've already built. And I think this is something beautiful that evolution does with we're using reusing those architectures, we can't just abandon our evolutionary history. And if you don't want to abandon your evolutionary history and you know that evolution has been happening, then assembly theory works. And I think that's, that's a key comment I want to make is that assembly theory is great for understanding where evolution has been used. The next jump is when we go to technology because of course, if you take the M3 processor, I want to buy, I'm bought one yet, I can't justify it, but I want to at some point. The M3 processor arguably is there's quite a lot of features, a quite large number, the M2 came before it then the M1 all the way back. You can apply assembly theory to micro processor architecture. It doesn't take a huge leap to see that. I'm a Linux guy by the way, so your examples go away. Yeah well, whatever is that like a is that a fruit company or some sorry, I don't even know. Yeah, there's a lot interesting stuff to ask about language like you could look at how would that work? You could look at GPT 1, GPT 2, GPT 3, 3, 5, 4 and try to analyze the kind of language it produces. I mean, that's almost trying to look at assembly index of intelligence systems. Yeah, I mean, I think the thing about large language models and this is a whole hobby horse I have at the moment is that obviously they're they're all about the ability to do something. The evidence of evolution in the in the large language model comes from all the people that produced all the language. And that's really interesting and all the corrections in the in the mechanical Turk. And so that's part of the history part of the memory of the system. Exactly. So you can you so so it would be really interesting to basically use an assembly based approach to making language in a hierarchy. Right. I think my guess is that you could we might be able to build a new type of large language model that uses assembly theory that it has more understanding of the past and how things were created. But basically, the thing with LLM is they're like everything everywhere all at once splat and make the user happy. So there's not much intelligence in the model. The model is how the human interacts with the model. But wouldn't it be great if we could understand how to embed more intelligence in them in the system. What do you mean by tell just there? Like you seem to associate intelligence with history. Yeah, well, I'm very I think selection produces intelligence. What you're almost implying the selection is intelligence. No. Yeah, kind of I would go that I would go out and limit say that but I think it's a little bit more human beings have the ability to abstract and they can break beyond selection. And this is what like Darwinian selection. Because the human being doesn't have to basically do trial and error. Like they can think about that. That's a bad idea when do that and then technologies and so on. We escaped Darwinian evolution and now we're on to some other kind of evolution. I guess higher. Yeah, higher level level. And then we'll assembly theory will measure that as well, right? Because it's all at the age. Okay, another piece of criticism or by way of question is how is assembly theory or maybe assembly index different from comagorov complexity. So for people don't know comagorov complexity of an object is the length of a shortest computer program that produces the object as output. Yeah, I seem to there seems to be a disconnect between the computational approach. So yeah, so comagolar of measure requires a cheering machine requires a computer. And that's one thing. And the other thing is assembly theory is supposed to trace the process by which life evolution emerged. There's a main thing there. There are lots of other layers. So so comagolar of complexity. You can you can approximate comagorov complexity, but it's not really telling you very much about the actual. It's really telling you about like your date your data set compression of your data set. And so that doesn't really help you identify the turtle in this case is the computer. And so what assembly theory does is I'm going to say this is a trigger warning for anyone listening is who loves complexity theory. I think that we're going to show that a it is a very important subset of assembly theory because here's what happens that I think that assembly theory allows us to build. So we understand when we're selections occurring selection produces factories and things. Factories in the end produce computers and you can go to an algorithmic information theory comes out of that. The frustration I've had with with looking at life through this kind of information theory is it doesn't take into account causation. So the main difference between assembly theory and all these complexity measures is there's no court or chain. And I think that's the main cause of change is at the core of assembly theory. Exactly. And if you're in if you've got your data in a computer memory, all the data is the same. You can access it in the same type way. You don't need this. You don't care. You just compress it and and you either look at the program runtime or the shortest program. And that for me. It is absolutely not capturing what it is what its selection does. But assembly theory looks at objects. It doesn't have information about the object history. It's going to try to infer that history. By looking for the shortest history. The object. The object doesn't like have a Wikipedia page that goes with it. I would say it does in a way and it is fascinating to look at. So you've just got the objects. And you have no information about the object. What assembly theory allows you to do with just with the object is to and the word infer is correct. I agree with infer. You're like say, well, that's not the that's not the history, but but something really interesting comes from this. The shortest path is inferred from the object. That is the worst case scenario if you have no machine to make it. So that tells you about the depth of that object in time. And so what assembly theory allows you to do without considering any other circumstances to say from this object how deep is this object in time. If we just treat the object as itself without any other constraints. And that's super powerful because the shortest path then says allows you to say, oh, this object wasn't just created randomly. There was a process. And so assembly theory is not meant to, you know, one up, AIT or to ignore the factory is just to say, it's just to say, hey, there was a factory. How big was that factory and how deep in time is it? But it's still computationally very difficult to compute that history right for complex objects. It is and becomes harder. One of the things that's super nice is that it constrains your initial conditions, right? It constrains where you're going to be. So if you take say imagine, so one of the things we're doing right now is applying assembly theory to drug discovery. Now what everyone's doing right now is taking all the proteins and looking at the proteins and looking at molecules, docker proteins. Why not instead take the molecule look at the molecules that are involved interacting with the receptors over time rather thinking about and use the molecules evolve over time as a proxy for how the proteins evolved over time. And then use that to constrain your drug discovery process. You flip the problem, one AIT and focus on the molecule evolution rather than the protein. And so you can guess in the future what might happen. So that so that so you rather than having to consider all possible molecules, you know where to focus. And that's the same thing if you're looking at an assembly spaces for like object where you don't know the entire history, but you know that, you know in the history of this object is not going to have some other motif that there that doesn't apply it doesn't appear in the past. But just even for the drug discovery point you made, don't you have to simulate all of chemistry for to figure out how to come up with constraints. No, the molecules and the I don't know enough about protein. Well, this is another thing that I think causes because this paper goes across 70 boundaries. So chemists have looked at this and said, this is not a this is not a react. This is not correct reaction. It's like no, it's a graph. Sure, there's there's a assembly index and shortest path examples here on chemistry. Yeah. And so and what you do is you look at the minimal constraints on that graph. Of course, I have some mapping to the synthesis, but actually you don't have to know all of chemistry. You just have to understand you can build up the constraint space rather nicely. But this is just at the beginning, right? There are so many directions. It could go in and I said it could all be wrong, but hopefully it's less wrong. What about the little criticism I saw of you by way of question, do you consider the different probabilities of each reaction in the chain. So like that there could be different. When you look at a chain of events that led up to the creation of an object, doesn't it matter that some parts in the chain are less likely to know others? No, no, well, let's go back. So no, not less likely, but react. So so no. So let's go back to what we're talking about. So the assembly index is the minimal path that could have created that object probabilistically. So imagine you have all your atoms in a plasma. You got enough energy. You got enough. There's collisions. What is the quickest way you could zip out that molecule with no reaction constraints? It's just basically what a walk on a random graph. So we make an assumption that basically the time scale for forming the bonds. So no, I don't want to say that because it's going to have people getting obsessing about this point and your criticism is really good one. What we're trying to say is like this is this puts a lower bound on something. Of course, some reactions are less possible than others, but actually I don't think chemical reactions exist. Oh boy. What does that mean? Why don't chemical reactions exist? I'm writing a paper right now that I keep in told I have to finish. It's called the origin of chemical reaction. And it merely says that reactivity exists is controlled by the laws of quantum mechanics and reactions. We put names, chemists put names on reactions. So you can have like, I don't know, the vitic reaction, which is by, you know, vitic. You could have the Suzuki reaction, which is by Suzuki. Now what are these reactions? So these reactions are constrained by the following. They're constrained by the fact that they're on planet Earth, 1G, 298 Kelvin, 1 bar. So these are constraints. They're also constrained by the chemical composition of Earth, oxygen, availability, all this stuff. And that then allows us to focus in our chemistry. So when a chemist does a reaction, that's a really nice, compressed, shorthand for constraint application, glass flask, pure reagent, temperature pressure, bomb, bomb, bomb, bomb, control, control, control, control, control. So of course, we have bond energies. So the bond energies are kind of intrinsic in a vacuum, say, so the bond energy, you have to have a bond. And so for assembly theory to work, you have to have a bond, which means that bond has to give the molecule certain life, a half life. So you're probably going to find later on that some bonds are weaker and that you are going to miss in mass spectra when you count, look at the assembly of some molecules, you're going to miscount the assembly of the molecule because it falls apart too quickly because the bond is just full. But you can solve that with looking infrared. So when people think about the probability, they're kind of misunderstanding. Assembly theory says nothing about the chemistry because chemistry is chemistry and their constraints are put in biology. There was no chemist in the origin of life, baking, unless you believe in the chemist in the sky and they were, you know, it's like Santa Claus, they had a lot of work to do. But chemical reactions do not exist in the constraints that allow chemical transformations to occur, do exist. Okay, so it's constraint to replicate. So there's no chemical reactions. It's all constraint application, which enables the emergence of what's the different word for chemical reaction transformation transformation. Yeah, like a function. It's a function. But no, but I love chemical reactions to the shorthand. And so the chemists don't all go mad. I mean, of course chemical reactions exist on earth. It's a shorthand for his constraints for it. Right. So assuming all these constraints that we've been using for so long, we just assume that that's always the case in natural language conversation. Exactly. The grammar of chemistry, of course, emerges in reactions and we can use them reliably. But I do not think the vitic reaction is accessible on Venus. Right. And this is useful to remember, you know, to frame it as constraint application is useful for when you zoom out to the bigger picture of the universe and looking to chemistry of the universe and then starting to apply some with theory. Yeah, that's interesting. That's really interesting. But we've also pissed off the chemist now. Okay, that's pretty happy. But what most of them? No, everybody, everybody deep down is happy. I think there's just sometimes feisty. That's how they show. That's how they have fun. Everyone is grumpy on some days when it when you challenge the problem with this paper is you what is like it's almost like I went to a part. It's like you I do used to do this occasionally. You want to go to a meeting and just find a way to find a friend everyone at the meeting simultaneously. Even the even the factions that don't like each other, they're all unified in their hatred of you just defending them. This paper, it feels like the person that went to the party and offended everyone simultaneously. So stop fighting with themselves and just focus on this paper. Maybe just a little insider. Interesting information. What were the editors of this year? Like what their reviews and so on? How difficult was that process? This is a pretty like big paper. Yeah, I mean, the so we were really happy. When we originally sent the paper, we sent the paper and the editor said, this was like this is a quite a long process. We sent the paper and the editor gave us some feedback and said, you know, I don't think is that interesting. It's not, you know, or it's hard. It's it's it's hard concept. And we asked and the editor gave us some feedback. And we and Sarah and I took a year to rewrite the paper was the nature of the feedback very specific and like this part of this part. Or was it like, what are you guys smoking? Yeah, it was kind of the latter. What are you smoking? Okay. And you know, you were polite in this promise. Yeah, well, the thing is there was the editor was really critical, but in a but in a really professional way. Yeah. And I mean, for me, this was the way science should happen. So when it came back, you know, we had too many equations in the paper. If you look at the pre print, there's just equations everywhere, like the twenty three equations. And when I said to Abyshek, he was the first author. We've got to remove all the equations. But my assembly equations, staying in Abyshek was like, you know, no, we can't. I said, well, look, if we want to explain this to people, it's a real challenge. And so Sarah and I went through the, I think it was actually 160 versions of the paper, but we basically, we got to version 40 or something. We said, right, zero, it started again. So we wrote the whole paper again. We knew the entire, amazing. And we just went spit by bit by bit. And so what is it we want to say? And then we send the paper in. And to us, we expected it to be rejected and not even go to review. And then the, we got notification back at Gondra Review. And we were like, oh my god, it's so going to get rejected. How's it going to get rejected? Because the first assembly paper that are on the mass spec, we sent to nature got went through six rounds of review and rejected. Right. And there's by a chemist, you just said, I don't believe you, you must be committing fraud. And a long story, probably a boring story. But in this case, it went out to review the comments came back. And the comments were incredibly. They were very, there were very deep comments from all the reviewers. There were. And but the, but the, but the, but the nice thing was the reviewers were kind of very critical, but not dismissive. They were like, oh, really? Explain this, explain this, explain this. Are you sure it's not comagolar off or you sure it's not this. And then we went through I think three rounds of review pretty quick. And, and the other went, yeah, you sin. But maybe you could just comment on the whole process. You've published some pretty huge papers and all kinds of topics within chemistry and beyond. Some of them have some little spice in them, a little spice of crazy. Tomway says I like my town with a little drop of poison. So it's, you know, it's not a mundane paper. So where, what's it like psychologically to go through all this process to keep getting rejected to, to get reviews from people that don't get the paper or all that kind of stuff just from a question of a scientist. Like what, what is that like? It's, I think it's, I mean, this paper for me kind of, because this wasn't the first time we tried to publish assembly theory at the highest level, the nature communications paper we on the mass spec on the idea went through went to nature and got rejected. And it, and it's, and I, I just was so confused when the, when the chemist said this can't be possible. I do not believe you can measure complex it using mass spec. And also, by the way, molecules, molecules, complex molecules can randomly form. And we're like, but look at the data. The data says, and they said, no, no, we don't believe you. And, and we went and I really, I don't know what that was. And, and we went and I just wouldn't give up the edit and the edit in the end was just like the different editors actually, right. What's behind that never giving up is you're like, when you're sitting there 10 o'clock in the evening, there's a melancholy feeling that comes over you. And you're like, okay, this is rejection number five. Or it's not rejection, but maybe it feels like a rejection because the, you know, the comments are the, you totally don't get it. Like what gives you strength to keep going there. Yeah, I don't know. I don't normally get emotional about papers, but, um. It's not about giving up because we want to get it published because we want the glory or anything. It's just like, why don't you understand. And so, um. So why did so why would just try to be as, as, as. As rational as possible and say, yeah, you didn't like it. Tell me why and then. Sorry. Silly. Never get emotional about papers normally, but, but you, but I think what we do, you just, you just compress like five years of angst from this. So it's been, it's been rough. It's not just rough. It's like, it happened. You know, I came up with the assembly equation. You know, remote from Sarah in Arizona and the people SFI, I feel like I was a mad person. Like, you know, the guy in depicted in, you know, in a beautiful mind. It was just like not, not the actual genius part, but just the, just the, just the, just the, just the, because I kept writing expanded. And I have no mathematical ability at all. And I was expand, I was making these mathematical expansions where I kept seeing the same motif again. I was like, I think this is a copy number, the same string is carrying again and again again. I kept, I couldn't do the math. And then I realized the copy number fell out of the equation and everything collapsed down. I was like, oh, that works kind of. So we submitted the paper. And then when it was almost accepted, right, the mass spec one. And it was astrobiologists, a great, you know, a mass spectroscopist, a great, and the chemist went nonsense. Like, big as pilot nonsense ever fraud. You know, and I was like, but why fraud? And they just said just because. And I was like, well, and so, so, and the, and I could not convince the editor in this case. The edit was just so pissed off because they see it as like a kind of, you know, a, you're wasting my time. And I would not give up. I wrote, I went and dissected, you know, all the parts. And I think, although I mean, I got upset about it, you know, it was kind of embarrassing actually, but, but I guess beautiful. But it was just trying to understand why they didn't like it. So they were part of me was like really devastated. And a part of me was super excited. I'm like, huh, they can't tell me why I'm wrong. And this kind of goes back to, you know, when I was at school, I was in a kind of learning difficulties class. And I kept going to the teacher and say, you know, you know, how, what do I do today to prove I'm smart? And they were like, nothing, you can't. I was like, give me a job, you know, give me something to do. Give me a job to do something to do as we. And I kind of felt like that a bit when I was arguing with the, I'm not arguing. There's no ad hominem, I wasn't telling the editor, they were idiots, anything like this or the review is I kept it strictly like factual. And all I did is I just kept knocking it down bit by bit by bit by bit by bit. It was ultimately rejected and it got published elsewhere. And then the actual experiment or data. So this is kind of in this paper, the experiment or justification was already published. So when we did this one and we went through the versions and, and then we sent it in and in the end, it just got accepted. We were like, well, that's kind of cool, right? This is kind of like, you know, some days you had, you know, the, the students, sorry, the, the first author was like, I can't believe I got accepted like normally. It's great. It's like, it's good. And then when the paper was published, I was not expecting the backlash. I was expecting computational, what, no, actually, it's just expecting one person who'd been trolling me for a while about it, just to carry on trolling. But I didn't expect the backlash. And then I wrote wrote the other impolishized and the other was like, well, you're apologizing for a great paper. Of course, it's going to get backlash. You said some controversial stuff, but it's awesome. And so it's, I think it's a beautiful story of perseverance. And the backlash is just a negative word for discourse, which I think is beautiful. And I think you, as I said to, you know, when it got accepted and people were saying, we're kind of like hacking on it. And I was like, papers are not gold medals. The reason I wanted to publish that paper in nature is because it says, hey, there's something before biological evolution. You have to have that if you're not a creationist, by the way. This is an approach. First time someone has put a concrete mechanism or sorry, a concrete quantification. And what comes next, you're pushing on is a mechanism. And that's what we need to get to is an auto-candidic set self-replicating molecules, some other features that come in. And the fact that this paper has been so discussed for me is a dream come true. Like it doesn't get better than that. If you can't accept a few people hating it. And the nice thing is the thing that I really makes me happy is that no one has attacked the actual physical content. Like you can measure the assembly index. You can measure selection now. So either that's right or it's well, either that's helpful or unhelpful. If it's unhelpful, this paper will sink down and no one will use it again. If it's helpful, it'll help people scaffold on it and will start to converge to a new paradigm. So I think that that's the thing that I wanted to see, you know, my colleagues, authors, collaborators. And people were like, you've just published this paper. You're a chemist. Why have you done this? Like, who are you to be doing evolutionary theory? Michael, I don't know. I mean, sorry. Did I need to get anyone to do anything? Well, I'm glad you did. Let me just before coming back to original life and these kinds of questions. You mentioned learning difficulties. I didn't know about this. So what was it like? I wasn't very good. It's cool, right? This is when you're very young. Yeah, yeah. One but in primary school. My handwriting was really poor and apparently I couldn't read and and I and my mathematics was very poor. So they just said, this is a problem. They identified it. My parents kind of at the time were confused because I was busy taking things apart, buying electronic junk from a shop, trying to build computers and things. And then once I got out of when I was I think about the major transition in my stupidity, like, you know, I everyone thought I wasn't that stupid. Well, I basically everyone thought I was faking. I like stuff and I was faking wanting to be it. So always want to be a scientist. So five, six, seven years, I'll be a scientist, take things apart. And everyone's like, you know, this guy wants to be a scientist, but he's an idiot. And so and so everyone was really confused. I think at first that I wasn't smarter than I, you know, it's claiming to be. And then I just basically didn't do well in the test. I went down and down and down and down and then. And I was kind of like, this is really embarrassing. I really like. I've just, don't imagine you could be like random, and I say, don't do it. I really like kind of, you know, physics and chemistry and all the science, and people say, you're not, you can't you can't read and write. And so I found myself in a learning difficulties class at the end of primary school and the beginning of secondary school in the UK secondary school is like 11 12 years old. And I remember being put in the remedial class, and the remedial class was basically full of were two types, three types of people. There were people that had quite violent, right? And there were people who couldn't speak English, and there were people that really had learning difficulties. So the one thing I can objectively remember was, I mean, I could read. I like reading. I read a lot. But something in me, I'm a bit of a rebel. I refused to read, while I was told to read. And I found it difficult to read individual words in the way that I told. But anyway, I got caught one day teaching someone else to read. And they said, okay, there we don't understand this. I always know what to be a scientist, but didn't really know what that meant. And I realized you have to get university, and I thought I can just go university, it's like curious people like, no, no, no, you need to have these, you have to be able to enter these exams to get this great point average. And the fact is the exams you've been entered into, you're not, you're just going to get C, D, or E, you can't even get A, B, or C, right? This is the UKG's DSC's. And I was like, oh, shit. And I said, can you just put me into the high exam? I said, no, no, you're going to fail. There's no chance. So my father, I'm intervene and said, you know, just let him go in the exams. And they said, he's definitely going to fail. It's a waste of time, waste of money. And he said, well, what if we paid? So they said, well, okay. So he didn't actually have to pay, he had to pay if I failed. So I took the exams and passed them, fortunately, I didn't get the top grades, but I, you know, I got into A levels. But then that also kind of limited what I could do at A levels. I wasn't allowed to do A level maths. Because I had such a bad math grade from my GCSE, and he had a C, but I, they wouldn't let me go into the ABC for maths, because of some kind of course, worked requirement back then. So the top grade I could have got was a C, so C dual E, so I got a C. And then let me do a kind of A S level maths, which is this half intermediate, but go university. But in the I could like chemistry, I had a good chemistry teacher. So in the end, I got to university to do chemistry. So through that kind of process, I think, for kids in that situation, it's, it's easy to start believing that you're not, well, how do I put it? They're you're stupid. And basically give up that you're just not good at math. You're not good at school. So this is by way of advice for people, for interesting people, for interesting young kids right now experiencing the same thing. Where was the place? What was the source of you not giving up there? I have no idea other than I was really, I really like not understanding stuff. For me, when I not understand something, I didn't understand, I feel like I didn't understand anything. But, but now, but back then I was so, I remember when I was like, I don't know, I, I, I trialled, I tried to build a laser when I was like eight. And I thought, how hard could it be? Like, and I basically, I was going to build a, I was going to build a CO2 laser. And I was like, right, I think I need some partially coated mirrors and need some carbon dioxide. And I need a high high high high voltage. So I kind of, when I was like, I didn't have a, and I was so stupid, right, I was kind of so embarrassed. I had to make enough CO2, I actually set a fire and try to filter the flame. Oh, nice. So, to correct, I've CO2. And I was like completely, completely failed. And I bent, but half the, the garage down. So my parents were not very happy about that. But, so that was one thing. I was like, I really like first principle thinking. And so, you know, so I remember being super curious and being determined at finances. And so, the kind of when people do a give advice about this, why I ask for advice about this. I don't really have that much advice other than don't give up. And one of the things I try to do as a, as a chemistry professor in my group is I, I don't, I hire people that I think that, you know, I'm kind of home. I, if they're persistent enough, who am I to deny them the chance? Because, you know, people gave me a chance. And I was able to do stuff. You believe in yourself? Essentially. I like, so I love being around smart people. And I love confusing smart people. And when I'm confusing smart people, you know, not by stealing their wallets and hiding it somewhere, but if I can confuse smart people, that is the one piece of hope that I might be doing something interesting. That's quite brilliant. Because a gradient to optimize, hang out with smart people and confuse them. And the more confusing it is, the more there's something there. And as long as they're not telling you just a complete idiot and they give you different reasons. Yeah. And I mean, I'm, you know, if everyone, it's like with assembly theory and people said, oh, it's wrong. And I was like, why? And they're like, and no one could give me a consistent reason. They said, oh, because it's been done before or it's just comagolar offer. It's just there, that and the other. So I think the, the, the thing that I like to do is, and in academia, it's hard, right? Because people are critical. But I mean, you know, the criticism, I mean, although I got kind of upset about it earlier, which is kind of silly, but not silly, because obviously it's hard work being on your own or with a team spatially separated, like, during lockdown. And try to keep everyone on board and, and, and, and be, and I have some faith that I've always wanted to have a new idea. And so, you know, I like a new idea. And I want to, I don't want to, I want to nurture it as long as possible. And if someone can give me actionable criticism, that's why I think I was trying to say earlier when I was kind of like stuck for words. Give me actionable criticism. You know, it's wrong. Okay, why is it wrong? So it doesn't, your, your equations incorrect for this or your method is wrong. And then say, if, and so why try and do is get enough criticism from people to then try and go back. And I've been very fortunate in my life that I've got great colleagues, great collaborators, funders, mentors, and people that will take the time to say, you're wrong because. And then why you have to do is integrate the wrongness and go, oh, cool. Maybe I can fix that. And I think criticism is really good. People have a go at me because I'm really critical. And like, but I'm not criticizing, you know, you as a person, I'm just criticizing the idea and trying to make it better and say, well, what about this? And, you know, and sometimes I'm kind of, you know, my filters are kind of, you know, truncated in some ways and just like that's wrong. That's wrong. That's wrong. What do they do there? Some people like, oh my God, you just told me you destroyed my life's work. I'm like, well, relax. No, I'm just like, let's make it better. And I think that we don't do that enough because we're, we're, you know, we, we're, we're either personally critical, which isn't helpful. Or we don't give any criticism at all because we're too scared. Yeah, I, yeah, the, I've seen you be pretty aggressively critical, but it's every time I've seen it, it's the idea and not the person. I'm sure I make mistakes on that. I mean, I, you know, I argue, I argue lots with, with lots, I mean, I argue lots with Sarah and she's like kind of shocked. I've argued with Yashar in the past and he's like, you're just making, Gashabark and you're like, you're just making up. I'm like, no, not, not quite. But kind of, yeah. Um, you know, I had a big argument with Sarah about time. She's like, no, time, time doesn't exist. I'm like, no, time does exist. And now, and as, as she realized, the her conception of assembly theory and my conception of assembly theory was the same thing necessitated us to abandon the fact that time is eternal to actually really fundamentally question how the universe produces combinatorial novelty. So, time is fundamental for some of the theory. Um, so I'm just trying to figure out where you and Sarah converge. So I, I think assembly theory is fine in this time right now, but I think it helps us understand that something interesting is going on. So there's, and I mean, really inspired by a guy called Nick Kizn. I'm going to butcher his argument, but I love his argument a lot. So, I hope he forgives me if he hears about it. But basically, um, if you want free will, time has to be fundamental. And we can go and, um, if you want time to be fundamental, you have to give up on the tonic mathematics. And you have to use intuitions, mathematics, by the way. Um, and again, I'm going to butcher this, but basically Hilbert said that, you know, infinite numbers are allowed. And I think it was Browar said, no, you can't, all numbers are finite. So they're kind of like, we're, so let's go back a step because I was like, people are going to say, assembly theory seems to explain that combinatorial large combinatorial space allows you to produce things like life and technology. And that large combinatorial space is so big, is not even accessible to a Sean Carroll, David Deutsch, multiverse, that physicists saying that, um, that all of, all of the universe already exists in time is probably, provably, that's strong word, not correct. The we are going to know that the universe as it stands, the present, the way the present builds the future, so big, the universe can't ever contain the future. And this is a really interesting thing. I think Max Techmark has this mathematical universe, he says, you know, the universe is kind of like a block universe. And I apologize to Max if I'm getting it wrong, but people think you can just move, you have the stat, you have the initial conditions. And you can run the universe, um, right to the end and go backwards and forwards in that universe. That is not correct. Let me load that in. The universe is not big enough to contain the future. Yeah. That's why that's it. So that's another, that's a beautiful way of saying that time is fundamental. Yes. And the, and the, you can have and that's what this is why, um, the, it's the law of the excluded middle, something is true or false only works in the past. Is it going to slow in New York next week or in Austin? You might, in Austin say, probably not in New York, you might say, yeah, if you go forward to next week and say, did it snow in New York last week, true or false, you can answer that question. The fact that the law of the excluded middle cannot apply to the future explains why time is fundamental. Well, I mean, that, that's a good example in two of example, but it's possible that we might be able to predict, you know, whether it's going to snow if we had perfect information. I think we're saying it not impulsible. Impulsible. So here's why I'll make a quick, really quick argument. And this argument isn't mine. It's, it's next and a few other people. Can you, can you explain his view on fundamental, on time being fundamental? Yeah. So I'll give my view, which kind of resonates with his, but basically, it's very simple, actually, he would say that free will, your ability to design and do an experiment is an exercising free will. So he used that thought process. I never really thought about it that way, and that you actively make decisions. I do think that I used to think that free will was I kind of, kind of consequence of just selection, but I'm kind of understanding that human free will, something really interesting. And he very much inspired me, but I think that, Sarah Walker said that inspired me as well, that, that these will converge is that I think that the universe in the universe is very big, huge. But actually, the, the place is largest in the universe right now, the largest place in the universe is earth. Yeah, I've seen you say that. And boy, does that, that's an interesting one of the process. What do you mean by that? Earth is the biggest place in the universe because we have this combinatorial scaffolding going all the way back from Luka. So you've got cells that can self replicate. And then you go all the way to terraforming the earth. You've got all these architectures, the amount of selection that's going on biological selection, just to be clear, biological evolution. And then you have multicellularity, then animals and abstraction and when abstraction, there was another kick because you can then build architectures and computers and cultures and language. And these things are the biggest things exist in the universe because we can just build architectures that couldn't naturally arise anywhere. And the further that distance goes in time, and this kind of is just, it's gigantic. And from a complexity perspective, yeah, okay, wait a minute, but I mean, I know you're being poetic, but how do you know there's not other earth like, like, how do you know, you're basically saying earth is really special. It's awesome stuff as far as we look out. There's nothing like it going on, but how do you know there's not nearly infinite number of places where cool stuff like this is going on? I agree. And I would say, I'll say again, the earth is the most gigantic thing we know in the universe, commentarily, we know. We know. Now, now, I guess this is just purely a guess. I have no data, but other than hope. Well, maybe not hope, maybe, no, I have some data that every star in the sky probably has planets. Yep. And life is probably emerging on these planets. But the amount of contingency that has looked associated with life is that I think the commentorial space associated with these planets is so different. We are never going to, our causal cones are never going to overlap or not easily. And this is a thing that makes me sad about alien life, why we have to create alien life in the lab as quickly as possible. Yeah, because I don't know if we are going to be able to be able to build architectures that will intersect with alien intelligence and architectures intersect. You don't mean in time or space. Time and the ability to communicate. The ability to communicate. Yeah. My biggest fear in a way is that life is everywhere, but we become infinitely more lonely because of our scaffolding in that commentorial space. Because it's so big. And so you're saying the constraints created by the environment that led to the factory of Darwinian evolution are just like this little tiny cone in a nearly infinite commentorial space. Exactly. So there's other cones like it. And and why can't we communicate with other like just because we can't create it. Doesn't mean we can't appreciate the creation right? Like that. I did say detect the creation. I truly don't know, but it's an excuse for me to ask for people to give me money to make a planet simulator. Yeah, right. If I can make with a different, just like another shameless say it's like give me money. I need to say this was all along plug for a planet simulator. It's like, it's like, hey, I won't be the first in my, my, my, my, my Rick, my Rick garage has run out of room, you know. Yeah. No, um, and this is a planet simulator. You mean like a different kind of planet? Yeah, or different sets of environments and pressures. Exactly. If we could basically recreate the selection before biology, as we know it, that gives rise to a different biology. We should be out of put the constraints on where I look in the universe. So here's a thing. Here's my, here's my dream. Yeah. My dream is that by creating life in the lab, based upon constraints, we understand. Like this is like a Venus type life or earth type life or something. Again, do you have 2.0? Screw it. Let's do I have 2.0 and I have 2.0 has a different genetic alphabet. Fine. That's fine. Different protein at alphabet. Fine. Have cells and evolution and all that stuff. We will then be out of say, okay, life is a more general phenomena. Selection is more general than the what we think is cons, the chemical constraints on life. And we can point the genes where but other telescopes are other planets that we are in that zone. We are most likely to combinatorially overlap with. So because you know, we basically so there is chemistry. You're looking for some overlap. And then we can then basically shine light on them literally and white look at light coming back and apply advanced assembly theory to general theory of language that we will get and say, huh, we in that signal, it looks random but there's a copy number. Oh, this random set of things that shouldn't be that looks like a true random number generator has structure as a not common common goal are off a it type structure, but evolutionary structure given by assembly theory and we start to, but I would say that because I'm a shameless assembly theorist. Yeah, it just feels like the the cone that might be misused in the word cone here, but the width of the cone is growing faster. It's going really fast to where eventually all the cones overlap. Even in a very, very, very large combinatorial space. It just, but then again, if you're saying the universe is also growing very quickly in terms of possibilities. That's right. I hope that as we build, as we build abstractions, the main, I mean, one one idea is that as we go to intelligence, intelligence allows us to look at the regularities around us in the universe and that gives us some common grounding to to discuss with aliens and you might be right that that that we will overlap there, even though we have completely different chemistry, literally completely different chemistry, that we will be at a past information from one another, but it's not a given and I have to kind of try and divorce hope and emotion away from what I under I can logically justify. It's just hard to intuit a world, a universe where there's nearly infinite complexity objects and they somehow can't detect each other. But the universe is expanding, but the nice thing is that I would say I would look, you see, I think Carl Sagan did the wrong thing, not the wrong thing, he flicked the Voyager pro Brown and Pail Blue dot, said, look how big the universe is. I was done it the way around, said, look at the Voyager pro that came from planet Earth that came from Luka, look at how big Earth is. They produced that. It produced that. Yeah. And that I think is like completely amazing. And then that should allow people and they have to think about, well, probably we should try and get causal chains, author, thanta Mars onto the moon, wherever. Well, it's human life or Martian life that we create, it doesn't matter. But I think this commentorial space tells us something very important about the universe. And I realized in the assembly theory that the universe is too big to contain itself. And I think this is, and now coming back and I want to kind of change your mind about time because I'm guessing that your time is just a coordinate. Yeah. So I'm going to change your mind. I'm going to change your mind in real time, at least attempt. Oh, in real time. There you go. I already got the tattoo. So this is going to be embarrassing if you change my mind. But you can just add you can just add an arrow time onto it. Right? Yeah. Sure. Just a matter of time. Or raise it a bit. So, and the argument that I think that is really most interesting is like people say the initial conditions specify the future of the universe. Okay, fine. Let's say that's the case for a moment. Now let's go back to Newtonian mechanics. Now, the uncertainty between principle and in Newtonian mechanics is this. If I give you the coordinates of your of an object moving in space and the coordinates of another object and they collide in space and you know those initial conditions, you should know exactly what's going to happen. However, you cannot specify these coordinates to infinite precision. Now everyone says, you know, oh, this is kind of like, you know, the chaos theory argument. No, no, it's deeper than that. Here's a problem with numbers. This is how this is where Hilbert and Browah fell out. To have the coordinates of this object are given all just the colliding. You have to have them to infinite precision. That's what Hilbert says. This is no problem. Infinite precision is fine. Let's just take that for granted. But when the object is finite and it can't store its own coordinates, what do you do? So, in principle, if a finite object cannot be specified to infinite precision, in principle, the initial conditions don't apply. Well, how do you know I can't store it? It's, well, how do you store an infinitely long number in a finite size? Well, we're using infinity very loosely here. No, no, we use infinite precision. I mean, not loosely, but very precisely. So you think infinite precision is required. Well, let's take the object. Let's say the object is a golf ball. Golf balls, a few centimeters in diameter. We can work out how many atoms are on the golf ball. Let's say we can store numbers down to atomic dislocations. So we can work out how many atoms are on the golf ball and we can store the coordinates in that golf ball down to that number. But beyond that, we can't. Let's make the golf ball smaller. This is where I think that we think that we get randomness in quantum mechanics. And some people say you can't get randomness in quantum mechanics deterministic. But aha, this is where we realize that classical mechanics and quantum mechanics suffer from the same uncertainty principle. And that is the inability to specify the conditions to precise enough degree to give you determinism. The universe is intrinsically too big. And that's why time exists. It's non-deterministic. Looking back into the past, you can use logical arguments because you can say, was it true or false? You really know. But this is the fact we are unable to predict the future with the precision is not evidence of lack of knowledge. It's evidence the universe is generating new things. Okay, so to you, first of all, quantum mechanics, you can just say statistically what's going to happen in two golf balls hit each other statistically. But that, but sure, I can say statistic what's going to happen. But then what they do happen. And then you keep nesting it together. You can't, I mean, it goes almost back to look at, look at, let's think about entropy in the universe. So how do we, how do we understand entropy change? Well, we could do the look at or process. We can use the aguardic hypothesis. We can also have, we can also have the counterfactuals where we have all the different states. And we can even put that in the multiverse. But both those are kind of they're non-physical. The multiverse kind of collapses back to the same problem about the precision. So all that, what you, if you accept, you don't have to have true and false going forward in the future. The real numbers are real. They're just, they're, they're, they're observables. We're trying to see exactly where time being fundamental sneaks in in this difference between the golf ball can't contain its own position perfectly precisely. If how that leads to time needing to be fundamental. Let me, I've quit. Do you believe or do you accept you have free will? Yeah, I think at this moment in time, I believe that I have free will. So then you are, then you have to believe that time is fundamental. I understand that's the statement you've made. Well, no, that we can logically follows because if you don't have free will, so like if you're in a, if you're in a universe that has no time, universe is deterministic. If it's deterministic, then you have no free will. I think the space of how much we don't know is so vast. They're saying the universe is deterministic. From that jumping, there's no free will. It's just too difficult to believe. No, I logically follows. No, no, I don't disagree. I'm not saying any, I mean, it's deep and it's important. All I'm saying and it's the difference of, it's actually different what I've said before is that if you don't require platonistic mathematics and accepts that non-determinism is how the universe looks and that gives us our creativity in the way the universe is getting novelty. It's kind of really deeply important in assembly theory because assembly theory starts to actually give you a mechanism why you go from boring time, which is basically initial condition and specify everything to a mismatch and creative time. I hope we'll do experiments. I think it's really important to, I would love to do an experiment that prove that time is fundamental and the universe is generating novelty. I don't know all the features of that experiment yet, but by, you know, having these conversations openly and getting people to think about the problems in a new way, better people, more intelligent people, were good mathematical backgrounds, can say, oh, hey, I've got an idea. I'd love to do an experiment that shows that the universe, I mean, universe is too big for itself going forward in time. And I really, you know, this is why I really hate the idea of the Boltzmann brain. The Boltzmann brain makes me super kind of like, you know, everyone's having a free lunch. It's like saying, it's like, let's break the order laws of physics. So Boltzmann brain is this idea that in a long enough universe, a brain will just emerge in the universe as conscious. Without, and that neglects the causal chain of evolution that required to produce that brain. And this is where the computational argument really falls down because the computation is because I can calculate the probability of a Boltzmann brain. And I can, and they'll give you a probability by I can calculate probability of a Boltzmann brain zero. Just because the space of our ability is so large. Yeah, it's like when we start falling ourselves with numbers that we can't actually measure and we can't ever conceive of, I think it doesn't give us a good explanation. And I've become, I want to explain why life is in the universe. I think life is actually novelty minor. Not, I mean, life basically minds novelty almost from the future and makes it actualizes in the present. Okay, life is a novelty minor from the future that is actualized in the present. Yeah. I think so. novelty minor. First of all, novelty. What's the origin of novelty when you go from boring time to creative time? Where is that? Is it as simple as as randomness like you refer into? I, I, I'm really struggling around them this because I had a really good argument with yasha bark about randomness. And he says, said randomness doesn't give you free will. That's insane because you just be random. But I think, and I think he's right at that level. Yeah. But I don't think we, I don't think he is right on another level. And it's not about randomness. It's about, it's about constrained. I'm going to sound looks constrained. I'm making this up as a go. I'm so making this up. Constrained opportunity. So what I mean is like, so you have to have so that the novelty, what is novelty? You know, this is what I think is the funny thing. Well, you ever want to discuss AI? Why I think everyone's kind of gone AI mad is that they're misunderstanding novelty. But let's think about novelty. Yes, what is novelty? So I think novelty is a genuinely new configuration that is not predicted by the past, right? And that you discover in the present, right? And that is truly different, right? Now everyone says that some people say that novelty doesn't exist. It's always with president. I want to do experiments that show that that is not the case. And it goes back to a question you asked me a few moments ago, which is, where is the factory? Yeah. Right? Because I think the same mechanism that gives us a factory gives us novelty. And I think that that is, that is why I'm so deeply hung up on time. I mean, of course I'm wrong, but how wrong? And I think that that life opens up that commentorial space in the way that the that our current laws of physics, although as contrived in a deterministic initial condition universe, even with the get out of the multiverse, David Deutsch style, which I hate love, by the way, but I don't think is correct. But it's it's kind of it's really beautiful. But the model that David Deutsch is conception of the multiverse is kind of like given. But I think that the problem with wave particle duality and quantum mechanics is not about the multiverse. It's about understanding how determined the past is. Well, I don't think just think that actually this is a discussion I was having with Sarah about that, right? Which she was like, Oh, I think we've been debating this for a long time now about how we how do we reconcile novelty to determinism in determinism? So just to clarify, you both human Sarah think the universe is not deterministic? I won't speak for Sarah, but I think roughly I think that the universe, I think the universe is deterministic looking back in the past, but undetermined going forward in the future. So I'm kind of having my cake and eat it. This is because I fundamentally don't understand randomness, right? As Yasha told me or other people told me, but if I adopt a new view now, which the new view is the universe is just non deterministic, but I'd like to refine that and say the universe appears deterministic going back in the past, but it's it but is undetermined going forward in the future. So how can we have a determinist universe that has deterministically work looking rules? There's non-determined going in the future. It's this breakdown and precision in the initial conditions and we have to just stop using initial conditions and start looking at trajectories and how how the commentorial space behaves in expanding universe in time and space. An assembly theory helps us quantify the transition to biology. And biology appears to be in novelty mining because it's making crazy stuff. You know, I'm that we are unique to Earth, right? There are objects on Earth that are unique to Earth that will not be found anywhere else because you can do the commentorial math. What was that statement you made about life is novelty mining from the future? Yeah, what's the little element of time that you're introducing? So what I'm kind of meaning is because the future is bigger than the present. In a deterministic universe, how do you go from the how do the how do the states go from one to another? I mean, there's a mismatch, right? Yeah. So so that must mean that you have a little bit of indeterminism, whether that's randomness or something else, I don't understand. I want to do experiments to formulate a theory to refine that as we go forward that my help us explain that. And then and I think as why I'm so determined to try and crack the the non-life to life transition looking at networks and molecules and that my help us think about it, the mechanism. But certainly the future is bigger than the past in my conception of the universe and some conception of the universe. And by the way, that's not obvious, right? That's what was just kind of the future being bigger than the past. Well, that that's one statement and the statement that the universe is not big enough to contain the future is another statement. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That one is a big one. I'm a really big one. I think so. I think it, but I think it's entirely because look, we have the second law. And right now, I mean, I'm we don't need the second law if the future's bigger than the past. It follows naturally. Right. Right. So why are we retrofitting all these these sticking past is on to our reality to hold on to a timeless universe? Yeah, but that's because it's kind of difficult to imagine the universe that's that can't contain the future. But it's not really exciting. It's very exciting, but it's it's hard. I mean, we're humans on earth and we have a very kind four dimensional conception of the world of three deep last time. It's just hard to into it. A world where what does they even mean? A universe that can't contain the future. Yeah. It's kind of it's kind of crazy, but obvious. I mean, I suppose it sounds obvious. Yeah. If it's true. But the nice thing is you can so why I mean, so the reason why assembly theory turned me on to that was that you let's let's just start in the present and look at all the complex molecules and go backwards in time and understand how evolutionary processes go go gave rise to them. It's not it's not at all obvious. The tax hole, which is a complex one the most complex natural products produced by biology was going to be invented by biology. It's an accident. You know, tax hole is unique to earth. There's no tax hole elsewhere in the universe. And tax hole was not decided by the initial conditions. It was decided by this kind of this interplay between the so the past simply is embedded in the present. It gives some features, but why the past doesn't map to the future one to one is because the universe is too big to contain itself. That gives space for creativity, novelty and on some things which are unpredictable. Well, okay. So given that you're disrespecting the power of the initial conditions, let me ask you about what I'd explain that cellular terminare able to produce such incredible complexity given just basic rules and basic initial conditions. I think that you've you've this falls into the Broward Hilbert trap. So how do you get a cellular automata producing complexity? You have a computer, you generate a display and you map the change of that in time. There are some CAs repeat like functions like it's fascinating to me that for Pi there is a there is a formula where you can go to the the millionth decimal place of Pi and read out the the number without having to go there. But there are some numbers where you can't do that. You have to just crank through. This whether it's Wolframian computation or irreducibility or some other thing, that doesn't matter. But these CAs, that complexity, is that just complexity or a number that is basically your mining that number in time? Is that just a display screen for that number, that function? Well, again, you see the same thing with a complexity on earth then? No, because the complexity on earth has a copy number and an assembly index associated with it. That CAs just a number running. You don't think it has a copy number? Wait a minute. Well, it does in the human where we're looking at humans producing different rules, but then it's nested on selection. So those CAs are produced by selection. Yeah. I mean, the CAs such a fascinating pseudo complexity generator. What I would love to do is understand, quantify the degree of surprise in a CA, and run it long enough. But what that I guess that means is we have to instantiate, we have to have a number of experiments where we're generating different rules and running them time-spec steps. But oh, I got it. CAs are mining novelty in the future by iteration. Right? And you're like, oh, that's great. That's great. You didn't predict it. Some rules you can predict that what's going to happen. Other rules you can't. So for me, if anything, CAs are evidence that the universe is too big to contain itself. Because otherwise, you'd know what the rules are going to do forever, more. Right. I guess you were saying that the physicists saying that all you need is the initial conditions and the rules of physics is somehow missing the bigger picture. Yeah. And if you look at CAs, all you need is the initial condition and the rules and then run the thing. You need three things. You need the initial conditions, you need the rules, and you need time iteration to mine it out without the coordinate. You can't get it out. Sure. And that's that that to use for them. And you can't predict it from initial conditions. If you could, then it'd be fun. And that time is a resource. A resource. A foundation of this is the history, the memory of each of the things that created. Has to have that memory of all the things that let up to it. I think it's yeah, you have to have the resource. Yeah. Because time is a fundamental resource. And yeah, I'm becoming, I think I had a major epiphany about randomness, but I keep doing that every two days and then that goes away again. It's random. You're a time fundamentalist.
