 the act of remembering can change the memory. If you remember some event and then I tell you something about the event later on when you remember the event, you might remember some original information from the event as well as some information about what I told you. And sometimes if you're not able to tell the difference, that information that I told you gets mixed into the story that you had originally. So now I give you some more misinformation or you're exposed to some more information somewhere else. And eventually your memory becomes totally detached from what happened. The following is a conversation with Sharon Raganath, a psychologist and neuroscientist that you see Davis specializing in human memory. He's the author of Why We Remember Unlocking Memories Power to Hold On to What Matters. This is the Lex Freeman podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description. And now to your friends, here's Sharon Raganath. Danny Connerman describes the experiencing self and the remembering self. And that happiness and satisfaction you gain from the outcomes of your decisions did not come from what you've experienced, but rather from what you remember of the experience. So can you speak to this interesting difference that you write about in your book of the experiencing self and the remembering self? Danny really impacted me because I was an undergrad at Berkeley. And I got to take a classroom long before I won the Nobel Prize or anything. And it was just a mind-blowing class. But this idea of the remembering self and the experiencing self, I got into it because it's so much about memory, even though he doesn't study memory. So we're right now having this experience, right? And people can watch it, presumably on YouTube, or listen to it on audio. But if you're talking to somebody else, you could probably describe this whole thing in 10 minutes. But that's going to miss a lot of what actually happened. And so the idea there is that the way we remember things is not the replay of the experience. It's something totally different. And it tends to be biased by the beginning and the end. And he talks about the peaks. And there's also the best parts, the worst parts, etc. And those are the things that we remember. And so when we make decisions, we usually consult memory. And we feel like our memory is a record of what we've experienced. But it's not. It's this kind of very biased sample, but it's biased in an interesting and I think biologically relevant way. So in a way, we construct a narrative about our past. You say that it gives us an illusion of stability. Can you explain that? Basically, I think that a lot of learning in the brain is driven towards being able to make sense. I mean, really, memory is all about the present and the future. The past is done. So biologically speaking, it's not important unless there's something from the past that's useful. And so what our brains are really optimized for is to learn about the stuff from the past that's going to be most useful in understanding the present and predicting the future. And so cause-effect relationships, for instance. That's a big one. Now, my future is completely unpredictable in the sense that like you could, you know, in the next 10 minutes, pull a knife on me and slip my throat, right? That's plenty of it. But having seized over your work at just, you know, generally my expectations about life, I'm not expecting that. I have a certainty that everything's going to be fine. We're going to have a great time talking today, right? But we're often right. It's like, okay, so I go to a, a sea of band on stage, you know, I know they're going to make me wait. The show's going to start late. You know, they come on. There's a very good chance there's going to be an encore. I have a memory, so to speak, for that event before I've even walked into the show, right? There's going to be people holding up their camera phones, trying to take videos of it now, because this is kind of the world we live in. So that's like everyday fortune telling that we do, though, it's not real. It's imagined. It's amazing that we have this capability, and that's what memory is about. But it can also give us the solution that we know everything that's about to happen. And I think what's valuable about that, that illusion is when it's broken, it gives us the information, right? So I mean, I'm sure being an AI, you know, about information theory. And the idea is the information is what you didn't already have. And so those prediction errors that we make based on, you know, we make a prediction based on memory. The errors are where the action is. The error is where the learning happens. Exactly. Exactly. Well, just to linger on Danny Kahneman, and just this whole idea of experiencing self versus remembering self, I was hoping you can give a simple answer of how we should live life. Based on the fact that our memories could be a source of happiness, or could be the primary source of happiness, that an event when experienced bears its fruits the most when it's remembered over and over and over and over. And maybe there is some wisdom in the fact that we can control to some degree how we remember it, how we evolve our memory of it, such that it can maximize the long term happiness of that repeated experience. Okay, well, first I'll say I wish I could take you on the road with me. So such a great description. Can I be your opening actor? Oh my god, no, I'm going to open for you, dude. Otherwise, it's like, you know, everybody leaves after you're done. Believe me, I did that in Columbus, Ohio once. It wasn't fun. Like the opening acts like Dranker Bartab. We spent all this buddy going all the way there. There was only that everybody left after the opening acts were done. And there was just that stoner dude with the dreadlocks hanging out. And then next to you know, we blew like our savings and getting a hotel run. So we should as a small tangent, your legit touring act. When I was in grad school, I played in a band and yeah, we traveled. We would play shows. It wasn't like we were in a hardcore touring band, but we did some touring and had some fun times. And yeah, we did a movie soundtrack. Nice. Henry Portrait of Serial Killer. So that's a good movie. We were on the soundtrack for the sequel, Henry II, Mask of Sanity, which is a terrible movie. Yeah. How's the soundtrack? It's pretty good. It's bad out there. At least that one part where the guy throws up the milkshake. Okay, all right. We're going to have to see it. We're going to have to see it. All right, we're getting back to life advice. And happiness, yeah. One thing that I try to live by, especially nowadays, and since I wrote the book, I've been thinking more and more about this, how do I want to live a memorable life? You know, I think if we go back to like the pandemic, right? How many people have memories from that period, aside from the trauma of being locked up and seeing people die and all this stuff? I think it's like one of these things where we were stuck inside, looking at screens all day, doing the same thing with the same people. And so I don't remember much from that in terms of those good memories that you're talking about, right? You know, when I was growing up, my parents worked really hard for us. And you know, we went on some vacations, but not very often. And I really tried to do now vacations to interesting places as much as possible with my family, because like those are the things that you remember, right? So I really do think about what's going to be like something that's memorable, and then just do it even if it's a pain in the ass, because the experiencing self will suffer for that, but the remembering self will be like, yes, I'm so glad I did that. Do things that are very unpleasant in the moment, because those can be reframed and enjoyed for many years to come. That's probably a good advice, or at least when you're going through shit, it's a good way to see the silver lining of it. Yeah, I mean, I think it's one of these things where if you have like people who you've gone through, since you said it, I'll just say, since you've gone through shit with someone. And it's like, that's a bonding experience often. You know, I mean, that can really bring you together. I like to say it's like, there's no point in suffering unless you get a story out of that. So in the book, I talk about the power of the way we communicate with others and how that shapes our memories. And so I had this near death experience, at least that's how I remember it, on this paddle board, where just everything they could have got wrong did go wrong almost. So many mistakes were made and ended up like at some point, just like basically away from my board, pinned in a current like in this corner, like not a super good swimmer. And my friend who came with me, Randy, who's a computational neuroscientist, and he had just been pushed down past me, and so he couldn't even see me. And I'm just like, if I die here, you know, I mean, no one's around. It's like, you just die alone. And so I just said, well, failure's not an option. And eventually I got out of it and froze and got cut up. And I mean, the things that we were going through were just insane. But short version of this is, you know, my wife and my daughter and Randy's wife, they gave us all sorts of hell about this because they were just like, where are they were ready to send out a search party. So they were giving me hell about it. And then I started to tell people in my lab about this and then friends and it just became a better and better story every time. And we actually had some photos of just the crazy things like this generator that was hanging over the water and we're like ducking under this. They got these metal gradings. And I'm like going flat on, and I was just nuts, you know, but it became a great story. And it was definitely, and Randy and I were already tight, but that was a real bonding experience for us. And yeah, I mean, and I learned from that that it's like, I don't look back on that enough actually, because I think we often, at least for me, I don't necessarily have the confidence to think that things will work out that I'll be able to get through a certain thing. But my ability to actually get something done in that moment is better than I give myself credit for, I think. And that was the last story that I really took away. Well, actually, just for me, you're making me realize now it's not just those kinds of stories, but even things like periods of depression or really low points. To me, at least, it feels like a motivating thing that the darker it gets, the better the story will be if you emerge on the other side. That to me feels like a motivating thing. So maybe if people listening to this and they're going through some shit, as we said, one thing that could be a source of light is that it'll be a hell of a good story when it's all over when you emerge on the other side. Let me ask you about decisions. You've already talked about it a little bit, but when we face the world and we're making different decisions, how much does our memory come into play? Is it the kind of narratives that we've constructed about the world that are used to make predictions? That's fundamentally part of the decision making. Absolutely. Yeah. So let's say after this, you and I decided we're going to go for a beer, right? How do you choose where to go? You're probably going to be like, oh, yeah, this new bar opened up near me at a great time there. That a great beer selection. Or you might say, oh, we went to this place and it was totally crowded and they're playing this horrible EDM or whatever. So right there, valuable source of information, and then you have these things like where you do this counterfactual stuff. Well, I did this previously, but what if I had gone somewhere else and said, maybe I'll go to this other place because I didn't try it the previous time. So there's all that kind of reasoning that goes into it too. I think even if you think about the big decisions in life, it's like you and I were talking before we started recording about how I got into memory research and you got into AI. And it's like we all have these personal reasons that guide us in these particular directions. And some of it's the environment and random factors in life. And some of it is memories of things that we want to overcome or things that we build on in a positive way, but either way they define us. And probably the earlier in life, the memories happen the more defining the more defining power they have in terms of determining who you become. I mean, I do feel like adolescence is much more important than I think people give credit for. I think that there is this kind of a sense like, you know, the first three years of life is the most important part. But the teenage years are just so important for the brain. And so that's where a lot of mental illness starts to emerge. Now we're thinking of things like schizophrenia as a neurodevelopmental disorder because it just emerges during that period of adolescence in early adulthood. And I think the other part of it is is that I hear so a little bit too firm in saying that memory determines who we are. The self is an evolving construct. I think we kind of underestimate that. And when you're a parent, you feel like every decision you make is consequential in forming this child and plays a role. But so do the child's peers. And so do, you know, there's so much, I mean, that's why I think the big part of education, I think that's so important, is not the content you learn. I mean, think of how dumb stuff we learned in school, right? But a lot of it is learning how to get along with people and learning who you are and how you function. And you know, that can be terribly traumatizing, even if you have a perfect, you know, parents working on you. Is there some insight into the human brain that explains why we don't seem to remember anything from the first few years of life? Yeah. Yeah. In fact, actually, I was just talking to my really good friend and colleague, Simona Getty, who studies the neuroscience of child development. And so we're talking about this. And so there are a bunch of reasons, I would say. So one reason is there's an area of the brain in the called the hippocampus, which is very, very important for remembering events or episodic memory. And so the first two years of life, there's a period called infantile amnesia. And then the next couple years of life after that, there's a period called childhood amnesia. And the difference is is that basically in the lab and, you know, even during childhood and afterwards, children basically don't have any episodic memories for those first two years. The next two years, it's very fragmentary. And that's why they call childhood amnesia. So there's some, but it's not much. So one reason is that the hippocampus is taking some time to develop. But another is the neocortex. So the whole folded stuff of gray matter all around the hippocampus is developing so rapidly and changing. And a child's knowledge of the world is just massively being built up, right? So I mean, I'm going to probably embarrass myself. But it's like if you showed like, you know, you trained a neural network and you give it like the first couple of patterns or something like that. And then you bombard it with another like, you know, years worth of data. Try to get back those first couple of patterns, right? It's like everything changes. And so the brain is so plastic. The cortex is so plastic during that time. And we think that memories for events are very distributed across the brain. So imagine you're trying to get back that pattern of activity that happened during this one moment. But the roads that you would take to get there have been completely rerouted, right? So I think that's my best explanation. The third explanation is a child's sense of self takes a while to develop. And so their experience of learning might be more learning what happened as opposed to having this first person experience of high remember I was there. Well, I think somebody once said to me that kind of loosely philosophically that the reason we don't remember the first few years of life, infantile amnesia is because how traumatic it is. Basically, the the error rate that you mentioned when your brain's prediction doesn't match reality, the error rate in the first few years of life, your first few months, certainly is probably crazy high. It's just non-stop freaking out the collision between your model of the world and how the world works. It's just so high that you want whatever the trauma of that is, not the linger around. I always thought that's an interesting idea because like just imagine the insanity of what's happening in a human brain in the first couple of years. Just you don't know anything. And there's just the stream of knowledge and where somehow given how plastic everything is, they just kind of molds and figures it out. But it's it's like an insane waterfall of information. I wouldn't necessarily describe it as a trauma and we can get into this whole stages of life thing which I just love. Basically, those first few years there are, I mean, you know, think about it. A kid's internal model of their body is changing, right? It's like just learning to move. I mean, like, you know, if you ever have a baby, you'll know that like the first three months they're discovering their toes, right? This is nuts. So everything is changing. But what's really fascinating is, and I think this is one of those, this is not at all me being a scientist, but it's like one of those things that people talk about when they talk about the, you know, positive aspects of children is that they're exceptionally curious and they have this kind of openness towards the world. And so that prediction error is not a negative traumatic thing. I think it's like a very positive thing because it's what they use that they're seeking information. One of the areas that I'm very interested in is the prefrontal cortex. It's an area of the brain that, I mean, I could talk all day about it, but it helps us use our knowledge to say, hey, this is what I want to do now. This is my goal. So this is how I'm going to achieve it and focus everything towards that goal, right? The prefrontal cortex takes forever to develop in humans. The connections are still being tweaked and reformed like into late adolescence early adulthood, which is when you tend to see mental illness pop up, right? So it's being massively reformed. Then you have about 10 years maybe of prime functioning of the prefrontal cortex, and then it starts going down again and you end up being older and you start losing all that frontal function. So look at this and you'd say, okay, from you've sit around episodic memory talks, well, we say children are worse than adults at episodic memory, older adults are worse than young adults at episodic memory. And I always say, would say, God, this is so weird. Why would we have this period of time that's so short when we're perfect, right? Or optimal. And I like to use that word optimal now because there's such a culture of optimization right now. And it's like, I realize I have to redefine what optimal is because for most of the human condition, I think we had a series of stages of life where you have basically adults saying, okay, young adults saying, I've got a child and, you know, I'm part of this village and I have to hunt and forage and get things done. I need a prefrontal cortex so I can stay focused on the big picture and the long haul goals. Now, I'm a child. I'm in this village. I'm kind of wandering around and I've got some safety and I need to learn about this culture because I know so little. What's the best way to do that? Let's explore. I don't want to be constrained by goals as much. I want to really be free. Play and explore and learn. So you don't want a super tight prefrontal cortex. You don't even know what the goals should be in, right? It's like, if you're trying to design a model that's based on a bad goal, it's not going to work well, right? So then you go late in life and you say, oh, why don't you have a great prefrontal cortex then? But I think, you know, if you go back and you think how many species actually stick around naturally long after their child bearing years are over, after reproductive years are over. Menopause, from what I understand, menopause is not all that common in the animal world, right? So why would that happen? And so I saw Alison Gopnik said something about this. So I started to look into this about this idea that, you know, really, when you're older in most societies, your job is no longer to form new episodic memories. It's to pass on the memories that you already have this knowledge about the world or what we call semantic memory, to pass on that semantic memory to the younger generations, to pass on the culture. You know, even now in indigenous cultures, that's the role of the elders. And they're respected. They're not seen as, you know, people who are pasted and losing it. And I thought that was a very poignant thing that memories doing what it's supposed to throughout these stages of life. So it is always optimal in a sense, just optimal for that stage of life. Yeah. And for the ecology of the system. So you've got, so I looked into this and it's like another species that has menopause is orcas. Orca pods are led by the grandmothers, right? So there's not the young adults, not the parents or whatever, the grandmothers. And so they're the ones that pass on the traditions to the, I guess, the younger generation of orcas. And if you look from what little I understand, different orca pods have different traditions. They hunt for different things. They have different play traditions. And that's a culture, right? And so in social animals, evolution, I think, is designing brains that are really around, you know, it's obviously optimized for the individual, but also for kin. And I think that the kin are part of this, like when they're a part of this intense social group, the brain development should parallel that the nature of the ecology. Well, it's just fascinating to think of the individual, orca, or human, throughout its life in stages, doing a kind of optimal wisdom development. So in the early days, you don't even know what the goal is. And you figure out the goal, and you kind of optimize for that goal and pursue that goal. And then all the wisdom you collect through that, then you share with the others in the system with the other individuals. And as a collective, then you kind of converge towards greater wisdom throughout the generation. So in that sense, it's optimal. Us humans and orcas got something going on. They worked. Apex predators. I just got a meglin on tooth. Speaking of Apex brands. It's just imagine the size of that thing. Anyway, how does the brain forget and how and why does it remember? So maybe some of the mechanisms, you mentioned the hippocampus, what are the different components involved here? So we could think about this on a number of levels. Maybe I'll give you the simplest version first, which is we tend to think of memories as these individual things, and we can just access them. Maybe a little bit like, you know, photos on your phone or something like that. But in the brain, the way it works is you have this distributed pool of neurons. And the memories are kind of shared across different pools of neurons. And so what you have is competition where sometimes memories that overlap can be fighting against each other. So sometimes we forget because that competition just wipes things out. Sometimes we forget because there aren't the biological signals which you can get into. I would promote long-term retention. And lots of times we forget because we can't find the cue that sends us back to the right memory. And we need the right cue to be able to activate it. So, for instance, in a neural network, there is no, you wouldn't go and you'd say, this is the memory, right? It's like the whole system of memories is in the weights of the neural network. And in fact, you could extract entirely new memories depending on how you feed. You have to have the right query, the right prompt to access that, whatever the part you're looking for. That's exactly right. That's exactly right. And in humans, you have this more complex set of ways memory works. As I said, the knowledge or what you call semantic memory. And then there's these memories for specific events, which we call episodic memory. And so there's different pieces of the puzzle that require different kinds of cues. So that's a big part of it too, is just this kind of what we call retrieval failure. You mentioned episodic memory, you mentioned semantic memory. What are the different separations here? What's working memory, short-term memory, long-term memory. What are the interesting categories of memory? Yeah. And so memory researchers, we love to cut things up and say, you know, is memory one thing or the two things or two things or three things. And so one of the things that there's value in that. And especially experimental value in terms of being able to dissect thing. And the real world is all connected. Speak to your question, working memory as a term that was coined by Alan Badley. It's basically thought to be the ability to keep information online in your mind right in front of you at a given time. And to be able to control the flow of that information, to choose what information is relevant, to be able to manipulate it and so forth. And one of the things that Alan did that was quite brilliant was he said, there's this ability to kind of passively store information, you know, see things in your mind's eye or hear your internal monologue. But, you know, we have that ability to keep information in mind. But then we also have this separate what he called a central executive, which is identified a lot with the prefrontal cortex. It's this ability to control the flow of information that's being kept active based on what it is you're doing. Now, a lot of my early work was basically saying that this working memory, which some memory researchers would call short term memory, is not at all independent from long term memory. That is that a lot of executive function requires learning. And you have to have like synaptic change for that to happen. And, but there's also transient forms of memory. So one of the things I've been getting into lately is the idea that we form internal models of events, the obvious one that I always use is birthday parties, right. And so you go to a child's birthday party. Once the cake comes out and they start, you just see a candle, you can predict the whole frame, you know, set of events that happens later. And up till that point where the child blows out the candle, you have an internal model in your head of what's going on. And so if you follow people's eyes, it's not actually on what's happening. It's going where the actions about to happen, which is this fascinating, right. See, I have this internal model. And that's a kind of a working memory product. It's something that you're keeping online that's allowing you to interpret this world around you. Now to build that model, though, you need to pull out stuff from your general knowledge of the world, which is what we call semantic memory. And then you'd want to be able to pull out memories for specific events that happen in the past, which we call episodic memory. So in a way, they're all connected, even though it's different. The things that we're focusing on and the way we organize information in the present, which is working memory, will play a big role in determining how we remember that information later, which people typically call long-term memory. So if you have something like a birthday party and you've been to many before, you're going to load that from disk into working memory, this model, and then you're mostly operating on the model. And if it's a new task, you don't have a model. So you're more in the data collection. Yes, one of the fascinating things that we've been studying. And this is, we're not at all the first to do this. Jeff Sachs was a big pioneer in this. And I've been working with many other people, Ken Norman, Leila Devatchi and Wei, or Columbia has done some interesting stuff with this. As this idea that we form these internal models at particular points of high prediction error, or points of, I believe, also points of uncertainty, points of surprise, or motivationally significant periods. And those points are when it's maximally optimal to encode an episodic memory. So I used to think, oh, well, we're just encoding episodic memories constantly, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. But think about how much redundancy there is and all that, right? It's just a lot of information that you don't need. But if you capture an episodic memory at the point of maximum uncertainty for the singular experience, right, you're just, it's going to only happen once. But if you capture it at the point of maximum uncertainty or maximum surprise, you have the most useful point in your experience that you've grabbed. And what we see is that the hippocampus and these other networks that are involved in generating these internal models of events, they show a heightened period of connectivity, or correlated activity, during those breaks between different events, which we call event boundaries. These are the points where you're like, surprise, or you cross from one room to another and so forth. And that communication is associated with a bump of activity in the hippocampus and better memory. And so if people have a very good internal model throughout that event, you don't need to do much memory processing. You're in a predictive mode, right? And so then at these event boundaries, you encode and then you retrieve and you're like, okay, wait a minute, what's going on here? Branginath is now talking about Orcas, what's going on? And maybe you have to go back and remember reading my book to pull out the episodic memory to make sense of whatever it doesn't babbling about, right? And so there's this beautiful dynamics that you can see in the brain of these different networks that are coming together and then deaffiliating at different points in time that are allowing you to go into these modes. And so to speak to your original question, just some example when we're talking about semantic memory and episodic memory and working memory, you can think about it as these processes that are unfolding as these networks kind of come together and pull apart. Can memory be trained and improved? This beautiful connected system that you've described, what aspect of it is a mechanism that can be improved through training? I think improvement depends on what your definition of optimal is. So what I say in the book is that you don't want to remember more, you want to remember better, which means focusing on the things that are important. And that's what our brains are designed to do. So if you go back to the earliest quantitative studies in memory by Ebbinghaus, what you see is that he was trying so hard to memorize this arbitrary nonsense. And within a day, he lost about 60% of that information. And he was using, he was basically using a very, very generous way of measuring it, right? So as far as we know, nobody has managed to violate those basics of having people forget most of their experiences. So if your expectation is that you should remember everything. And that's what your optimal is. You're already off because this is not what human brains are designed to do. On the other hand, what we see over and over again is that the brain does basically one of the cool things about the design of the brain is it's always less is more, less is more, right? It's like, I mean, I've seen estimates that the human brain uses something like 12 to 20 watts in a day. I mean, that's just nuts the low power consumption, right? So it's all about reusing information and making the most of what we already have. And so that's why basically again, what you see biologically is, you know, neuromodulators, for instance, these chemicals in the brain like Norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, these are chemicals that are released during moments that tend to be biologically significant, surprise, fear, stress, etc. And so these chemicals promote lasting plasticity, right? Essentially, some mechanisms for which the brain can say prioritize the information that you carry with you into the future. Attention is a big factor as well, our ability to focus our attention on what's important. And so there's different schools of thought on training attention, for instance. So one of my colleagues, Amishi Jow, she wrote a book called Peak Mind and talks about mindfulness as a method for improving attention and focus. So she works a lot with military like Navy SEALs and stuff to do, do this kind of work with mindfulness meditation. Adam Gazali, another one of my friends and colleagues has worked on kind of training through video games actually as a way of training attention. And so it's not clear to me, you know, one of the challenges though in training is you tend to overfit to the thing that you're trying to optimize, right? So you tend to, if I'm looking at a video game, I can definitely get better at paying attention in the context of the video game, but you transfer it to the outside world. That's very controversial. The implication there is that attention is a fundamental component of remembering something, allocating attention to it. And then attention might be something that you could train how you allocate attention and how you hold attention on a thing. I can say that in fact, we do in certain ways, right? So if you are expert in something, you are training attention. So we did this one study of expertise in the brain. And so people used to think, let's say if you're a bird expert or something, right? People will go like, if you get really into this world of birds, you start to see the differences in your visual cortex is tuned up. And it's all about plasticity, the visual cortex. And vision researchers love to say everything's visual. But it's like, we did the study of attention and working or working memory and expertise. And one of the things that surprised us were the biggest effects as people became experts in identifying these different kinds of just crazy objects that we made up. As they developed this expertise of being able to identify what made them different from each other and what made them unique, we were actually seeing massive increases in activity in the prefrontal cortex. And this fits with some of the studies of chest experts and so forth. It's not so much that you learn the patterns passively. You learn what to look for. You learn what's important, what's not, right? And you can see this in any kind of expert professional athlete there looking three steps ahead of where they're supposed to be. So that's a kind of a training of attention. And those are also what you'd call expert memory skills. So if you take the memory athletes, I know that's something we're both interested in. And so these are people who train in these competitions and they'll memorize like a deck of cards in like a really short amount of time. There's a great memory athlete, her name I think is pronounced Yenya Winter Soul. But she, so I think she's got like a giant Instagram following. And so she had this YouTube video that went viral where she had memorized an entire IKEA catalog. And so how do people do this? By all accounts from people who become memory athletes, they weren't born with some extraordinary memory. But they practice strategies over and over and over again, the strategy that they use for memorizing a particular thing, it can become automatic. And you can just deploy it in an instant. So again, it's not necessarily going to one strategy for learning the order of a deck of cards might not help you for something else that you need like, remembering your way around Austin, Texas. But it's going to be these whatever you're interested in, you can optimize for that. And that's just a natural byproduct of expertise. There's certain hacks that seem to call the memory palace that I played with. I don't know if you're familiar with that whole technique. And it works. It's interesting. So another thing I recommend for people a lot is I use Anki a lot every day. It's an app that does space repetition. So I think medical students and like students use this a lot to remember a lot of different things. Oh yeah. Okay, we can come back to this. But yeah, sure. It's a whole concept of space repetition. You just when the thing is fresh, you kind of have to remind yourself of it a lot. And then over time, you can wait a week, a month, a year before you have to recall the thing again. And that way, you essentially have something like note cards that you can have tens of thousands of and can only spend 30 minutes a day and actually be refreshing all of that information, all of that knowledge. It's really great. And then for memory palace is a technique that allows you to remember things like the Ikea catalog or by placing them visually in a place that you're really familiar with. Like I'm really familiar with this place. I can put numbers or facts or whatever you want to remember, you can walk along that little palace and it reminds you. It's cool. Like there's stuff like that that I think athletes, memory athletes could use, but I think also regular people can use one of those things I have to solve for myself is how to remember names. I'm horrible at it. Yeah. I think it because when people introduce themselves, I have the social anxiety of the interaction. Or I'm like, I know I should be remembering that, but I'm freaking out internally about social social interaction in general. And so therefore I forget immediately. So I'm looking for good tricks for that. So I feel like we've got a lot in what people introduce themselves to be. It's almost like I have this like just blank blackout for a moment. And then I'm just looking at them like, what happened? I look away or something. What's wrong with me? So I mean, I'm totally with you on this. The reason why it's hard is that there's no reason we should be able to remember names because when you say remembering a name, you're not really remembering a name, maybe in my case, you are. But most of the time, you're associating a name with a face and an identity. And that's a completely arbitrary thing. I mean, maybe in the olden days, somebody named Miller, it's like they're actually making flowers. For the most part, it's like these names are just utterly arbitrary. So you have no thing to latch onto. And so it's not really a thing that our brain does very well to learn meaningless arbitrary stuff. So what you need to do is build connection somehow, visualize a connection. And sometimes it's obvious or sometimes it's not. I'm trying to think of a good one for you now. But the first thing I think of is Lex Luthor. But yeah, so Lex Luthor is where a suit, I think. I know he has a shaved head though. He's bald, but you're not. You've got a great head. I trade hair with you any day. But like, you know, but something like that. But if I can come up with something, like I could say, okay, so Lex Luthor is this criminal master. And then I just imagine you talked about stabbing or whatever earlier. Yeah, exactly. I'm kind of connected. And that's it. Yeah. Yeah. And I, but I'm serious, though, that these kinds of weird associations now building a richer network. I mean, one of the things that I find is if I like you can have somebody's name that's just totally generic, like John Smith or something, not that no fenced people that that name. But you know, if I, if I see a generic name like that, but I've read John Smith's papers academically and then I meet John Smith at a conference, I can immediately associate that name with that face because I have this pre-existing network to lock everything into it, right? And so you can build that network. And that's what the method of low sigh or the memory palace technique is all about. Is you have a pre-existing structure in your head of like your childhood home or this mental palace that you've created for yourself. And so now you can put arbitrary pieces of information in different locations in that mental structure of yours. And then you could walk through the different path and find all the pieces of information you're looking for. So the method of low sigh is a great method for just learning arbitrary things because it allows you to link them together and get that queue that you need to pop in and find everything, right? We should maybe linger on this memory palace thing just to make obvious because when people were describing to me a while ago what this is seems insane. I just, you literally think of a place like a childhood home or a home that you're really visually familiar with. And you literally place in that three-dimensional space facts or people or whatever you want to remember. And you just walk in your mind along that place visually. And you can remember, remind yourself of the different things. One of the limitations is there is a sequence to it. So it's, I think your brain somehow you can't just like go upstairs right away or something. You have to like walk along the room. So it's really great for remembering sequences but it's also not great for remembering like individual facts out of context. So the full context of the tour I think is important. But it's fascinating how the mind is able to do that when you ground these pieces of knowledge into something that you remember well already, especially visually fascinating. You can just do that for any kind of sequence. I'm sure she used something like this for the for IKEA catalog. So yeah, absolutely, absolutely. And I think the principle here is, again, I was telling you this idea that memories can compete with each other, right? Well, I like to use this example and maybe some Dale regret this, but I've used it a lot recently, is like imagine if this were my desk, it could be cluttered with a zillion different things, right? So imagine it's just cluttered with a whole bunch of yellow posted notes. And one of them, I put my bank password on it, right? Well, it's going to take me forever to find it. I might, you know, it's just going to be buried under all these other posted notes. But if it's like hot pink, it's going to stand out and I find it really easily, right? And so that's one way in which if things are distinctive, if you've processed information in a very distinctive way, then you can have a memory that's going to last. And that's very good, for instance, for name, face associations. If I get something distinctive about you, you know, that it's like that you've got very short hair and maybe I can make the associate should Lex Luth or that way or something like that, right? You know, but I get something very specific. That's a great cue. But the other part of it is, what if I just organized my notes so that I have my finances in one pile and I have my like reminders, my to-do list in one pile and so forth. So I organized them. Well, then I know exactly if I'm going for my banking, you know, my bank password, I could go to the finance pile, right? So the method of low-side works or memory policies work because they give you a way of organizing. There's a school of thought that says that episodic memory evolved from this like kind of knowledge of space and, you know, basically this primitive abilities to figure out where you are and so people explain the method of low-side that way. And, you know, whether or not the evolutionary argument is true, the method of low-size-not at all is special. So if you're not a good visualizer, stories are a good one. So a lot of memory athletes will use stories and they'll go like, if you're memorizing a deck of cards, they have a little code for the different like the king and the jack and the ten and so forth. And they'll make up a story about things that they're doing and that'll work. Songs are a great one, right? I mean, it's like I can still remember there's a subscriber episode of the TV show Cheers. They think a song about Albania that he uses to memorize all these facts about Albania. I could still sing that song to you. It's just I saw it on a TV show, you know. So what you mentioned is based repetition. So what do you like this? Proceed me, can you explain it? Oh, yeah. If I am trying to memorize something, let's say if I have an hour to memorize as many Spanish words as I can. If I just try to do like half an hour and then I later in the day, I do half an hour. I won't retain that information as long as if I do half an hour today and half an hour one week from now. And so doing that extra spacing should help me retain the information better. Now there's an interesting boundary condition, which is it depends on when you need that information. So many of us, you know, for me, like I can't remember so much from college and high school because I crammed because I just did everything at the last minute. And sometimes I would literally study like, you know, in the hallway right before the test. That was great. Because what would happen is as I just had that information right there. And so actually not spacing can really help you if you need it very quickly, right? But the problem is is that you tend to forget it later on. But on the other hand, if you space things out, you get a benefit for later on retention. And so there's many different explanations. We have a computational model of this. It's currently under revision. But in our computer model, what we say is that an easy, maybe a good way of thinking about this is this conversation that you and I are having. It's associated with a particular context, a particular place in time. And so all these little cues that are in the background, these little guitar sculptures that you have and that big light umbrella thing, right? All these things are part of my memory for what we're talking about the content. So now later on, you're sitting around and you're at home drinking a beer and you think, God, what a strange interview that was, right? So now you're trying to remember it, but the context is different. So your current situation doesn't match up with the memory that you pulled up. There's error. There's a mismatch between what you've pulled up and your current context. And so in our model, what you start to do is you start to erase or alter the parts of the memory that are associated with a specific place in time. And you heighten the information about the content. And so if you remember this information in different times and different places, it's more accessible at different times and different places because it's not overfitted in a AI kind of way of thinking about things. It's not overfitted to one particular contact. But that's also why the memories that we call upon the most also feel kind of like they're just things that we read about almost. You don't vividly reimagine them, right? It's like there's just these things that just come to us like facts, right? Yeah. And it's a little bit different than semantic memory, but it's like basically these events that we have recalled every, you know, over and over and over again, we keep updating that memory. So it's less and less tied to the original experience. And then we have those other ones, which it's like you just get a reminder of that very specific context, you smell something, you hear a song, you see a place that you haven't been to in a while. And boom, it just comes back to you. And that's the exact opposite of what you get with spacing, right? That's so fascinating. So the space repetition one of the its powers is that you lose attachment to a particular context. But then it loses the the intensity of the flavor of the memory. That's interesting. That's so interesting. Yeah, but you know, at the same time, it becomes stronger in the sense that the content becomes stronger. Yeah. So it's used for learning languages, for learning facts, for learning, for, but you know, for that generic semantic information depth of memory. Yeah. And I think this falls into a category we've done other modeling. One of these is published study in plus computational biology, where we showed that another way, which is I think related to the spacing effect is what's called the testing effect. So the idea is is that if you're trying to learn words, let's say in Spanish or something like that. And this doesn't have to be words. It could be anything. You test yourself on the words. And that act of testing yourself helps you retain it better over time than if you just studied it. Right. And so from traditional learning theories, some learning theories, anyway, this seems weird. Why would you do better giving yourself this extra error from testing yourself rather than just giving yourself perfect input? That's a replica of what it is that you're trying to learn. And I think the reason is is that you get better retention from that error, that mismatch that we talked about. Right. So what's happening in our model? It's actually conceptually kind of similar to what happens with back prop in AI. So the neural networks and say the idea is that you expose, here's the bad connections and here's the good connections. And so we can keep the parts of this cell assembly that are good for the memory and lose the ones that are not so good. But if you don't stress test the memory, you haven't exposed it to the error fully. And so that's why I think this is kind of this is a thing that I come back to over and over again is that you will retain information better if you're constantly pushing yourself to your limit. Right. If you are feeling like you're coasting, then you're actually not learning. So it's like, oh, you should always be stress testing the memory system. Yeah. And feel good about it. You know, even though everyone tells me, oh, my memory is terrible. In the moment, they're overconfident about what they'll retain later on. So it's fascinating. So what happens is when you test yourself, you're like, oh, my God, I thought I knew that, but I don't. And so it can be demoralizing until you get around that and you realize, hey, this is the way that I learned. This is how I learned best. It's like if you're trying to, you know, star in a movie or something like that, you know, just sit around reading the script, you actually acted out and you're going to botched those lines from time to time, right? You know that there's an interesting moment you probably have experienced this. I remember a good friend of mine, Joe Rogan, I was on his podcast and we were randomly talking about soccer football. Somebody had grew up watching Diego Armando Mardona, one of the greatest soccer players of all time. And we were here talking about him and his career and so on. And Joe asked me if he's still around. Now, and I said, yeah, I don't know why I thought, yeah, because that was a perfect example of memories. He passed away. I tweeted about it, how heartbroken I was, all this kind of stuff, like a year before. I know this, but in my mind, I went back to the thing I've done many times in my head, visualizing some of the epic Ranteed on goal and so on. So for me, he's alive. So I'm in part of also the conversation when you're talking to Joe, you're the stress and like your, the focus is allocated, the attention is allocated in particular way. But when I walked away, I was like, in which world was Diego Mardona still alive? Like in which, because I was sure my head that he was still alive. It was a moment that sticks with me. I've had a few like that in my life where it just kind of, like obvious things just disappear from mind. And it's cool. Like it shows actually the power of the mind and the positive sense to erase memories you want to race, maybe. But I don't know. I don't know if there's a good explanation for that. One of the cool things that I found is that some people really just revolutionize a field by creating a problem that didn't exist before. It's got to like why I love sciences. Like engineering is like solving other people's problems and science is about creating problems. I'm just much more like I would break things and you know, straight problems. Not necessarily move fast. One of my former mentors, Marsha Johnson, who in my opinion is one of the greatest memory researchers of all time, she comes up young woman in the field and this mostly guy field. She gets into this idea of how do we tell the difference between things that we've imagined and things that we actually remember? How do we tell I get some mental experience? Where did that mental experience come from? And it turns out this is a huge problem. Because essentially our mental experience of remembering something that happened, our mental experience of thinking about something, how do you tell the difference? They're both largely constructions in our head. And so it is very important. And the way that you do it is, I mean, it's not perfect, but the way that we often do it and succeed is by again, using our prefrontal cortex and really focusing on the sensory information or the place and time and the things that put us back into when this information happened. And if it's something you thought about, you're not going to have all of that vivid detail as you do for something that actually happened. But it doesn't work all the time. But that's a big thing that you have to do. But it takes time. It's slow and it's again effortful. But that's what you need to remember accurately. But what's cool and I think this is what you alluded to about how that was an interesting experience. As imaginations exactly the opposite imagination is basically saying, I'm just going to take all this information from memory, recombine it in different ways and throw it out there. And so for instance, Dan Schachter and Donna Attis, who did a cool work on this, Demis Hasibis did work on this with Elner McGuire and UCL. And this goes back actually to this guy, Frederick Bartlett, who is this revolutionary memory researcher Bartlett. He actually rejected the whole idea of quantifying memories. There's no statistics in my book. He came from this anthropology perspective and short version of the stories. He just asked people to recall thing. He would give people stories and ask people to recall them. And what he found was people's memories didn't reflect all of the details of what they were exposed to. And they did reflect a lot more. They were filtered through this lens of prior knowledge, the cultures that they came from, the beliefs that they had, the things they knew. And so what he concluded was that he called remembering an imaginative construction. Meaning that we don't replay the past. We imagine how the past could have been by taking bits and pieces that come up in our heads. And likewise, he wrote this beautiful paper on imagination saying when we imagine something, it creates something, we're creating it from these specific experiences that we've had in combining it with our general knowledge. But instead of trying to focus it on being accurate and getting out one thing, you're just ruthlessly recombining things without any necessary kind of goal in mind. I mean, or at least that's one kind of creation. So imagination is a fundamentally coupled with memory in both directions. I think so. I mean, it's not clear that it is in everyone. But one of the things that's been studied is some patients who have amnesia, for instance, they have brain damage, say, to the hippocampus. And if you ask them to imagine things that are not in front of them, like imagine what could happen after I leave this room, right? They are find it very difficult to give you a scenario what could happen. Or if they do, it'd be more stereotype, like, yes, this would happen. But it's not like they can come up with anything that's very vivid and creative in that sense. And it's partly because when you have amnesia, you're stuck in the present because to get a very good model of the future, it really helps to have episodic memories to draw upon. And so that's the basic idea. And in fact, one of the most impressive things, when people started to scan people's brains and ask people to remember past events, what they found was there was this big network of the brain called the default mode network. It gets a lot of press because it's like, it's like, it's important. It's engaged during mind wandering. And if I ask you to pay attention to something, it only comes on when you stop paying attention. As if people, oh, it's just this kind of day dreaming network. And I thought, this is just ridiculous research, who cares? But then what people found was when people recall episodic memories, this network gets active. And so we started to look into it. And this network of areas is really closely, functionally interacting with the hippocampus. And so in fact, some would say the hippocampus is part of this default network. And if you look at brain images of people, or brain maps of activation, so to speak, of people imagining possible scenarios of things that could happen in the future, even things that couldn't really be very plausible, they look very similar. I mean, you know, to the naked eye, they look almost the same as maps of brain activation when people remember the past. According to our theory, and we've got some data to support this, we've broken up this network in various sub pieces, is that basically it's kind of taking apart all of our experiences and creating these little Lego blocks out of them. And then you can put them back together if you have the right instructions to recreate these experiences that you've had, but you could also reassemble them into new pieces to create a model of an event that hasn't happened yet. And that's what we think happens. And when I'm our common ground that we're establishing in language requires using those building blocks to put together a model of what's going on. Well, there's a good percentage of time I personally live in the imagined world. I think of, I do thought experiments a lot. I take the absurdity of human life as it stands and played forward in all kinds of different directions. Sometimes it's rigorous thoughts, thought experiments, sometimes it's fun ones. So I imagine that that has an effect on how I remember things. And I suppose I have to be a little bit careful to make sure stuff happened versus stuff that I just imagined happened. And it's also, I mean, some of my best friends are characters inside books that never even existed. And I'm, you know, there's some degree to which they actually existed in my mind. Like these characters exist, authors exist, the yeski exist, but also brothers Karamazov. I love that book. Yeah. One of the few books I've read. One of the few literature books that I've read a lot in school that I don't remember, but for others Karamazov's, they exist. They exist. And I have almost kind of like conversations with them. It's interesting. It's interesting to allow your brain to kind of play with ideas of the past of the imagined and see it all as one. Yeah. There was actually this famous Namanist. He's kind of like back then, the equivalent of a memory athlete, except he would go to shows and do this. Those described by this really famous neurosycologist from Russia named Luria. And so this guy was named Solomon Sharashewski. And he had this condition called synesthesia that basically created these weird associations between different senses that normally wouldn't go together. So that gave him this incredibly vivid imagination that he would use to basically imagine all sorts of things that he would need to memorize. And he would just imagine like just create these incredibly detailed things. And he said that allowed him to memorize all sorts of stuff. But it also really haunted him by some reports that basically it was like he was at some point, you know, and again, who knows the drinking was part of this, but it's some point had trouble differentiating his imagination from reality. Right. And this is interesting because it's like, I mean, that's what psychosis is in some ways is you, you know, first of all, you're just learning connections from prediction errors that you probably shouldn't learn. And the other part of it is is that your internal signals are being confused with actual things in the outside world. Right. Well, that's why a lot of this stuff is both feature and bug is a double edge sword. Yeah, I mean, it might be why there's such an interesting relationship between genius and psychosis. Yeah, maybe they're just two sides of the same coin. Humans are fascinating, aren't they? I think so. Sometimes scary, but mostly fascinating. Can we just talk about memory sport a little longer? There's something called the USA Memory Championship. Like what are these athletes like? What does it mean to be like a elite level at this? Have you interacted with any of them or reading about them? What have you learned about these folks? There's a guy named Henry Roderger who's studying these guys. And there's actually a book by Joshua Four called Moonwalking with Einstein, where he talks about he actually as part of this book, just decided to become a memory athlete. They often have these life events that make them go, hey, what are I do this? So there was a guy named Scott Hagwood who I write about who thought that he was getting chemo for cancer. And so he decided, because chemo, there's a well-known thing called chemo brain, where people become like they just lose a lot of their sharpness. And so he wanted to fight that by learning these memory skills. So he bought a book. And this is the story you hear in a lot of memory athletes is they buy a book by other memory athletes or other memory experts, so to speak. And they just learn those skills and practice them over and over again. They start by winning bets and so forth. And then they go into these competitions. The competitions are typically things like memorizing long strings of numbers or memorizing orders of cards and so forth. So there tend to be pretty arbitrary things, not like things that would be able you'd be able to bring a lot of prior knowledge. But they build the skills that you need to memorize arbitrary things. Yeah, it's fascinating. I've gotten a chance to work with something called the end-back tasks. So there's all these kinds of tasks. Memory recall tasks are used to kind of load up the quote unquote working memory. And to see a psychologist used it to test all kinds of stuff like to see how well you're good at multitasking. We used it in particular for the task of driving. Like if we fill up your brain with intensive working memory tasks, how good are you at also not crashing that kind of stuff. So it's fascinating. But again, those tasks are arbitrary in there. Usually we're calling the sequence of numbers in some kind of semi complex way. Are you do you have any favorite tasks of this nature in your own studies? I've really been most excited about going in the opposite direction and using things that are more and more naturalistic. And the reason is is that we've really moved we've moved in that direction because what we found is that memory works very very differently when you study it when you study memory in the way that people typically remember. And so it goes in a much more predictive mode and you have these event boundaries, for instance, and you have but a lot of what happens is this kind of fast-dating mix that we've been talking about a mix of interpretations and imagination with perception. And so the new direction we're going in is understanding navigation and our memory for places. And the reason is is that there's a lot of work that's done in rats, which is very good work. They have a rat and they put it in a box and the rat goes chase the cheese in a box. You know, find cells in the hippocampus that fire when a rat is in different places in the box. And so the conventional wisdom is that the hippocampus forms this map of the box. And I think that probably may happen when you have like absolutely no knowledge of the world, right? But I think one of the cool things about human memories we can bring to bear our past experiences de-economically learn new ones. And so for instance, if you learn a map of an Ikea, let's say if I go to the Ikea in Austin, I'm sure there's one here. I probably could go to this Ikea and find my way to the, you know, where the wine glasses are without having to even think about it because it's got a very similar layout, even though Ikea is a nightmare to get around. Once I learned my local Ikea, I can use that map everywhere. White form a brand new one for a new place. And so that kind of ability to reuse information really comes into play when we look at things that are, you know, more naturalistic tasks. And another thing that we're really interested in is this idea of like what if instead of basically mapping out every coordinate in a space, you form a pretty economical graph that connects basically the major landmarks together and being able to use that as, you know, emphasizing the things that are most important, the places that you go for food and the places that are landmarks that help you get around. And then filling in the blanks for the rest because I really believe that cognitive maps or mental maps of the world, just like our memories for events are not photographic, I think there's this combination of actual verifiable details and then a lot of inference that you make. What have you learned about this kind of spatial mapping of places? How do people represent locations? There's a lot of variability, I think, that and there's a lot of disagreement about how people represent locations in a world of GPS and physical maps. People can learn it from like basically what they call a survey perspective of being able to see everything. And so that's one way in which humans can do it. That's a little bit different. There's one way which we can memorize roots. Like I know how to get from here to, let's say if I knew, walk here from my hotel, I can just rigidly follow that route back. And there's another more integrative way, which would be what's called a cognitive map, which would be kind of a sense of how everything relates to each other. And so there's lots of people who believe that these maps that we have in our head are isomorphic with the world. They're like these literal coordinates that follow Euclidean space. And as you know, Euclidean mathematics is very constrained, right? And I think that we are actually much more generative in our maps of space so that we do have these bits and pieces. And we've got a small task as it's right now, not yet like we need to do some work on it for further analysis. But one of the things we're looking at is these signals called ripples in the hippocampus, which are these bursts of activity that you see that are synchronized with areas in the neocortex and the default network actually. And so what we find is that those ripples seem to increase at navigationally important points when you're making a decision or when you reach a goal. So this speaks to the emotion thing, right? Because if you have limited choices, if I'm walking down a street, I could really just get a mental map of the neighborhood with a more minimal kind of thing by just saying here's the intersections. And here's the directions I take to get in between them. And what we found in general in our MRI studies is basically the more people can reduce the problem, whether it's space or any kind of decision making problem, the less the hippocampus encodes. It really is very economical towards the points of most highest information content and value. So can you describe the encoding in the hippocampus and the ripples you were talking about? What's the signal in which we see the ripples? Yeah, so this is really interesting. There are these oscillations, right? So there's these waves that you basically see. And these waves are points of very high excitability and low excitability. And at least during, they happen actually during slow wave sleep too. So the deepest stages of sleep when you're just zonked out, right? You see these very slow waves where it's like very excitable and then very unexcitable goes up and down. And on top of them, you'll see these little sharp wave ripples. And when there's a ripple in the hippocampus, you tend to see a sequence of cells that resemble a sequence of cells that fire when, you know, an animal is actually doing something in the world. So it almost is like a little people call it replay. And it's a little bit, I don't like that term, but it's basically a little bit of a compressed play of the sequence of activity in the brain that was taking place earlier. And during those moments, there's a little window of communication between the hippocampus and these areas in the new cortex. And so that I think helps you form new memories, but it also helps you, I think, stabilize them, but also really connect different things together in memory and allows you to build bridges between different events that you've had. And so this is one of hardly star theories of sleep. And it's real role in helping you see the connections between different events that you've experienced. Oh, so during sleep is one of the connections that formed. The connections between different events. Yeah. Right. So it's like, you see me now, you see me next week, you see me a month later, you start to build a little internal model of how I behave and you know, what to expect of me. And we think sleep, one of the things that allows you to do is figure out those connections and connect the dots and find the signal in the noise. So you mentioned FMRI. What is it and how is it used in studying memory? This is actually the reason why I got into this whole field of sciences. When I was in grad school, FMRI was just really taking off as a technique for studying brain activity. And what's beautiful about it is you can study the whole human brain. And there's lots of limits to it, but you can basically do it in person without sticking anything into their brains. And very non-invasive. And for me, being an MRI scanner is like being in the womb, I just fall asleep. If I'm not being asked to do anything, I get very sleepy, you know. But you can have people watch movies while they're being scanned or you can have them do tests of memory, like giving them words and so forth to memorize. But what MRI is itself is just this technique where you put people in a very high magnetic field. Typical ones we would use would be three Tesla to give you an idea. So a three Tesla magnet, you put somebody in. And what happens is you get this very weak, but you know, measurable magnetization in the brain. And then you apply a radio frequency pulse, which is basically a different electromagnetic field. And so you're basically using water. The water molecules in the brain as a tracer or so to speak. And part of it in FMRI is the fact that these magnetic fields that you mess with by manipulating these radio frequency pulses and the static field. And you have things called gradients, which change the strength of the magnetic field in different parts of the head. So they're all we tweak them in different ways. But the basic idea that we use in FMRI is that blood is flowing to the brain. And when you have blood that doesn't have oxygen on it, it's a little bit more magnetizable than blood that does. Because you have hemoglobin that carries the oxygen, the iron basically in the blood that makes it red. And so that hemoglobin when it's deoxygenated actually has different magnetic field properties than when it has oxygen. And it turns out when you have an increase in local activity in some part of the brain, the blood flows there. And as a result, you get a lower concentration of hemoglobin that is not oxygenated. And then that gives you more signal. So I gave you, I think I sent you a gift, as you like to say. And we had off record intense argument about with this pronounced gift for gift, but that's we shall set that aside. We could have called it a stern rebuke perhaps, but rebuke. Yeah, I drew a hard line. It is true, the creator of gifts that is pronounced gif, but that's the only person that pronounces gif. Anyway, yes, you sent a gift of, this would be basically a whole, a movie of F from a r i data. And so when you look at it, it's not very impressive. It looks like these look very pixelated maps of the brain, but it's mostly kind of like white. But these tiny changes in the intensity of those signals that you probably wouldn't be able to visually perceive, like about 1% can be statistically very, very large effects for us. And that allows us to see, hey, there's an increase in activity in some part of the brain when I'm doing some task like trying to remember something. And I can use those changes to even predict is a person going to remember this later or not. And the coolest thing that people have done is to decode what people are remembering from the patterns of activity from, because maybe when I'm remembering this thing, like I'm remembering the house where I grew up, I might have one pixel that's bright in the hippocampus and one that's dark. And if I'm remembering something like more like the car that I used to drive on a 16, I might see the opposite pattern where a different pixels and so all that little stuff that we used to think of noise, we can now think of almost like a QR code for memory, so to speak, where different memories have a different little pattern of bright pixels and dark pixels. And so this really revolutionized my research. So there's fancy research out there where people really, I mean, not even that, I mean, by your standards, it would be stone age, but you know, a flying machine learning techniques to do decoding, it's so forth. And now there's a lot of forward encoding models that you can go to town with this stuff, right? And I'm much more old school of designing experiments where you basically say, okay, here's a whole web of inter of memories that overlap in some way, shape, or form. Do memories that occurred in the same place have a similar QR code and do memories that occurred in different places have different QR code and you can just use things like correlation coefficients or cosine distance to measure that stuff, right? Super simple, right? And so what happens is you can start to get a whole state space of how a brain area is indexing all these different memories. It's super fascinating because what we could see is this little like separation between how certain brain areas to processing memory for who was there and other brain areas of processing information about where it occurred or the situation that's kind of unfolding and some are giving you information about what are my goals that are involved and so forth. And so and the hippocampus is just putting it all together into these unique things that just earth about when and where it happened. So there's a separation between spatial information concepts like literally there's distinct as you said QR codes for these. So to speak, let me try a different analogy to that might be more accessible for people, which would be like you've got a folder on your computer, right? I open it up, there's a bunch of files there. I can sort those files by, you know, alphabetical order and now things that both start with letter A are lumped together and things that start with Z versus A are far apart, right? And so that is one way of organizing the folder, but I could do it by date. And if I do it by date, things that were created close together in time are close and things that are far apart in time or far. So every like you can think of how a brain area or a network of areas contributes to memory by looking at what the sorting scheme is and these QR codes that we're talking about that you get from F from R.I. allow you to do that. And you can do the same thing if you're recording from massive populations of neurons in an animal. And you can do it for recording local potentials in the brain, you know, so little waves of activity in let's say a human who has epilepsy and he stick electrodes in their brain, try to find the seizures. So that's some of the work that we're doing now. But all these techniques basically allow you to say, hey, what's the sorting scheme? And so we've found that some networks of the brain sort information and memory according to who was there. So I might have like we've actually shown in one of my favorite studies of all time that was done by a former postdoc Zach Rea and Zach did the study where we had a bunch of movies with different people in my labs are two different people and you filmed them at two different cafes and two different supermarkets. And what you could show is in one particular network, you could find the same kind of pattern of activity more or less a very very similar pattern of activity every time I saw Alex in one of these movies, no matter where he was, right. And I could see another one that was like a common pattern that happened every time I saw this particular supermarket nugget, you know. And so and it didn't matter whether you're watching a movie or whether you're recalling the movie is the same kind of pattern that comes up, right? This is fascinating. It's so now you have those building blocks for assembling a model of what's happening in the present, imagining what could happen and remembering things very economically from putting together all these pieces so that all the hippocampus has to do is get the right kind of blueprint for how to put together all these building blocks. These are all like beautiful hints at a super interesting system that makes me wonder on the other side of it how to build it. But it's like, it's fascinating. Like the way does the encoding is really really fascinating. Or I guess the symptoms, the results of that encoding are fascinating to study from this. Just as a small tangent, you mentioned sort of the measuring local potentials with electrodes versus FMRI. Oh yeah. What are some interesting like limitations, possibilities of FMRI? Maybe the way you explain it is like brilliant with blood and detecting the activations or the excitation because blood flows to that area. What's like the latency of that? Like what's the blood dynamics in the brain that like how quickly can it how quickly can it task change and all that kind of stuff? Yeah, I mean it's very slow to the brain 50 milliseconds is like, you know, like it's an eternity. Maybe you have 50. Maybe like let's say half a second, 500 milliseconds. Just so much back and forth stuff happens in the brain in that time. Right? So in FMRI, you can measure these magnetic field responses about six seconds after that burst of activity would take place. All these things, it's like, is it a feature or is it a bug? Right? So one of the interesting things that's been discovered about FMRI is it's not so tightly related to the spiking of the neurons. So we tend to think of the computation so to speak as being driven by spikes, meaning like there's just a burst of it's either on or it's off and the neurons like going up or down. But sometimes what you can have is these states where the neuron becomes a little bit more excitable or less excitable. And so FMRI is very sensitive to those changes in excitability. Actually, one of the fascinating things about FMRI is where does that, how is it we go from neural activity to, you know, essentially blood flow to oxygen, you know, all this stuff. It's such a long chain of, you know, going from neural activity to magnetic fields. And one of the theories that's out there is, you know, most of the cells in the brain are not neurons. They're actually these support cells called glial cells. And one big one is astrocytes and they play this big role in regulating, you know, kind of being a middle man, so to speak, with the neuron. So if you, for instance, like one neuron's talking to another, you release a neurotransmitter, like let's say, glutamate. And that gets another neuron starts, starts getting active after you release it in the gap between the two neurons called synapse. So what's interesting is if you leave that, you know, imagine you're just flooded with this, like liquid in there, right? If you leave it in there too long, you just excite the other neuron too much and you can start to basically get seizure activity. You don't want this. So you got to suck it up. And so actually what happens is these astrocytes, one of their functions is to suck up the glutamate from the synapse. And that is a massively, and then break it down and then feed it back into the neurons so that you reuse it. But that cycling is actually very energy intensive. And what's interesting is at least according to one theory, and they need to work so quickly that they're working on metabolizing the glucose that comes in without using oxygen, kind of like what, you know, anaerobic metabolism. So they're not using oxygen as fast as they are using glucose. So what we're really seeing in some ways may be in FMRI, not the neurons themselves being active, but rather the astrocytes, which are meeting the metabolic demands of the process of keeping the whole system going. It does seem to be that FMRI is a good way to study activation. So with these astrocytes, even though there's a latency, it's pretty reliably coupled to the activations. Oh, well, this gets me to the other part. But so now let's say, for instance, if I'm just kind of like I'm talking to you, but I'm kind of paying attention to your cowboy hat, right? And looking up to the room, I'm thinking about the right even if I'm not looking at it. What you'd see is that there would be this little elevation in activity in areas in the visual cortex, you know, which process vision around that point in space. Okay. So if then something happened like, you know, suddenly the light flashed in that part of, you know, right in front of your cowboy hat, I would have a bigger response to it. But what you see in FMRI is even if I'm not, even if I don't see that flash light, there's a lot of activity that I can measure because you're kind of keeping it excitable in that inner and of itself, even though I'm not seeing anything there that's particularly interesting, there's still this increase in activity. And so it's more sensitive with FMRI. So there is that a feature or is it a bug, you know, some people who study spikes in neurons and say, well, that's terrible. We don't want that, you know. Likewise, it's slow. And that's terrible for measuring things that are very fast. But one of the things that we found in our work was when we give people movies and when we give people stories to listen to, a lot of the action is in the very, very slow stuff. It's in because if you're thinking about like a story, let's say you're listening to a podcast or listening to the Lex Friedman podcast, right? You're putting this stuff together and building this internal model over several seconds, which is basically, we filter that out when we look at electrical activity in the brain because we're interested in this millisecond scale. It's almost massive amounts of information, right? So the way I see it is every technique gives you a little limited window into what's going on. Ephraim Rye is huge problems. You know, people lie down in the scanner. There's parts of the brain where I'll show you in some of these images where you'll see kind of gaping holes because there's, you can't keep the magnetic field stable in those spots. You'll see parts where it's like there's a vein. And so it just produces a big increase and decrease in signal or respiration that causes these changes. There's lots of artifacts and stuff like that, you know. Every technique has its limits. If I'm lying down in MRI scanner, I'm lying down. I'm not interacting with you in the same way that I would in the real world. But at the same time, I'm getting data that I might not be able to get otherwise. And so different techniques give you different kinds of advantages. What kind of big scientific discoveries, maybe the flavor of discoveries have been done throughout the history of the science of memory, the studying of memory. What kind of things have been like understood? Oh, there's so many. It's really so hard to summarize it. I mean, I think it's funny because it's like when you're in the field, you can get kind of blase about this stuff. But then once I started writing the book, I was like, oh my god, this is really interesting. How did we do all this stuff? I would say that some of the, I mean, you know, from the first studies, just showing how much we forget is very important. Showing how much schemas, which is our organized knowledge about the world, increase our ability to remember information, just massively increase in a studies of expertise, showing how experts like chess experts can memorize so much in such a short amount of time because of the schemas they have for chess. But then also showing that those lead to all sorts of distortions in memory, the discovery that the active remembering can change the memory, can strengthen it, but it can also distort it if you get misinformation at the time. And it can also strengthen or weaken other memories that you didn't even recall. So just this whole idea of memory is an ecosystem, I think, of some big discovery. I could go, this idea of like breaking up our continuous experience into these discrete events, I think was a major discovery. So the discreetness of our encoding of events? Maybe. Yeah. I mean, you know, and again, there's controversial ideas about this, right? But it's like, yeah, this idea that, and this gets back to just this common experience of you walk into the kitchen and you're like, why am I here? And you just end up grabbing some food from the fridge. And you go back and like, oh, wait a minute, I left my watch in the kitchen. That's what I was looking.