 So I was trying to figure out how to do photorealistic AI photos and it was stable diffusion by itself is not doing that well like the faces look all mangled. And it doesn't have enough resolution or something to do the well. So, but I started seeing these these base models is fine gene models and the people who trained on porn and I would try them and they would be very photorealistic. They would have bodies that actually made sense like body on an enemy. But if you look at the photorealistic models that people use now still there's still core of porn there like of naked people so I need to prompt out the naked and ever needs to do this with AI startups of imaging. You need to prompt out the naked stuff you have to keep reminding the model to put those on the. Yeah, don't put naked because very risky I have Google vision that checks every photo before it's shown to the user to like check. Like a nipple detector. Oh, it's after we did that because you get the journalists get very angry. The following is a conversation with Peter levels also known on X as levels I.O. He is a self thought developer and entrepreneur who designed program shipped and ran over 40 startups many of which are hugely successful. In most cases, he did it all by himself while living the digital nomad life in over 40 countries and over 150 cities. Programming on a laptop while chilling on a couch using vanilla HTML, jQuery, PHP and SQLite. He builds and ships quickly and improves on the fly all in the open documenting his work both his successes and failures with a raw, honest, ever true, indie hacker. Peter is an inspiration to a huge number of developers and entrepreneurs who love creating cool things in the world that are hopefully useful for people. This was an honor and a pleasure for me. This is the Lex Fibre and podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description and now dear friends, here's Peter levels. You've launched a lot of companies and built a lot of products as you say most fail but some succeeded. What's your philosophy behind building the startups that you did? I think my philosophy is very different and most people in startups because most people in startups they build a company and they raise money and they hire people and then they build a product and they find something that makes money. I don't really raise money, I don't use VC funding, I do everything myself, I'm a designer, I'm a developer, I make everything, I make the logo. For me, I'm much more scrappy and because I don't have funding, I need to go fast, I need to make things fast to see even ID works. I have an ID in my mind and I build it, build a micro mini startup and I launch it very quickly within two weeks or something of building it. At check if there's demand and if people actually sign up and not just sign up but if people actually pay money, they need to take out the credit cards, pay me money and I can see if the idea is validated. Most of these don't work, as you say, most fail. There's this rapid iterative phase, we just build a prototype that works, launch it, see if people like improving it really quickly to see if people get a little bit more enough to pay and all that. That whole rapid process is how you think of it. I think it's very rapid and it's like if I compare it to Google, like our big tech companies, especially Google right now is struggling, they made transformers, they made all the invented all the AI stuff years ago and they never really shipped. They could have shipped chat GPD for example, I think I heard in 2019, I never shipped it because they were so stuck in bureaucracy but they had everything, they had the data, they had the tech, they had the engineers and it couldn't do it. It's because these big owners say it can make you very slow. So being alone by myself and my laptop, in my underwear, in a hotel room or something, I can ship very fast and I don't need to ask legal for it, can you vouch for this? I can just go and ship. Do you always code in your underwear? Your profile picture, you're like slouching your underwear, chilling on a laptop. No, but I would do where I like shorts a lot and I usually just wear shorts and I know T-shirt because I'm always too hot, I'm always overheating. Thank you for showing up not just in your underwear but wearing shorts. I'm still wearing this for you but. Thank you for dressing up. I think it's because since I go to the gym, I'm always too hot. What's your favorite accent in the gym? Man, over at press. Over at press, like shoulder press. Yeah. Okay. But it feels good because you're doing like you do you win because when you do what is I do 60 kilos, so there's like 120 pounds or something like it's my own. It's my only thing I can do well in on the gym and you said like this and you're like I did it, you know? Like a winner pose. A victory pose. I do bench press squats, deadlifts. Hence the mug talking to my therapist, it's a deadlift. Yeah, because it acts like therapy for me, you know? Yeah, it is controversial to say like if I say it isn't with the people get angry. Physical hardship is a kind of therapy. Yeah. I just rewatched Happy People Year in the Tiger that won a Herzog film with a document. People that are doing trapping their essentially just working for survival in the wilderness year round. Yeah. And there's a deep happiness to their way of life because they're so busy in it in nature. Yeah, absolutely. Like there's something about that physical physical, yeah. Toil. Yeah, my dad taught me that my dad always does like a construction in the house. Like it's always renovating the house. He breaks through one room and then he goes to the next room and he's just going in a circle around the house for like the last 40 years. So, but so he's always doing construction in the house and it's his hobby and he like he taught me when I'm depressed or something. He says like get a big like what do you call it? Like a big mountain of sand or something from construction. Just get a shovel and bring it to the other side and just you know, do like physical labor, do like hard work and do something like set a goal, do something. And I kind of did that with startups too. Yeah, construction is not about the destination man. It's about the journey. Yeah. Yeah, sometimes I wonder people who are always remodeling their house. Is it really about the remodeling or is it about the project? No, no, it's not. It's a journey that puzzle of it. No, he doesn't care about the results. Well, he shows me it's like it's amazing. Like yeah, it's amazing. But then he wants to go to the next room, you know, but I think it's very metaphorical for work. Because I also, I never stop work. I go to the next website where I make a new one, right? Where I make a new startup. So I'm always like, like to give you something to wake up in the morning and like, you know, have coffee and and kiss your girlfriend and then you have like a goal. Not today. I'm going to fix this feature today. I'm going to fix this bar or something. I'm going to do something. You have something to wake up to, you know, and I think maybe especially as a man, also women, but you need. You need a hard work, you know, you need like an endeavor, I think. How much of the building that you do is about money. How much is it about just a deep internal happiness? It's really about fun because I was, because I was doing it when I didn't make money, right? That's the point. So I was always coding. I was always making music. I made electronic music, drama based music like 20 years ago. And I was always making stuff. So I think creative expression is like a meaningful work that's so important. It's so fun. It's so fun to have like a daily challenge where you try to figure stuff out. But the interesting thing is you put a lot of successful products and you never really wanted to take it to that level where you say. Level where you scale real big and sell it to a company something like this. Yeah. The problems, I don't dictate that, right? Like if more people start using it, if millions of people suddenly start using it and it becomes big, I'm not going to say, I'll stop signing up to my website and pay me money. But I never raised funding for it. And I think as I don't like the stressful life that comes with it, like I have a lot of founder friends. And they tell me secretly, like hundreds of millions of dollars in funding and stuff. And they tell me like next time, if I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it like you because it's more fun. It's more in these more chill. It's more creative. They don't like this. They don't like to be manager, right? You become like a CEO. You become a manager. And I think a lot of people that start startups when they become a CEO, they don't like that job actually, but they can't really exit it. You know, but they like to do the groundwork, the coding. So I think that keeps you happy like doing something creative. Yeah, it's interesting how people are pulled towards that, the scale to go really big. And you don't have that honest reflection with yourself, like what actually makes you happy? Because for a lot of great engineers, we'll make some happy as the building, the the quote unquote individual contributor. Like where you're actually still coding or you're actually still building. And they let go of that. And then they become unhappy. But some of that is the sacrifice needed to have an impact at scale if you truly believe in a thing you're doing. Well, look at Elon is doing things a million times bigger than me, right? And would I want to do that? I don't know, you can't really choose these things, right? But I really respect that. I think Elon is very different from VC founders. Right? VC start is like software. There's a lot of bullseye in this world, I think. There's a lot of like dodgy finance stuff happening there, I think. And I never have like concrete evidence about it, but your God tells you something's going on with like companies getting sold to friends and VCs and then they do reciprocity and shady financial dealings. With Elon, that's not just raising money from investors and actually building stuff. It needs the money to build stuff, you know, hard work stuff. And that I really respect. You said that there's been a few low points in your life that you've been depressed and the building is one of the ways you get out of that. Can you talk to that? Can you take me to that place at that time when you were at a low point? So I wasn't Holland and I graduated university and I didn't want to like get a normal job. And I was making some money with YouTube because I had this music career and I uploaded my music to YouTube and YouTube started paying me like with at sense like $2000 a month, $2000 a month. And all my friends got like normal jobs and we stopped hanging out because people like in university hanging out, you know, utilities, each house is you go party. But even people get jobs, they only party like in the weekend and they don't hang anymore in the week because you need to be at the office and I was like, it's not for me. I want to do something else. And I was starting getting this like I think it's like Saturn return this you know when you turn 27. It's like some concept where Saturn returns to the same place in the orbit that it was when you're born. I'm learning so many things. It's some astrology thing, you know. So many truly special artists died when they were 27. Exactly. It's something with 27 man. And it was for me like I started going crazy because I didn't really see like my future in Holland buying a house going living in the suburbs and stuff. So I flew out. I went to Asia started digital nomadding and did that for a year and then that made me feel even worse, you know, because I was like alone in hotel rooms, like looking at the ceiling. Like what am I doing in my life? Like this is like I was working on startups and stuff in YouTube. But it's like what is the future here, you know, like is this is this something while my friends in Holland were doing really well and with a normal life, you know. So I was getting very depressed and like I'm like a outcast. You know, my money was shrinking. I wasn't making money anymore. I was making $500 a month or something and I was looking at the ceiling thinking like now I'm like 27. I'm a loser. And that's the moment when I started building like startups. And it was because my dad said like if you're depressed, you need to, you know, get sand, get a shovel start shoveling, do something. You can't just sit still. Which is kind of like an interesting way to deal with depression. You know, like it's not like, oh, let's talk about it. It's more like let's go do something. And I started doing a project called 12 Startups in 12 months where every month I would make something like a project and I would launch it with Stripe. So people could pay for it. So the basic format is try to build a thing, put online and put Stripe to where you can pay money for it. Yeah, I'm not sponsored by Stripe, but I just try to check out the button. Is that still like the easiest way to just like pay for stuff? Stripe. 100% like I think so. Yeah, it's a cool company. They just made it so easy. You can just click them. Yeah. And they're really nice. Like the CEO Patrick is really nice. Behind the scenes, it must be difficult to like actually make that happen. Because that used to be a huge problem like just just adding a thing, a button where you can like pay for it. It's dude, I know this because when I was nine years old, I was making websites also. And I tried to open a merchant account. There was like before Stripe, you would have like, I think it was called World Pay. So I had to like fill out all these forms. And then I had to fix them to America from Holland with my dad's facts. And my dad had to, it was on my dad's name and he did sign for this and he started reading these terms and conditions. It was like he's liable for like a hundred million in damages. And he's like, I don't want to sign this. I'm like, Dad, come on, I need an merchant account. I need to make money on the internet. And he signed it and we sent it, we fixed it to America and I had a merchant account. But then never nobody paid for anything. So that was the problem, you know. But it's much easier now. You can sign up, you add some codes and yeah. So 12 startups in 12 months. Yeah. So what, how do you start number one? What was that? What, what were you feeling? What were you sitting behind the computer? Like how much do you actually know about building stuff at that point? Well, I could, I could code a little bit because I did the YouTube channel and I made a website for, I would make websites for like the YouTube channel. It was called Panda Mix Show. And it was like these electronic music mixes like Dubstep or Drum Bays or Techno or House. I saw one of them like Flash, reusing Flash. Yeah, my album, my CDL was using Flash. Yeah. I sold my CD, yeah. Kids Flash was a software. This is like the brain that like grandpa, you know, but Flash was cool. And there was, was it called boy, I should remember this action script. There's some kind of programming language. Yeah, yeah, X-Script. Oh, yeah. Back then, that was the JavaScript, you know? The JavaScript. Yeah. And I thought that's going to, that's supposed to be the dynamic thing that takes over the internet. I invested so many hours in learning that. Steve Jobs killed it. Steve Jobs said Flash sucks. Stop using it and everyone's like, okay. That guy was right though, right? Yeah, I don't know. Yeah. Well, it was, it was a closed platform, I think. And closed. But this ironic because Apple, you know, they're not very open. But back then Steve was like, this is closed. We should not use it. And it's as security problems, I think, which sounded like a cop out. Like I just wanted to say that to make it look kind of bad. But Flash was cool. Yeah. Yeah, it was cool for time. Yeah. Listen, animated gifts were cool for time too. Yeah. They came back in a different way as a meme though. I mean, like I, I remember when gifts were actually cool, not ironically cool. Yeah. Like there's like on the internet, you would have like a dancing rabbit or something like this. And that was really exciting. You had like the, you know, Lex homepage, you know, this, everything was centered. Yeah. And you had like Peter's homepage and the, on the construction, gift, which was like a guy, like, with a helmet. And the lights, and those amazing. And the banners. Yeah, that's how before like Google Adsense, you would have like banners for advertising. It was amazing. Yeah. And a lot of links to porn, I think. Yeah. Or porn. That was where the merchant accounts people would use for. Or people would make money a lot. The only money made on internet was like porn, where a lot of it. Yeah. It was a dark place. It's still a dark place. Yeah. And but there's beauty in the darkness. Anyway. So you were, you did some basic HTML. Yeah. Yeah. But I had to learn the actual coding. So it was good. It was a good, good idea to like every month launch a startup. So I could learn to code, learn basic stuff. And but it was still very scrappy because it didn't have time to, which is on purpose. I could didn't have time to spend a lot of, I had a month to do something. So I couldn't spend more than a month and I was pretty strict about that. And I published it as a blog post so people, I think I put it on hackonyms and people would check like, kind of like, oh, did you actually, you know, I felt like accountability because I put it public that I actually had to do it. Do you remember the first one you did? I think it was playing my inbox because back then my friends we would send, we would send like cool me. It was before Spotify. I think we would send like two thousand thirteen. We would send music to each other like YouTube links. Like this is a cool song. This is a cool song. And it was these giant email tracks on Gmail. And they were like unavigatable. So I made an app that would log into your Gmail, get them emails and find them on YouTube links. And then make like kind of like a gallery of your, your songs like essentially Spotify. And my friends loved it. Was this scraping it? Like what was it? No, it uses like POP, like pop or I'm happy. You know, it would actually check your email. So that like privacy concerns because it would get all your emails to find YouTube links. But then I wouldn't save anything. But there was fun. There was like, and that the first product already would get like pressed. Like when I think like some tag media and stuff. And I was like, this is cool. Like it didn't make money. There was no payment button. But it was a, it was actually people using it. I think tens of thousands of people used it. That's a great idea. I wonder why, why don't we have that? Why don't we have things that access Gmail and extract some useful aggregate information? Yeah. Yeah. You could tell Gmail like, don't give me all the emails. Just give me the ones with YouTube links, you know, or something like that. Yeah. I mean, there is a whole ecosystem of like apps you can build on top of the Google. Yeah. But people don't, they build, they build, I've seen a few like boomerang. There's a few apps that are like good. But just, I wonder what maybe it's not easy to make money. I think it's hard to get people to pay for these like extensions and plugins, you know? Yeah. Because it's not like a real app. So it's not like people don't value it. People, they're like, oh, this plugin should be free, you know? When I want to use a plugin in Google sheets or something, I'm not going to pay for it. It should be free, which is, but if you go to a website and you actually, okay, I need this product, I'm going to pay for this because it's a real product. So even though it's the same code in the back, it's a plugin, you know? Yeah. I mean, you can do it through like extensions like Chrome extensions from the browser side. Yeah. But who pays for Chrome extensions, right? Like barely anybody. So that's not a good place to make money probably. Yeah. That sucks. Like Chrome extensions should be an extension for your startup, you know? You have a product. Yeah. Oh, we also have a Chrome extension, you know? I wish the Chrome extension would be the product. I wish Chrome would support that. Yeah. Like where you could pay for it easily. It's like imagine, I can imagine a lot of products that would just live as extensions. Like improvements for social media. Yeah. It's like TPs, you know? GPs, yeah. Like these chat GPs, they're going to charge money for it now. You get a ref share. Ref share, I think from opening I, I made a lot of them also. Yeah. We'll talk about it. So let's rewind back. It's a pretty cool idea to do 12 startups in 12 months. What's it take to build a thing in 30 days? Like at that time, how hard was that? I think the hard part is like figuring out what you shouldn't add, right? Which you shouldn't build because you don't have time. So you need to build a landing page. Well, you need to make, you know, you need to build the product actually because they need to be something that pay for. Do you need to build a login system? Like maybe no, you know, like maybe you can build some scrappy login system. Like for photo, you sign up, you pay with a strap checkout and you get a login link. And when I started, it was only a login link with a hash and that's just a static link. So it's very easy to log in. Yeah. It's not so safe, you know, what if you link the link and now I have a real Google login. But that took like a year. So keeping it very scrappy is very important to, because you don't have time, you know, you need to focus on what you can build fast. So money, stripe, build the product, build a landing page. You need to think about how are people going to find this? So are you going to put it on Reddit or something? How are you going to put it on Reddit without being looked at as a spammer, right? Like if you say, Hey, it is my new star, you should use it. No, nobody gets deleted, you know? Maybe if you find a problem that a lot of people on Reddit already have on subreddits, you know, like you solve that problem, say. Sub people, I made this thing that might solve your problem and maybe it's free for now, you know, like that could work. But you need to be very, you know, narrow it down. What you're building time is limited. Yeah. Actually, can we go back to the you laying in a room feeling like a loser? Yeah. I still feel like a loser sometimes. What's, what can you, can you speak to that feeling to that place of just like feeling like a loser? And I think a lot of people in this world are laying in a room right now listening to this and feeling like a loser. Okay. So I think it's normal. If you're young, did you feel like a loser? First of all, especially when you're 27. Yes. Yeah, especially. There's like a peak. Yeah. Yeah. I think 20th of the peak. And so I would not kill yourselves. It's very important to just get through it, you know? But because you have nothing, you have probably no money. You have no business. You have no job. Like, during a business at this, I saw it somewhere like the reason people are depressed because I have nothing. They don't have a girlfriend. They don't have a boyfriend. They don't have a, you need stuff. You need like our family. You need things around you. You need to build a life for yourself. You don't build a life for yourself. You'll be depressed. So if you're alone in Asia in a hostel looking at the ceiling and you know, have any money coming in. You don't have a girlfriend. You don't. Of course you're depressed. It's logic. But back then, if you're in the moment, you think there's not logic. There's something wrong with me, you know? Yeah. And also, I think I started going, I started getting like anxiety. And I think I started going a little bit crazy where I think travel can make you insane. And I noticed because I know that there's like digital moments that they killed themselves. And I don't, I haven't checked like this comparison with like baseline people like suicide rate. But I have a hunch, especially in the beginning, when it was a very new thing like 10 years ago, that it can be very psychologically texting. And you're alone a lot back then when you travel alone, there was no other digital moments back then a lot. So you're in a strange culture. You look different in everybody like you're in, I was in Asia like everybody's really nice in Thailand. But you're not part of the culture. You're traveling around. You're hopping from city to city. You don't have a home anymore. You feel disrooted. And you're constantly in the outcast in that you're different from everybody else. Yes. Exactly. But people treated like Thailand people are so nice, but you still feel like outcasts. And, and I think the digital moments I met then were all kind of like, it was like shady business, you know, but they were like vigilantes because of this new thing. Like one guy was selling illegal drugs. It was American guy was selling illegal drugs for UPS to Americans, you know, on this website. They were like a lot of dropshippers doing shady stuff. There's love, Shades, things going on there. And they were, they didn't look like very balanced people. They didn't look like people I wanted to hang with, you know. So I also felt outcast from other foreigners in Thailand, other digital moments. And I was like, man, I made a big mistake. And then I went back to Holland and then I got even more depressed. You said digital nomad. What is digital nomad? What is that way of life? What is the philosophy there? And the history of the movement. I struck upon it on the accent because I was like, I'm going to graduate university and then I'm going to, I need to get out of here. I'll fly to Asia because I've been before in Asia. I started in Korea in 2009, like study exchange. I was like, Asia is easy. Thailand is easy. And I'll just go there and figure things out. It's very cheap. Check my, I would live like for $150 per month rent for like a private room. Pretty good. So I struck upon this on the accent. I was like, okay, there's other people on laptops working on their startup or working remotely. Back then, nobody worked remotely, but they worked on their businesses, right? And they would, you know, live in like Colombia or Thailand or Vietnam or Bali. They would live kind of like a more cheap places. And it looked like a very adventurous life. Like you travel around, you build your business. There's no pressure from like your home society, right? Like your American. So you get pressure from America society telling you kind of what to do. Like you need to buy a house or you need to do this stuff. I had this in Holland too. And you can get away from this pressure. You can find it kind of feel like you're free. You're kind of, there's nobody telling you what to do. But that's also why you start feeling like you go crazy because you are free. You're detached from anything and anybody. You're detached from your culture. You're detached from the culture. You're probably in because you're staying very short. I think Franz Kafka said, I'm free. Therefore I'm lost. Man, that's so true. Yeah, it's exactly the points. And yeah, freedom is like it's the definition of no constraints, right? Like anything is possible. You can go anywhere. And everybody's like, oh, that must be super nice. You know, like freedom. You must be very happy. And it's the opposite. Like I don't think that makes you happy. I think constraints probably make you happy. And it's a big lesson I learned then. But what were they making for money? So you were saying they were doing shady stuff at that time? For me, you know, because I was more like a developer. I wanted to make startups kind of. And it was like, there was like drugs, being shipped to America, like diet pills and stuff, like non-FDA-proof stuff, you know? And they would like let there was no like effort. They were like, they would, they would, they would say with beers, they would laugh about like all the dodgy shit kind of they're doing, you know? That part of it. Okay. Kind of vibe, you know, like kind of sleazy e-com vibe. I'm not saying all e-com is sleazy, you know, but, right. But you know this vibe. It could be a vibe. And your your vibe was more build cool shit. That's ethical. You know the guys with sports cars in Dubai, these people, you know? Yes. E-com like, oh, it probably got a drop ship. Yeah. And you make $100 million a month. Like, those people was this shit. And I was like, this is not my people. Yeah. I mean, there's nothing wrong with any of those individual. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. But there's a foundation that's not quite ethical. And what is that? I don't know what that is. But yeah, I get you. Well, I don't want to judge. It was more, I know that for me, it wasn't my world. It wasn't my subculture. I wanted to make cool shit, you know, but they also think that cool shit is cool. So, you know, but I wanted to make like real like startups. And there was my thing. I would read Hecker News, you know, like, why culminator? And they were making cool stuff. So I wanted to make cool stuff. I mean, that's a pretty cool way of life. Just if you romanticize it from a moment, it's very romantic, man. It's very, it's colorful, you know, like if I think about the memories. What is some happy memories? It's just like working, working cafes or working in just the freedom that envelops you with that way of life. Because anything is possible. You just get off. I think it was amazing. Like we would work. I would make friends and we would work until, you know, 6 a.m. in Bali, for example, with like, with Andre my best friend, who I was still my best friend. And we would, another friend and we would work until like the morning when the sun came up. Because at night, the co-worker space was silent, you know, there was nobody else. And I would wake up like 6 p.m. or 5 p.m. I would drive to the co-worker space on a motorbike. I would buy like a Fertie hot lattes from a cafe. How many? Fertie. Because there was like, there was like six people coming. What we didn't know, sometimes people would come in. And we would say 3-0-30. Yeah. Nice. Like 4 per person or something, you know. Yeah. Man, it's Bali. I don't know if they were powerful lattes, you know, but they were lattes. And we would put them in plastic bag and then we would drive there and all the coffee was like falling, you know, ever. And then we'd go and go and say, I have these coffees here. I would work all night. We'd play like techno music and everybody would just work on there. Like this would literally like business people. They would work in their startup and we would all try and make something. And then the sun would come up and the morning people, you know, the yoga, yoga girls and yoga guys would come in, you know, after the yoga class and six. And they'd say, hey, good morning. And we're like, we look like this, you know, and we're like, what's up? How are you doing? And we didn't know how bad we looked, you know, but it was very bad. And then we would go home, sleep in like a hostel or a hotel and do the same thing. And again and again and again. And it was this locking in most, you know, like working. And that was very fun. So it's just a bunch of you techno music blasting all through the night. Yeah. And I'm more like, I'm not like this. I can see I got for me. It's such an interesting thing because the speed of the beat affects how I feel about a thing. So the faster it is, the more anxiety I feel, but that anxiety is channeled into productivity. But if it's a little too fast, I start the anxiety overpower. So you don't like drum bass music? Probably not. That's too fast. I mean, for working as a, I have to play with it. It's like you can actually like, I can adjust my level of anxiety. It must be a better word than anxiety. It's like a productive anxiety that I like whatever it is. It also depends what kind of work you do, right? Like if you're writing, you probably don't want drum bass music. I think for codes, like industrial techno, this kind of stuff kind of fast. It works well because you really get like locked in and combined with caffeine, you know, you go deep, you know. And I think you balance on this edge of anxiety because this caffeine is also hitting your anxiety. And you want to be on the edge of anxiety with this techno running. Sometimes it gets too much. Like stop the techno, stop the music. But those are good memories. You know, also like travel memories, like you go from city to city. And it feels like, it's kind of like jet set life. Like it feels very beautiful. Like you're seeing a lot of cool cities and... What was your favorite place? Any member? The visited. I think still, like Bangkok is the best place. And Bangkok and Chiang Mai, I think Thailand is very special. Like I've been to the other place, like I've been to Vietnam and I've been to South America and stuff. I still think Thailand wins in how nice people are, how easy of a life people have their... Everything's cheap. Yeah, good. Well Bangkok is going expensive now. But Chiang Mai is still cheap. I think when you're starting out, it's a great place. Man, the air quality sucks. It's a big problem. And it's quite hot. But that's a very cool place. Proven cones. I love Brazil also. My girlfriend is Brazilian, but I do not just because of that, but I like Brazil. The problem still is the safety issue. It's like in America, it's localized. It's hard for Europeans to understand, like, safety is localized to specific areas. So if you go to the right areas, it's amazing. Brazil is amazing. If you go to the wrong areas, like maybe you die. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, that's true. But it's not true in Europe. From Europe is much more... That's true. That's true. You're right. It's more averaged out. Yeah. I like it when there's strong neighborhoods. When you're like, you cross a certain street and you're in a dangerous part of town. Man, yeah. I like it. I like there's certain cities in the United States like that. Yeah. I like that. And you're saying Europe is more... But you don't feel scared? Well, I don't. I like danger. BJJ. No, not even just that. I think danger is interesting. Yeah. Danger reveals something about yourself, about others. Also, I like the full range of humanity. Yeah. So I don't like the mellowed out aspects of humanity. I friends, these are almost friends that are exactly like this. They go to the broken areas. They like this reality. They like authenticity more. They don't like luxury. They don't like... Oh, yeah. No. No luxury. Yeah. It's very European of you. Like... Wait, was that... That's a whole other conversation. Yeah. So you quoted Freya Stark, quote, to awaken quite a loan in a strange town is one of the most pleasant sensations in the world. Yeah. Do you remember time you were woken in a strange town and felt like that? We're talking about small towns or big towns or... Man, anywhere. I think I wrote it in some blog post and like... It was a common thing when you would wake up and this was like... Because I have this website. I started a website about this data nomad is like called nomadlist.com and this was a community. So it was like 3,000 other data nomads because I was feeling lonely so I built this website and I stopped feeling lonely. Like I started organizing meetups and making friends and it was very common that people would say they would wake up and they would forget where they are. Like for the first half minute and I had to look outside like where am I, which country? Which sounds really like privilege but it was more like funny. Like you literally don't know where you are because you're so disrooted. But there's something... Man, it's like Anthony Burden, you know? There's something pure about this kind of Vaga bones travel thing, you know? Like it's behind me I think. I don't like... Now I travel with my girlfriend, right? It's very different but it is a romantic like memories of this kind of like Vaga bone individualistic solo life. But the thing didn't make me happy but it was very cool but it didn't make me happy, right? It made me anxious. There's something about it that made me anxious. I don't know. I still feel like that. It's a cool feeling. It's scary at first but then you realize where you are and you... I don't know. It's like you're awakened to the possibilities of this place when you see like that. It's like... It's great. And it's even when you're doing some basic travel. Yeah. I go to San Francisco or something like that. Yeah, you have like the novelty effect like you're in a new place. Like here things are possible. You know, you don't get bored yet and... And that's why people get addicted to travel, you know? Back to startups. You wrote a book on how to do this thing and gave a great talk on it. How to do startups. The book's called Make Boost Trappers Handbook. Yeah. I was wondering if you could go through some of the steps. This idea of build, launch, grow, monetize, automate and exit. There's a lot of fascinating ideas in each one. So, idea stage. Yeah. How do you find a good idea? So I think you need to be able to spot problems. So for example, you can go in your daily life like when you wake up and you're like, what is stuff that I'm really annoyed with? That's like in my daily life that doesn't function well. And that's a problem that you can see. Okay, maybe that's something I can add, write code about. You know, code for and it will make my life easier. I would say make like a list of all these problems you have and like idea to solve it. And I see which one is like viable. You can actually do something and then start building it. So that's a really good place to start. Become open to all the problems in your life. Like actually start noticing them. I think that's actually not a trivial thing to do to realize that some aspects of your life could be done way way better. Yeah. Because we kind of very quickly get accustomed to discomfort. Exactly. Like for example, like door knobs. Yeah. Like design of certain things. Like your next free man door knob. Well, that one I know how much incredible design work has gone into. Is it really interesting? Doors and door knobs. The design of everyday things, forks and spoons. It's going to be hard to come up with a fork that's better than the current fork designs. And the other aspect of it is you're saying like in order to come up with interesting ideas you got to try to live a more interesting life. Yeah. But that's where travel comes in. Because when I started traveling, I started seeing stuff in other countries that you didn't have in Europe, for example, or America, even. Like if you go to Asia, like do it, especially 10 years ago, nobody knew about this. Like we Chets, all these apps that they already had before we had them, these, everything apps, right? Like now Elon's trying to make X this everything app like we chat. The same thing. Like in an easier talent, you have one app that you can order food. If you can order groceries, you can order massage. You can order car mechanic. Anything you can think of is in the app. And that's stuff, for example, you know, that's called like arbitrage. You can go to back to your country and build that same app for your country, for example. So you start seeing problems. You start seeing solutions that other countries already, other people already did in the rest of the world. And also traveling in general just gives you more problems because travel is uncomfortable, you know, airports are horrible. Airplanes are not comfortable either. There's a lot of problems you start seeing. Just getting out of your house, you know? But also you can, I mean, in the digital world, you can just go into different communities and see what can be improved by the little in that. Yeah. Yeah. What specifically is your process of generating ideas? Do like, do I do a dumps? Like do you have a document where you just keep writing? Yeah, you still have like a, because when I was, when I wasn't making money, I was trying to like make this list of ideas to see like, so I need to build, I was thinking statistically already, like I need to build all these things and one of these will work out probably, you know? So I need to have a lot of things to try. And I did that right now. I think like because I already have money, I can do more things based on technology. So for example, AI, when I found out about, when stable diffusion came or chat GBT and stuff, all these things were like, I didn't start working with them because I had a problem. I had no problems, but I was very curious about technology and I was like playing with it and figuring out like, first is playing with it and then you find something like, okay, this generates, stable fusion generates houses very beautiful and interior, you know? So it's less about problem stallions, more about the possibilities of new things you can create. Yeah, but that's very risky because that's the famous solution trying to find a problem. And usually it doesn't work. And that's very common with, with sort of, I think they have tech, but actually people don't need to tech right? So can you actually explain, it'd be cool to talk about some of the stuff you created. Can you explain this photo AI? Yeah. So it's like fire your photographer ideas that you don't need a photographer anymore. You can train yourself as AI model and you can take as many photos you want anywhere in any clothes with facial expressions like happy or sad or poses, all the stuff. So how does the work? This is a, he's sent me a link to a gallery of ones done on making it. So on the left you have the prompts, the box. Yeah. So you can write like, so model is your model, this leg treatment. Yeah. So you can write like model as a blah, blah, whatever you want. Yep. Then press the button and it will take photos, take like one minute. What are you using for the hosting for the compute? Replicates. Replicate.com. They're very, very good. Okay. It's cool like this interface wise, it's cool that you're showing how much it's going to take. This is amazing. I'm, I'm presuming you just loaded in a few pictures from the internet. Yeah. So I went to Google images, tapped on Lex Friedman, I added like 10 or 20 images. You can open them in the gallery and you can use your cursor to, yeah. So some don't look like you. So the hidden misread is like, I don't know, let's say like 50, 50 or something. But when I was watching your tweets, like it's been getting better and better and better. It was very bad in the beginning. It was so bad, but still people who signed up todays, you know. There's, there's two Lexes. It's great. It's getting more and more sexual. It's making me very uncomfortable. Yeah. But that's the problem with these models because, no, we need to talk about this because the models of diffusion. Sure. So the photorealistic models that are like fine tunes, they were all trained and born in the beginning. And it was a guy called Hassan. So I was trying to figure out how to do photorealistic AI photos and it was, stable diffusion by itself is not doing that well. Like the faces look all mangled. Yep. And it doesn't have enough resolution or something to do that well. So, but I started seeing these, these base models, these fine tune models and the people who trained them born and I would try them and they would be very photorealistic. They would have bodies that actually made sense like body anatomy. But if you look at the photorealistic models that people use now, still, there's still core of porn there, like of naked people. So I need to prompt out the naked and everyone needs to do this with AI startups of imaging. You need to prompt out the naked stuff. You need to put a, you know, naked. You have to keep reminding the model to put those on the naked because it's very risky. I have Google Vision that checks every photo before it's shown to the user to like check and accept the doctor. Like a nipple detector. Oh, it's after we did that. The detector. Because you get the journalists get very angry if they, you know, there was a journalist a thing that would get angry that used this and it was like, oh, it made me, it showed like a nipple because Google Vision didn't detect it. So that's like this kind of promise you need to deal with, you know, that's what I'm talking about. This is with cats. Look at the cat face. It's also kind of mangled. You know, I'm, I'm, I'm a, I'm a little bit disturbed. I'm assuming on the cat if you want like, like, yeah, it's a very sad cut. It doesn't have a nose. It doesn't have a nose. But this is the problem with AI startups because they all act like it's perfect. Like this is groundbreaking and but it's not perfect. It's like really bad, you know, half time. So if I wanted to sort of update model as, yeah, so you remove this stuff and you write it like whatever you want, like in Thailand or something or in Tokyo. In Tokyo? Yeah. And you say like at night, if neon lights, like you can add more detail to make sure I'll go in Austin. Do you think I'll know in Texas? Yeah, Austin, in Austin, Texas. The cowboy hats in Texas. Yeah. As a cowboy. As a cowboy. It's going to go so towards the porn directions. It's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's the end of my career. Or the beginning, it depends. We can send you a push notification when your photos are done. Yeah, cool. And let's see. Oh, wow. So this whole interface you've built. Yeah. This is really well done. It's all jacory. I still use jacory. Yes. Yes. Still after the day, you're not the only one the entire of the web. Yeah. This PHP, the stack. It's been jacory. Yeah. As equal lights. You're just like one of the top performers from a programming perspective that are still like openly talking about it. But everyone's using PHP. Like if you look at most of the web, it's still probably PHP and J4. I mean, seven percent. It's because of WordPress, right? Because the blog is a. Yeah. That's true. I'm seeing a revival now. People are getting sick of frameworks. Um, like all the JavaScript frameworks are so like what are you called? Like, wieldy. Like, they're so it's takes so much work to just maintain this code. And then it updates to a new version. You need to change everything. PHP just stays the same and works. Yeah. Can you actually just speak to that stack? You build all your websites, app, startups, projects, all of that with mostly vanilla HTML? Yeah. Yeah. JavaScript with jQuery, PHP and a school light. And so that's a really simple stack and you get stuff done really fast with that. Can you just speak to the philosophy behind that? I think it's accidental because that's the thing I knew. Like I knew PHP, I knew HTML, um, CSS, you know, because you make websites. And when my startups started taking off, I didn't have time to, I remember putting on my to do list, like learn. JS because it's important to switch, you know, because this obviously is much better language than PHP. And I never learned it. I never did it. Uh, because at the end of time, I, these things were growing like this and I was launching more project and I never had time. It's like one day, you know, I'll, I'll start coding properly and I never got to it. I sometimes wonder if I need to learn that stuff. But still to do it for me to really learn no JS or, or flask or these kind of the act, you react. And it's just, it feels like a responsible software engineer should know how to use these. But you can get stuff done so fast with vanilla versions of stuff. Yeah. It's like software developers. If you want to get a job and there's like, you know, people making stuff like startups. If you want to be on the pranera probably, you should maybe shoot. I wonder if there's like, I really want to measure performance and speed. I think there's a deep wisdom in that. Yeah. I do think that frameworks and just constantly wanting to learn the new thing, this complicated way of software engineering gets in the way. I'm not sure what to say about that because definitely like you shouldn't build everything from just vanilla JavaScript or vanilla C, for example, C++ when you're building systems and engineering is like, there's a lot of benefits for a point of safety, all that kind of stuff. So I don't know, but it just feels like you can get so much more stuff done if you don't care about how you do it. Man, this is my most controversial take I think and maybe I'm wrong, but I feel like this framework's now that raised money. They raised a lot of money. Like they raised 50 million, 100 million, 3 million, dollars. And the idea is that you need to make the developers and new developers. Like when you're 18 or 20 years old, right? Get them to use this framework and add a platform to it like where the framework can open source, but you probably should use the platform, which is paid to use it. And the cost of the platforms to host it are a thousand times higher than just hosting it on a simple AWS server or a VPS on digital ocean, right? So there's obviously like a monetary incentive here. Like we want to get a lot of developers to use this technology and then we need to charge some money because they're going to use it in startups and then the startups can pay for the bills. But what that kind of destroys the information out there about learning to code because they pay YouTube is they pay influencers, developing influencers is a big thing to like, and same thing happens with like nutrition and fitness or something. Same thing happens in developing. They pay these influencers to promote the stuff, use it, make stuff with it, make demo products with it. And then a lot of people like, wow, use this. And I started noticing this because when I was ship my stuff, people would ask me, what are you using? I would say I would just be a bit jacquery. Why doesn't matter? And people would start kind of attacking me like, why are you not using this new technology, this new framework, this new thing? And I say, I don't know because this beach people in works and I don't really optimizing for anything just to just works. And I never understood like why, like I understand there's new technologies that are better and this should be improvement. But I'm very suspicious of money just like lobbying. Does money in this developer framework seen? There's hundreds of millions that goes to ads or influence or whatever. It can't all go to developers. You don't need so many developers for a framework and it's open source to make a lot of more money on these startups. So that's a really good perspective. In addition to that is like when you say better, it's like, can we get some data on the better? Because I want to know from the individual developer perspective and then from a team of five, team of ten, team of 20 developers, measure how productive they are in shipping features, how many bugs they create, how many security holes. BSP was not good at security for a while, but now it's good. In theory, in theory, is it though? How is good? No, no, no, no. Now as you're saying it, I want to know if that's true because PHP was just the majority of websites on the internet. Could be true. It's just overrepresented. Same with WordPress. Yes, there's a reputation that WordPress has a gigantic number of security holes. I don't know if that's true. I know it gets attacked a lot because it's so popular. It definitely does have security holes, but maybe a lot of other systems have security holes as well. Anyway, I just sort of question the conventional wisdom that keeps wanting to push softener genius towards frameworks, towards complex, like super complicated softener engineering approaches that stretch out the time it takes to actually build a thing. 100%. And it's the same thing with big corporations, 80% of the people don't do anything. It's not efficient. And if you're your benchmark is like people building stuff that actually gets done and like for society, right? Like if we want to save time, we should probably use the technology as simple, that's pragmatic, that's like that works. That's not overly complicated. It doesn't make your life like a living hell, you know? And use the framework when it obviously solves a problem, a direct problem. Of course, yeah, of course. I'm not saying you should code without a framework. You should use whatever you want, but yeah, I think it's suspicious, you know? And I think it's when I talk about on the Twitter, like there's a lot, this this army comes out, you know, there's this framework armies. Yeah, it's man, something my gut tells me. I want to ask the framework army what have they built this week? It's the Elon question. What did you do this week? Yeah, did you make money with it? You know, did you charge users? Is it a real business? And yeah. So going back to the cowboy. First of all, everyone looks like you, right? But some do every aspect of this is pretty incredible. I'm also just looking at the interface is really well done. So this is all just jQuery and yeah, this is really well done. So like, take me through the journey of photo AI, like you don't know what most of the world doesn't know much about stable diffusion or any of this, any of the generative AI stuff. And so you're thinking, okay, how can I build cool stuff with this? Yeah. What was the origin story of photo AI? I think it started because stable diffusion came out. So stable fusion is like the first like generative image model, AI model. And I started playing with it. Like you could install it on your Mac like somebody forked it and made it work for MacBooks. So I downloaded it and cloned the repo and started using it to generate images. And it was like amazing. Like it would. I found it on Twitter because you see things happen on Twitter and I would post what I was making on Twitter as well. You could make any image. You could write a prompt. So it's actually write a prompt and then it generates a photo of that or image of that in any style. Like they would use like artist names to make like a pic also kind of style and stuff. And I was trying to see like what is a good at is a good at people notes really bad at people, but it was good at houses. So architecture for example, I would generate like architecture houses. So I made a website called this house does not exist. It works and it generated like they called like house porn and that one. Like house porn is like a subreddit. So this was stable fusion like the first version. So it looks really you can click for another photo. So it generates like all these kind of non existing houses. It is house porn, but it looked kind of good. You know, like especially back then it looks really good. It looks really good. It looks really good. It looks really good. It looks really good. It looks really good. You are done. Wow. And it looks like a description. And you cannot vote. Is it nice? I voted. Man, there is so much to talk to you about like the choices here. This is very scrappy. In the bottom there is like a ranking of the most uploaded houses. So these are the top photos. And if you go to all time you see quite beautiful ones. Yeah. So this one is my favorite. The number one is like kind of like a house is not more popular. It was really popular for like a while, but then people got so bored of it. I think because I was getting bored of it too, like just continuous house porn, like everything starts looking the same. But then I thought it was really good interior. So I pivoted to interior AI.com where I tried to like upload first-genered interior designs and then I tried to do like it was a new technology called image to image where you can input image like a photo and would kind of modify the thing. So you see it looks almost the same as photo as the same code essentially. Nice. So I would upload a photo of my interior where I lived and I would ask like changes into like I know like maximalist design, you know. And it worked and it worked really well. So I was like, okay, this is a startup because obviously interior design AI and nobody is doing that yet. So I launched this and it was successful and made like in a week, made 10k, 20k a month and now still makes like 40k, 50k a month and it's been like two years. So then I was like, how can I improve this interior design? I need to start learning fine tuning. A fine tuning is where you have this existing AI model and you fine tune it on the specific goal you wanted to do. So I would find really beautiful interior design, make a gallery and train a new model that was very good interior design and it worked and I used that as well. And then for fun, I uploaded photos of myself and here's what happened. To train myself like and this would never work obviously and it worked and actually it started understanding me as a concept. So my face worked and you could do like different styles like me as a like very cheesy medieval warrior or the stuff. So it's like this is another startup. So now I did avatar AI dot me. I couldn't get to dot com and this was this was yeah, avatar AI dot me. Well now it's forwards to photo because it pivoted. But this was more like cheesy thing. So this is very interesting because this went so viral. It made like I think like 150 K in a week or something. So most of my ever made and and then big. This is very interesting. The big VC companies like Lensa, which are much better at iOS and stuff than me. I didn't have iOS app. They quickly build the iOS app that does the same and they found technology and it's all open technology. So it's good. I think they made like 30 million dollars with it. They they became like the top grossing app after that. And it was how do you feel about that? I think it's amazing. Honestly, and it's not like you didn't have like a feeling like a. No, I was a little bit like sad because all my products would work out and I never had like real fierce competition and now I have like fierce competition from like a very skilled high talent like iOS developer studio or something that and they already had a app. They had an app store for like I think retouching your face or something. So they were very smart. They had these other stuff there. It's a feature. They had the users. They do push notifications to everybody. We have this avatars. Yeah. Man, they made create. I think they made they made so much money and I think they did a really great job and I also made a lot of money with it. But that was I quickly realized it wasn't my thing because it was so cheesy. It was like, Kitch, you know, it's kind of like me as a Barbie or me as a you know, it was to cheesy. I wanted to go for like what's a real problem we can solve because this is going to be a hype. And it wasn't hype. This avatars. It's like let's do real photography. Like how can you make people look really photorealistic and that was difficult. And that's why it's off this world because they were all like in a cheesy, you know, Picasso style and art is easy because you interpret the all the problems that AI has with your face are like artistic, you know, if you call it Picasso. But if you make a real photo, all the problems with your face like it just you look wrong, you know. So I started making photo AI, which was like a pivot of it. It was like a photo studio where you could take photos without actually needing a photographer needing a studio. You don't just, you know, you just type it. And I've been working on it for like the last year. Yeah, it's really incredible. That journey is really incredible. Let's go to the beginning of photo AI though because I remember seeing a lot of really hilarious photos. I think you were using yourself as a case study, right? Yeah. Look what there's a tweet here sold $100,000 in AI generated avatars. And it's a lot like it's a lot for anybody. It's a lot for me like a 10k a day on this, you know, that's amazing. That's amazing. And then the nested tweet like the launched tweets and then the before there is like the me hacking on it. Oh, I see. So that. Okay. So October 26, 2022, I trained in a male model on my face. Because my eyes are quite far apart. I learned when I did YouTube, I would put like photo of like my DJ photo, you know, my make sure people would say I'd look like a hammerhead shark. It was like the top comments. So then I realized my eyes are far apart. Yeah, the internet helps you. Yeah, I've realized who you are. How you look, you know, boy, do I love the first trap? But what is this wait? It's water from the waterfall. But the waterfall is in the back, you know, so what's going on? So this is how much of this is real? It's all AI. It's all AI. That's pretty good though for the early days. Exactly. So, but this was hit or miss. So you had to do love curation because 99% of it was really bad. So these are the photos uploaded. How many photos did you use? Only these. I will try more up to date picks later. These are the, these are the only photos you uploaded. Wow. Wow. Okay. So like you were learning all this super quickly. What, what, what are some like interesting details you're memorable from that time for like what you have to figure out to make it work? And for people just listening, he uploaded just a, just a handful of photos that don't really have a good capture of the face. And he's able to, I think it's cropped. It's like a crop, but it, but the layout, but they're, they're square photos. So there are five, 12 by five, 12. Mm-hmm. Because I say diffusion. But nevertheless, not great capture of the face. Yeah. Like it's not, it's not like a collection of several hundred photos that are like. Exactly. I would, I would imagine that too when I started, I was like, oh, this must be like some treescan technology, right? Yeah. So I think the cool thing with it, it trains the concept of you. So it's literally like learning, just like any AI model learns, it learns how you look. So I did this and then I was getting so much, I was getting DMs like telegram messages like, how can I do the same thing? I want these photos. Mm-hmm. My girlfriend wants these photos. So I was like, okay, this is obviously a business. But I didn't have time to code it, make a whole like app about it. So I made a HTML page, um, ready to start the domain name. And this was not even, it was a striped payment link, which means you have a liturant link to stripe to pay, but there's no code in the back. So all you know is you have customers that paid money. Then I added like a, some, a type form link. So type form is a site where you can create like your own, um, input form like Google forms. So they would get an email with a link to the type form or actually just a link after the checkout and they could upload their photos. So enter the email, upload the photos and, um, and I launched it. And I was like here, first, still, there's October 2022. And I think we didn't like the first 24 hours was like, I'm not sure. It was like a thousand customers or something. Um, but the problem was I didn't have code to automate this. So I had to do manually. So the first few hundred, I just literally took their photos, uh, trained them. And then I would generate the photos with the problems and had this text follow the problems and I would do every manually. And this quickly became way too much. So, but that's another constraint. Like I was forced to code something up, uh, that would do that. And that was essentially making it into a real website. So first was the type form and they uploaded through the type form and image. And then you were like, that image is downloaded. Did you write a script to export? No, it's download images myself. It's a zip file on zip file. Are you unzipped it on? But yes. And then I'm, no, I'm because you know, do things don't skill. Paul Graham says, right? So, uh, and then I would trade it and then with email them the photos. I feel for my personal email. So here's your, here's your avatar. You know, and they liked it. They were like, was amazing. You emailed them with your personal email. Didn't have email address on this domain. And this is like a hundred people. Yeah. And then you know who signed up, uh, like a man, I cannot say, but really famous people, like really, really, like billionaires, famous tech billionaires did it. And I was like, wow, this is crazy. And I sent, I was like so scared to mess them. So I said, thanks so much for using my sites. You know, he's like, yeah, amazing app, great work. So it's like, this is different than normal reaction. You know, it's Bill Gates, isn't it? Can I say anything? Just like shirtless picture. GDPR, you know, like privacy, your opinion regulation. Right. And I'm sure anything. But I was very, I was like, wow. And, uh, but this shows like, so you make something. And then if it takes off very fast, you're like, it's validated. You know, you're like, here's something that people really want. But then also thought, this is hype. This is going to die down very fast. And I did because it's too cheesy. But you have to automate the whole thing. How do you automate it? So like, what's the AI component? Like, how hard was that to figure out? Okay. So that's actually, in many ways, the easiest thing, because there is all these platforms already back then, there was platforms for fine tune, still diffusion. Like now I use replicates back then, I use different platforms, um, which was funny because that platform, when this thing took off, I would tweet, because I tweet always like how much money these websites make. And then so did the, you called vendor, right? Did the, the platform that did the GPUs, the increase their price for training from $3 to $20. After they saw that I was making so much money. So immediately my profit is gone because I was selling them for $30. And I was in a slack with them, like saying, what is this? Like, can you just put it back to $3? And say, yeah, maybe in the future, we're looking at it right now. I'm like, what are you talking about? Like you just took all my money, you know, and they're smart. Well, they're not that smart because like, you also have a large, uh, platform. And a lot of people respect you. So you can literally come out and say that. Yeah. I think it's like kind of dirty to cancel a company or something. I prefer just bringing my business elsewhere, but there was no elsewhere back then. Right. So I started talking to other, um, AI model ML platforms. So we applied it on those platforms and I started DMing the CEO, say, can you please create, like it's called Dream Booth, this fine tuning of yourself. Can you add this to your side? Cause I need this because I'm being price-guysed. And he said, no, because it takes too long to run, takes half an hour to run. And we don't have the GPUs for it. I said, please, please, please. And then after a week, we said, we're doing it where launching this. And then this company became, it was like not very famous company. It became very famous with this stuff because suddenly everybody was like, oh, we can build similar apps like Alpha, apps and everybody started, they're like, then Alpha, apps and everybody started using replicates for it. Um, and I was from these early DMs with like the CEO, like Ben Ferris, very nice guy. And he was like, they never price, gosh, me, they never treat me bad. They always be very nice. It's a very cool company. So you can run any ML model, any AI model, LLMs, you can run on here and you can scale. Yes, they scale. Yeah, yeah. And I mean, you can do now, you can click on the model and just run it already. It's like super easy. You log in with GitHub. Um, that's great. And by running it on the website, then you can automate with the API. You can make a website that runs the model. Generate images, generate text, generate video, generate music, generate video, like fine, two models. They do anything. Yeah. It's very cool company. Nice. And you're like growing with them essentially. They grew because of you because it's like a big use case. Yeah. Like the, the website even looks weird now. It started as like a machine learning platform. That was like, I didn't even understand what it did. It was just two, two ML, you know, like you would understand it because you're in the ML world. I wouldn't know. It's new, but friendly. Yeah, exactly. And I didn't know how it worked. And, um, but I knew that they could probably do this. And they did it. They built the models and now I use them for everything. And we trained like, I think now like 36,000 models, 36,000 people already. But is there some tricks to fine tuning to like the collection of photos that are provided? Like how do you like? Yes. It's so many hacks. The hacks. It's like honored hacks to make it work. What is what? What is the secret? I will not not the secrets, but the more like insights, maybe about the human face and the human body. Like what kind of stuff get messed up a lot? I think people, man, it's a lot of people don't know how they look. So, um, yeah, they generate photos of themselves and then they say, ah, it doesn't look like me. Yeah. But it doesn't, you know, you can check the training for us. It does look like you, but you don't know how you look. So there's a face this morphia of yourself that you have known. Are you look? Yeah. That's hilarious. I mean, I've got to want to one of the least pleasant activities in my existence is having to listen to my voice and look at my face. So I get to like really, really have to sort of, uh, come in to terms with the reality of how I look and how I sound. And everybody. And but people often don't really really have a distorted view perspective. I know that like I would, if I would make a selfie, how I think I look that I, that's nice. Other people think that's not nice, but then they make a photo of me. I'm like, it's super ugly. But then I like, no, that's how you look and you look nice. You know, so how other people see you is nice. So you need to ask other people to choose your photos. Yeah. You shouldn't choose them yourself because you don't know how you look. Yeah, you don't know what makes you interesting. What makes you attractive and a lot of us, this is dark aspect of psychology. We focus on some small flaws. Yeah. This way I hate plastic surgery, for example, people tried to remove the flaws when the flaws are the thing that makes you interesting and attractive. I learned from the hammerhead shark eyes, this stuff about you that looks ugly to you. And it's probably that was makes you original makes you nice and people like it about you. Yeah. And it's not like, oh my God. And people noticed it. People noticed your hammerhead eyes, you know, but it's like, that's me. That's my face. So I love myself and that's confidence and confidence is attractive. Yes. Confidence is attractive. But yes, understanding what makes you beautiful. It's the breaking of symmetry. It makes you beautiful. It's the breaking of the the average face makes you beautiful. All that. Yeah. And obviously different from men and women and different ages, all this kind of stuff. Yeah. But be underneath it all, the personality, all of that when the face comes alive. That also is the thing that makes you beautiful. Yeah. But anyway, you have to figure all that out with the eye. Yeah. One thing that worked was like people would upload full body photos themselves. So I would crop the face, right? Because then in the model, new better that we're training mostly the face here. But then I started losing resemblance of the body. Because some people are skinny, some are muscular, whatever. So you want to have that too. So now I mix full body photos in the training with face photos, face crops. And it's all automatic. Like, and I know that other people they use again, AI models to detect like what are the best photos in this training set and then train on those. But it's all it's all about training data and it's with everything in AI. Like how good your training data is. Is in many ways more important than how many steps you train for like how many months or whatever with these GPUs like the gold. Do you have any guidelines for people of like how to get good data? How to give good data to find, you know? Like the photos should be diverse. So for example, if I only publish photos with a brown shirt or green shirts, the multiple thing that I'm training the green shirts. So the things that are the same every photo are the concepts that are trained. What you want is your face to be the concept of the strength. And everything else to be diverse, like different. So diverse lighting as well, diverse. Outside inside. But there's no like, this is the problem. There's no like manual for it is. And nobody knew we were all just, especially two years ago, we're all hacking trying to test anything, anything you can think of. And it's frustrating. It's one of the most frustrating and also fun and challenging things to do because with AI. Because it's a black box and like Carpati, I think says this like, we didn't really know how this thing works. But it does something. But nobody really knows why, right? Like we cannot look into the model of an LLM. Like what is actually in there? We just know it's like a treaty matrix of numbers, right? So it's very frustrating because some things you, there would be, you think they're obvious that they will improve things, will make it worse. And there's so many parameters you can tweak. So you're testing everything to improve things. I mean, there's a whole field now of mechanistic interpretability that like studies that tries to figure out, tries to break thing apart and understand how it works. But you know, there's also the data outside and the actual consumer facing product side of figuring out how you get it to generate anything that's beautiful or interesting or naturalistic, all that kind of stuff. And you're like at the forefront of figuring that out about the human face. And humans really care about the human face. They're very vain. Like me, you know, like I want to look good in your podcast, for example. Yeah, for sure. And then one of the things I actually would love to like rigorously use photo AI because for the thumbnails, I take portraits of people. I didn't know shit about photography. I basically used your approach for photography. I like Google, how do you take photographs? Yeah. Okay. Camera lighting. And also it's tough because maybe you could speak to this also, but like with photography, no offense, they're true artists, grief photographers. But like people like take themselves way too seriously. They think you need a whole lot of equipment. You definitely don't want one light. You need like five lights. And you have to have like the lenses. And I talked to a guy, an expert of shaping the sound in a room. Okay. And because I was thinking I was going to do a podcast studio, whatever I should probably like treat the sound, do a sound treatment on the room. And like when he showed up and analyzed the room, he thought everything I was doing was horrible. And that's when I realized like, you know what? I don't need experts in my life. I think it's not a house. I think you can go. I mean, I said, thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you for your tips. I just felt like there is, you know, focus on whatever the problems are. Use your own judgment. Use your own instincts. Don't listen to other people. And only consult other people when there's a specific problem. And you consult them not to all float the problem onto them, but to gain wisdom from their perspective. Even if their perspective is ultimately one you don't agree with, you're going to gain wisdom from that. And just I ultimately come up with a like a PHP solution. PHP and J query. So it's too much. So the PHP studio. I got a little suitcase. I use like just the basic sort of consumer type of stuff. One light. It's great. Yeah. And look at you. You're one of the top podcasts in the world. And you get millions of views. And it works. And the people that spend so much money on optimizing for the best sound for the best studio, they get like 300 views, you know? So what is this about? This is about that either you do it really well, or also that a lot of these things don't matter. Like what matters is probably the content of the podcast. Like you get the interesting guests focused on stuff that matters. Yeah. And I think this is very common. They call it gear acquisition syndrome. Like gas. Like people in any industry do this. They just buy all the stuff. There was a meme recently. Like what's the name for the guy that buys all the stuff before he even started doing the hobby, right? Marketing, you know, marketing does that to people they want to buy this stuff. Yeah. But like man, you can make a Hollywood movie on an iPhone, you know? If the content is good enough, it would probably be original because you would be using an iPhone for it, you know? So that said, I so the reason I brought that up with photography, there is wisdom from people. And one of the things I realized, you probably also realized this, but how much power light has to convey emotion. Did you just take one light and move it around? You're sitting in the dark and just move it around your face. The different positions are having a second light potentially. You can play with how a person feels just from a generic face. It's interesting. Like you can make people attractive. You can make them ugly. You can make them scary. You can make them lonely. All of this. And so you kind of start to realize this. I would definitely love AI help in creating great portraits of people. Guest photos, for example, I see small use case, but for me, that's a, I suppose it's an important use case because like I want people to look good, but I also want to capture who they are. Maybe my conception of who they are, what makes them beautiful, what makes their appearance powerful in some ways. Sometimes it's the eyes, oftentimes it's the eyes, but there are certain features of the face, and sometimes it'd be really powerful. And I can't, it's also kind of awkward for me to take. Photographs. So I'm not collecting enough photographs for myself to do it, who just those photographs. If I can load that off onto AI and then start to play with like lighting all that stuff. You should probably do it yourself. Like you can use photo yeah, but it's even more fun if you do it yourself. So you train the models, you can learn about like control nets. Control nets is where, for example, your photos in your podcast are usually like from the angle, right? So you can create a control net face pose that's always like this. So every model, every photo you generate uses this control net pose, for example. I think it will be very fun for you to try out that something. Do you play with lighting at all? Do you play with lighting with pose with the... Man, actually this, like this week recently, there's a new model came out that can adjust the light of any photo, but also AI image with stable diffusion. I think it's called relight. And it's amazing. Like you can, you can upload kind of like a light map. So, for example, red, purple, blue, and it uses that light map to change the light on the photo you input. It's amazing. So just for sure a lot of stuff you can do. What's your advice for people in general on how to learn all the state of the AI tools available? Like you mentioned, new models coming out all the time. Yeah, like what the, how do you pay attention? How do you stay on top of everything? I think you need to join Twitter X, you know, X is amazing now. And the whole AI industry is on X. And they're all like anime avatars. So it's funny because my friends ask me this, like, who should I follow to stay up to date? And I say go to X and follow all the AI anime models that this person is following or follows. And I send them something URL and they all start laughing. Like what is this? But they're real like people hacking around the AI. They get hired by big companies and they're on X. And most of them are anonymous. This is very funny. They use anime avatars. I don't. But those people hack around and they publish what they're discovering. They talk about papers, for example. So yeah, definitely X is great. I almost exclusively all the people I follow are AI people. Yeah. It's a good time now. Well, but also just brings happiness to my soul because they are so much turmoil on Twitter. Yeah, like politics and stuff. There's battles going on. It's like a war zone. And it's nice to just go into this happy place to where people are building stuff. Yeah. Yeah. I like Twitter for that most like building stuff. Like seeing other because it inspires you to build. And it's it's just fun to see other people share what they're discovering. And then you're like, okay, I'm going to make something to it's just super fun. And so if you want to start going X. And then I would go to replicate and start trying to play models. And when you have something that kind of you manual enter stuff, you set the parameters, someone that works, you can you can make a app out of it or a website. Can you speak a little bit more to the process of it becoming better and better and better photo? Yeah. So I had this photo guy and a lot of people using it. There was like a million or more photos a month being generated. And I discovered I was testing parameters like increase the step count of generating photo or changing the sampler like a scheduler. Like you have DPM, two caras, all these things. I don't know anything about that. But I know you can choose them in your general image and they have different resulting images. But I didn't know which one was were better. So I would do it myself tested. But I was like, why don't I test on these users? Because I have a million photos generated anyway. So unlike 10% of the users, I would randomly test parameters. And then I would see if they would because you can favor the photo or you can download it. I would measure if they favor it or like the photo. And then I would AB test and you test for significance and stuff. Which parameters were better and which were worse? So you started to figure out which models I actually worked on. Exactly. And then if it's significant enough data, you switched to that for the whole, you know, all the users. And so that was like the breakthrough to make it better. Just use the users to improve it themselves. And I tell them when they sign up, we do sampling, we do testing on your photos with random parameters. And that worked really well. I don't do a lot of testing anymore because it's like, I kind of reached like a diminishing point where it's like, it's kind of good. But that's there was a breakthrough. So it's really about the parameters and models that choose and letting the users help do the search in the space of models and parameters for you. Yeah. But actually, so like stable fusion, I used 1.5, 2 pin opic, came out as stable fusion excel, came out all these new versions. And they were all worse. And so the core scene of people are still using 1.5 because it's like, it's also not like what he called newturt, like they're newturt to make it super like with safety features and stuff. So most of the people are still on stable fusion 1.5 and maybe I'll stable diffusion the company when like the CEO left a lot of drama happens because they couldn't make money. And yeah, so they gave it, it's very interesting, they gave us this open source model that everybody uses. They raised like hundreds of millions of dollars. They didn't make any money with it, they're not a lot. They did an amazing job and now everybody uses open source model for free. And it's amazing, it's amazing. You're not even using the latest one. No, and the strange thing is that this company raised hundreds of millions, but the people that are benefiting from it are really small. People like me will make these small apps that are using the model. And now that it's turned to charge money for the new models, but the new models are not so good for people that are not so open source. Yeah, it's interesting because open source is so impactful in AI space, but you wonder like what is the business model behind that. But it's enabling this whole ecosystem of companies that they're using the open source model. It's kind of like this framework, but then they didn't bribe enough, implement to use it. And they didn't charge money for the platform, you know. Okay, so back to your book and the ideas. What did you get to the first step? Generating ideas. So you had no book and you filling it up. How do you know when ideas are good one? Like what? You have this just flood of ideas. How do you pick the one that you actually try to build? Man, mostly you don't know. Like mostly I choose the ones that are most viable for me to build. Like I cannot build a space company now, right? Would be quite challenging. But I can build something to actually write down like space company. No, I think asteroid mining would be very cool. Because like you go to an asteroid, you take some stuff from there, you bring it back, you sell it, you know, it's. But then you need to do and you can hire someone to launch the thing. So all you need is like the robot that goes to the asteroid. You know, and the robotics interesting. Like I want to also learn robotics. So maybe that could be. I think both the asteroid mining and the robotics is together. You're like, no, exactly this is. This is the. We do this not because it's easy, but because we thought it would be easy. Exactly. That's me with this me with asteroid mining. Exactly. That's why I should do this. It's not nomadlist.com. No, it's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. You have to like build stuff. You have to. Gravity is really hard to overcome. Yeah, but it seems man, I sound like it is probably not, but it sounds quite approachable, like relatively approachable. You don't have to build the rocket. But oh, you use something like space. You're higher space X to send your. You're, you know, this dog robot or whatever. So is there actually existing notebook where you wrote down asteroid mining? No, I used back then used Trello Trello. Yeah, but now I don't really. I used Telegram. I rather than like save messages and I have like idea. I read it down to yourself on tell. You know, like because you use what's that, right? I think so you have like message to yourself. I think also. Yeah. So you talk to yourself on telegram. Yeah, use like a note that's not forget stuff. And then I've been it's, you know, I love hope. Like you're not using super complicated systems or whatever. You know, people use obsidian now. There's a lot of these. A notion that we have systems for note taking. You're not your notepad. You're notepad.dexigay. If those users, man, I saw some YouTubers doing this like. There's a lot of these productivity gurus also. And they do this whole like iPad with a pencil. And then I also had an iPad and I also got the pencil. And I got this app where you can like draw on paper like. Draw like a calendar, you know, like people's students use this. And you can do coloring and stuff. And I'm like, dude, I did this for a week. And I'm like, what am I doing my life? Like I can just write it as a message to myself. And it's good enough, you know? Speaking of ideas, you shared a tweet explaining why the first idea sometimes might be a brilliant idea. The reason for this, you think is the first idea submerges from your subconscious. And it was actually boiling your brain for weeks, most sometimes years in the background. They ate hours of thinking can never compete with the perpetual subconscious background job. So this is the idea that if you think about an idea for eight hours versus like the first idea that pops into your mind. Yeah. And sometimes there is subconscious like stuff that you've been thinking about for many years. That's really interesting. It emerges. I wrote it wrong because I don't know. I'm not native English, but it emerges from your subconscious, right? It comes from the like a water. It's just subconscious in here. It's boiling and then when it's ready, it's like thing. And second microwave comes out. And there you have your idea. You think you have ideas like that? Yeah. All the time. Harbson. There's just stuff that's been like there. Yes. Yeah. And I also, it comes up and I bring it a center back, you know, like center back to the kitchen. Not ready. To boil more. And it's like a soup that of ideas that's cooking. It's a hundred percent. This is how my brain works. And I think most people, but it's also about the the timing. Sometimes you have to send it back not just because you're not ready, but the world is not ready. Yes. So many times like startups are too early with their idea. Yeah. Harbson. Robotics is an interesting one for that because like there's been a lot of robotics companies that failed. Yeah. Because it's been very difficult to build a robot. It's company make money because there's the manufacturing like the cost of everything. The intelligence of the robot is enough. It's not sufficient to create a compelling enough product from which to make money. So all the, so there's this long line of robotics companies that've tried their big dreams and they failed. Yeah, like Boston Dynamics. I still know what they're doing, but they always upload YouTube videos. And it's amazing. But I feel like a lot of these companies don't have a, it's like a solution look for a problem for now. You know, military obviously is uses. But like, and do I need like a robotic dog now for my house? I don't know. Like it's fun, but it doesn't really solve anything yet. I feel the same kind of VR. Like it's really cool. Appalvation Pro is very cool. It doesn't really solve something for me yet. And that's kind of the tech looking for a solution, right? But one day will when the personal computer when the Mac came along, there's a big switch that happened. It's somehow captivated everybody's imagination. You could like the application of killer apps became apparent that you can type in a computer. But did they become apparent like immediately? Back then they also had like this thing, we like, we don't need these computers. They're like a hype and and it also went like in kind of like, you know, ways. Yeah, but the hype is the thing that allowed the thing to proliferate sufficiently to where people's minds would start opening up to it a little bit. The possibility of it. Right now, for example, with the robotics, there's very few robots in the homes of people. Exactly. The robots that are there are rumbers, sort of vacuum cleaners, or they're Amazon Alexa. Yeah, but the dishwasher, I mean, it's essentially a robot. Yes, but the intelligence is very limited, I guess, is one way we can summarize all of them. Except Alexa, which is pretty intelligent, but is limited with the kind of ways it interacts with you. It's, you know, that's just one example. Yeah. And sometimes think about that is like, some people in this world were kind of born in the whole existence is like, they were meant to build the thing. Yeah. You know, I guess sometimes wonder like what might, what I was meant to do. If you have these plans for your life, you have these dreams. I mean, I meant to build robots. Okay, me first. Maybe, maybe that's the sense of, of, of habit. It could be other things. Hilarious enough be the thing I was meant to be is to talk to people. Yeah. Which is weird because I always was anxious about talking to people. It's like a really. Yeah, I'm scared of this. I was scared. Yeah, exactly. I'm scared of you. It's just anxiety throughout social interaction in general. I'm an introvert that hides from the world. So yeah, it's really strange. Yeah, but that's also kind of life. Like life brings you to, it's very hard to super intently kind of choose what you're going to do with your life. It's more like surfing. You're surfing the waves. You go on the ocean. You see where you end up. You know? Yeah. Yeah. And there's universe has a kind of sense of humor. Yeah. I guess you have to just, yeah, allow yourself to be carried away by the way. Exactly. Yeah. Have you felt that way in your life? Yeah, all the time. Like yeah, that's like, I think that's the best way to live your life. So a lot, whatever to happen. Like do you know what you're doing the next few years? Is it possible that it'll be completely like changed? Possibly. I think relationships, like you want to hold the relationships, right? You want to hold your girlfriend. You want to become wife and all this stuff. But you should, I think you should stay open to where, like for example, where you want to live. Like I don't know. We don't know where we want to live, for example. That's something that will figure itself out. It will crystallize where you will get sent by the waves to somewhere where you want to live, for example. What are you going to do? I think that's a really good way to live your life. It's, I think most stress comes from trying to control, like hold things, like it's kind of Buddhist. You know, you need to like lose control that it lose. And then things will happen. Like when you do mushrooms, when you do drugs, like psychedelic drugs, the people that start that are like control freaks get bad trips, right? Because you need to let go. Like I'm pretty controlled freak, actually. And when I did mushrooms, when I was 17, I was very good. And at the end, it wasn't so good because I tried to control. It was like, ah, now it's going too much. You know, now I need to let stop. Bro, you can't stop. You need to go true with it, you know? And I think it's a good metaphor for life. I think that's a very tranquil way to lead your life. Yeah, actually when I took a high Alaska, that lesson is deeply within me already. They can't control anything. I think I probably learned that the most in Jiu-Jitsu. So just let go and relax. Yeah. And that's why I had just an incredible experience. There's like literally no negative aspect of my I wasca experience or any psychedelic I've ever had. Some of that could be with my biology, my genetics, whatever, but some of it was just not trying to control. Yeah, just surf the way. For sure. I think most stress in life comes from trying to control. So once you have the idea, step two, build. How do you think about building the thing? What's the idea? I think you should build with the technology that you know. So for example, Nomad lists, which is like this website I made to figure out the best cities to live and work as digital nomads. It wasn't a website. It launched as a Google spreadsheet. So it was a public Google spreadsheet. Anybody could edit. And I was like, I'm collecting cities where we can live as these nomads with the internet speeds, the cost of living, other stuff. And I tweeted it and I would, and I'd back then I didn't have a lot of followers. I had like a few thousand followers or something. And it went like viral for my skill viral back then, which was like five retweets. And a lot of people started editing it. And there was like hundreds of cities in this list, like from all of the world with all the data. It was very crowdsourced. And then I made that into a website. So figuring out like what technology can use that you already know. So if you cannot code, you can use a spreadsheet. If you cannot use a spreadsheet, like whatever you can always use a, for example, a website generated like weeks or somewhere square space, right? You don't need to code to build a startup. All you need is an idea for a product, build something like a landing page or something, put a striped button on there and then make it. And if you can code, use the language that you already know and start coding with that and see how far you can get. You can always rewrite the code later. Like the text tag is not actually the... It's not the most important of a business when you start on a business. The important thing is that you validate that there's a market, that there's a product that people want to pay for. So use whatever you can use. And if you cannot code, use, you know, spreadsheets, landing page generators, whatever. Yeah. And the crowdsourcing element is fascinating. It's cool. It's cool when a lot of people start using it. You get to learn so fast. Like I've actually... Did the spreadsheet thing. You share a spreadsheet publicly. And I made it editable. Yeah. It's so cool. It's interesting things start happening. Yeah. I did it for like a workout thing because I was doing a large amount of push-ups and pull-ups and I remember this. And like... And while I was at Google Sheets, it's pretty limited in that everything's allowed. So people could just write anything in any cell and they can create new sheets, new tabs. And it just exploded. And one of the things that I really enjoyed is there's very few trolls. Because actually other people would delete the trolls. There would be like this weird war of like... Of they want like to protect the thing. It's an immune system that's inherent to the thing... It comes to society, you know? It's spreadsheets. And then there's the outcast who go to the bottom of the spreadsheet and they would try to hide messages. Like I don't want to be with the cool kids up at the top of the spreadsheet. So I'm going to go to the bottom. I'm going to... Yeah. It's interesting. It's fast. I mean, but that kind of crowdsourcing element is really powerful. And if you can create a product that used that as a... To his benefit, that's really nice. Like any kind of voting system, any kind of rating system for A and B testing is really, really, really fascinating. So anyway, so Nomad List is great. I would love for you to talk about that. But one sort of way to talk about it is... Through you building hood maps. Yeah. So you did an awesome thing which is to document yourself building the thing and doing so in just a handful of days, like three, four, five days. So people should definitely check out the video in the blog post. Can you explain what hood maps is and what this whole, like, this process was? So I was traveling and I was still trying to find like problems, right? And I would go... I would discover it as like everybody's experience of a city is different because they say in different areas. Yeah. So I'm from Amsterdam and when I grew up, in Amsterdam, or didn't grow up, I lived there. University, I knew that the center is like... Europe, the centers are always tourist areas. So they're super busy. They're not very authentic. The cult, they're not really Dutch culture. It's Amsterdam tourist culture, you know? So when people would travel to Amsterdam and say, don't go to the center, go to, you know, Southeast, of the center, the Yordan or the pipe or something. More hipster areas, like a little more authentic culture of Amsterdam. That's where I would live, you know, and where I would go. And I thought this could be like an app where you can have like a Google Maps. And you put colors over it. You have like areas that are like color-colored, like red as tourists. Green is rich, you know, green money. Yellow is hipster. You can figure out where you need to go in a city where you travel because I was traveling a lot. I wanted to go to the cool spots. So just use color. Color, yeah. And I would use a canvas. So I thought like, what do I need? I need to... Did you know that you would be using a canvas? No, I didn't know it was possible. I said, I didn't know. So this is a cool thing. People should really check it out. Is this how it started? Because like, you're honestly captured so beautifully, the humbling aspects, the embarrassing aspects of like not knowing what to do. So like, how do I do this? And you like document yourself. Yeah, you're right. Dude, I feel embarrassed about myself. It's called being alive. Nice. So you're like, you don't know anything about... Canvas is a way... Yes, HTML, five... thing that allows you to draw... Shit. Draw images. Just draw pixels essentially. So... Yeah. And that's... There was special back then because before you could only have like elements, right? So you want to draw a pixel, use a canvas. And I knew I needed to draw pixels because I needed to draw these colors. And I thought like, okay, I'll get like a Google Maps, iFrame and Bats. And then I'll put a div on top of it with the colors and I'll do like opacity 50, you know? So it kind of shows. So I did that with canvas and then I started drawing. And then I thought like, obviously other people need to edit this because I cannot draw all these things myself. So I crowdsource it again and I... You would draw on the map and then it would send the pixel data to the server, put it in the database. And then I would have a robot running like a cron job which every week would calculate or every day would calculate like, okay, so Amazon Center, there's like, six people say it's tourist, this part of the center. But two people say it's like hipster. Okay, so the tourist part wins, right? It's just an array. So find the most common value in a little pixel area on the map. So that, so most people say it's tourist, it's tourist and it comes red. And I would do that for, you know, all the GPS corners in the world. Can you just clarify, do you have to be as a human that's contributing to this? Do you have to be in that location to make the label? No, people just type in cities and go like, go berserk and start drawing everywhere. Would they draw shapes? Would they draw pics? Man, it drew like crazy stuff. Like offensive symbols I cannot mention, they would draw penises. I mean, that's, that's obviously a guy. I would do the same thing, draw penises. That's the first thing when I show up to Mars and there's no cameras. I'm drawing penises on the same thing. Man, I did it in the snow, you know, but the penises did not become a problem because I knew that not everybody would draw a penis and not in the same place. So most people would use it fairly. So just if I had enough crowds for data, so you have all these pixels on top of it, it's like a layer of pixels. And then you choose the most common pixel. So yeah, it's just like a bowl, but in visual formats. And it worked. And we didn't week out enough data. And it was like cities that did really well, like Los Angeles. A lot of people started using it, like most data's in Los Angeles. Because Los Angeles has defined neighborhoods. Yeah, and not just in terms of the, the official labels, but like what they're known for. What are the, Duke, did you provide the categories that they were allowed to use as labels? The colors, yeah. Oh, it's colors. So it's just like, I think you can see there's like hipster, tourist, rich, business. There's always a business area, right? And then there's a residential. The residential is gray. So I thought those were the most common things in the city, kind of. And a little bit Mimi, like it's almost fun to label it. Yeah, I mean, obviously it's simplified. But you need to simplify this stuff. You know, you don't want to have too many categories. And it's essentially just like, like using a, you know, paintbrush where you select the color in the bottle, you select the category, and you start drawing. There's no instruction. There's no manual. And then I also added tagging, so people could like, write something on a specific location. So don't go here or like, here's like a nice cafe and stuff. And man, the memes that came from that. And I also added up voting so that the tags could be upvoted. So the memes that came from that is like, amazing. Like people in those anxious would write crazy stuff. It would go viral in all these cities. You can allow, allow your location. And it will probably send you to Austin. Okay, so we're looking. Boy, drunk hipsters. Airbro and bros. Airbro and bros. Hipster girls who do cocaine. I saw a guy in a fish costume. You got beaten up here. Yep. That seems also accurate. Overpriced and underwhelming. Let me see. Let me make sure this is accurate. Let's see. 36th for people who know Austin know that that's important to label. Sixth street is famous in Austin. 36th drunk fat boys. Accurate. Drunk fat bros. Continue on six very well. One that was six drunk douche bros. So for Fred to douche douche. I mean, it's very accurate. So for the first time, douche, I mean, it's very accurate so far. They only let hot people live here. That's. I think that might be accurate. It's like the district. Because that's freaks on the river. Yeah, that's true. Dog runners accurate. Saw a guy in a fish costume. Get beat up here. I want to know this story. So that's that's all user contributed. Yeah, and this like stuff I couldn't come up with because I don't know Austin. I don't know the memes. The self-cultures. And then me as a user can upload or download this. So this is completely common source. It's like because of Reddit, you know, upload down. And that's really really really powerful. Single people dog accurate. At which point did it go from colors to the actually show in the text? I figured out of the text like a week a week after. So here's like the pixels. So that's really cool. The pixels. How do you go from that? That's a huge amount of data. So there's yeah, we'll now look at an image where it's just a sea of pixels that call it different colors in a city. So how do you combine that to be a thing that actually makes it some sense? I think here the problem was that you have this data, but it's like it's not locked to one location. Yeah. So I had to normalize it. So when you click when you draw on the map, it will show you the specific pixel location. And then you can convert the pixel location to a GPS coordinate, like a ladder is longer to it. But the number will have a lot of commas or a lot of decimals, right? Because it's very specific. Like it's like this specific part of the table. So what you want to do is you want to take that pixel and you want to normalize it by removing like decimals, which I discovered. So that you're talking about this neighborhood, this or this street, right? So that's what I did. I just took the decimals off and then I saved it like this. And then it starts going to like a grid. And then you have like a grid of data. You get like a pixel map kind of. And you said it looks kind of ugly. So then you smooth it. Yeah, I started adding blurring and stuff. I think now it's not smooth again because I like it better. People like the pixel look kind of. Yeah, a lot of people use it and it keeps going viral. And every time my maps bill, like map box, I had to stop using a first use Google Maps. It went viral and Google Maps, it was out of credits. So I and I had to so fun. During when I launched it went viral. Google Maps, the map didn't load anymore. It says over the limit. You need to contact enterprise sales. And I'm like, but I need now like a map. So and I don't want to contact enterprise sales. I don't want to go and call scheduled with some counter. So I switched to map box and then I had map box for years and then it went viral and I had a bill of $20,000 was like last year. So they helped me with the bill. They said, you know, you can pay less. And then I now switched to like an open source kind of map platform. So it's very expensive products and never made any dollar money. But it's very fun. But it's very expensive. What do you learn from that? So like, from that experience, because when you leverage somebody else's through the API, yeah, I mean, I don't think a map hosting service should cause this much, you know, but I could host it myself, but that would be, I don't know how to do that, you know, but I could do that. Yes, super complicated. I think the thing is more about like you can't make money with this product. I tried to do many things to make money with it and it's it's, it hasn't worked. You talked about like possibly doing advertisements on it or some, somehow, but or people sponsoring it. Yeah. But it's really surprising to me that people don't want to advertise on it. I think map apps are very hard to like monetize. Like Google Maps also doesn't really make money. Like some of the GCDs ads, but I don't think there's a lot of money there. You could put like a banner ad that's kind of ugly. And the price is kind of like, it's kind of cool. So it's kind of fun to like subsidize it. It's kind of a little bit part of no-mind list. Like I put it on no-mind list in the cities as well. But I also realized like you don't need to monetize everything. Like some products are just cool. And you know, it's like it's cool to have hoodmaps exist. I want this to exist, right? Yeah, there's a bunch of stuff you've created that I'm just glad exists in this world. That's true. And so, a whole other puzzle and I'm surprised to figure out how to make money out of it. I'm surprised maps don't make money, but you're right. It's hard. It's hard to make money. Because there's a lot of compute required to actually bring it to life. And also, where do you put the ad? Right? Like if you have a website, you can put like an ad box or you can do like a product placement or something. But you talk about a map app that where 90% of the interface is a map. So what are you going to do? You're going to like, it's hard to figure out where it's this. Yeah. And people don't want to pay for it. No, exactly. Because if you make people pay for it, you lose 99% of the user base and you lose the crowdsource data. So it's not fun anymore. It stops being accurate, right? So you kind of, they pay for it by crowdsourcing the data. But then, yeah, it's fine. It doesn't make money, but it's cool. But that said, no mad list makes money. Yeah. So what was the story behind no mad list? So no mad list started because I was in Chiang Mai in Thailand, which is now like the second city here. And I was, you know, working on my laptop. I met like other nomads there and I was like, okay, this seems like a cool thing to do. Like working in a laptop in a different country, kind of travel around. But back then, the internet everywhere was very slow. So the internet was fast. And for example, Holland or United States, but in a lot of parts in, you know, South America or Asia was very slow, like 0.5 megabits. So you couldn't watch a YouTube video. Thailand weirdly had like quite fast internet. But I wanted to find like other cities where I could go to like work on my laptop, whatever, and travel. But we needed like fast internet. So I was like, let's, you know, crowdsource this information with a spreadsheet. And I also needed to know the cost of living because I didn't have a lot of money. I had $500 a month. So I had to find a place where like the rent was like, you know, $200 from offers. And we had, you know, some money that I could actually rent something. And there was no med lists and it still runs. It's not, I think it's now almost 10 years. So it's just a describe how it works. I'm looking at my here. There's a total score. It's ranked number two. Yeah, it's like a number score 4.82, like by members, but it's looking at the internet. In this case, it's fast. Yeah, fun, temperature, humidity, air quality, safety, food safety, crime, racism, or lack of crime, lack of racism, educational level, power grid, vulnerability, the climate change income level. It's a little much, you know, English speed. It's awesome. It's awesome. Walkability. Keep getting stuff. Because for certain groups of people, certain things really matter. And this is really cool. Happiness that I'd love to ask about that. That life, free Wi-Fi, AC, female friendly, freedom of speech. And not so good in time, you know, values derived from national statistics, why for? I like how bad one. I need to do it because the data sets are usually national. They're not on city level, right? So I don't know about the freedom of speech between Bangkok or Chiang Mai. I know it in Thailand. I mean, this is really fascinating. So this is for city. It's basically rating all the different things that matter to the internet. And this is all crowdsourced. Well, so started crowdsourced. But then I realized that you can download more accurate data sets from like public source, like World Bank. They have a lot of public data sets, United Nations. And you can download a lot of data there, which you can freely use. Like I started getting problems with crowdsourced data, where, for example, people from India, they really love India. And they would submit the best scores for everything in India. And not just like one person, but like a lot of people, they would love to pump India. And I'm like, I love India too, you know, but that's not valid data. So you started getting discrepancies in the data between people where people wear from and stuff. So I started speaking to data sets. And now it's mostly data sets. But one thing that still crowdsource is, so people add where they are, they add their travels to their profile. And I use that data to see which place are upcoming and which places are popular now. So about half the ranking you see here is based on actual digital nomads who are there. You can click on a city, you can click on people, you can see the people, the users that are actually there. And it's like 30,000 or 40,000 members. So these people are in Austin now. And 1800 remote workers in Austin now, which 8 plus members check in. Members who will be here soon. And go, yeah, so we have meetups. So people organize their own meetups. And we have about, I think like, 30 per month. So it's like one meetup a day. And I don't do anything. They organize themselves. So I just, it's a whole black box. It just runs. And I don't do a lot on it. It pulls data from everywhere and it just works. Cons of Austin is too expensive, very sweating, human knowledge, difficult to make friends. Yeah, difficult to make friends. Interesting, right? I didn't know that. Difficult to make friends. And with this all crowdsource, but mostly it's pros. Yeah, Austin very fast internet. I understand why it says not say for women. Did you check the data set? It's still safe. The problem with a lot of plays like United States is that it depends per area, right? So if you get like city level data or nation level data, it's like Brazil is the worst because the range in like safe and wealthy and not safe is like huge. So you can't say many things about Brazil. So once I actually show up to say, how do you figure out what what area like where to get fast internet? For example, like for me, it's all consistently a struggle to figure out. My school hotels with fast wifi, for example, like a place. Okay, okay. I show up to a city. There's a lot of fascinating puzzles. And I haven't figured out a way to actually solve this puzzle. When I show up to a city figuring out where I can get fast internet connection. And for podcasting purposes where I can find a place with a table that's quiet. Right. That's not easy. Construction sounds? All kinds of sounds. You get to learn about all the sources of sounds in the world. And also like the quality of the room because the more the empty are the room. And like if it's just walls without any curtains or any of this kind of stuff, then there's or echoes in the room. Anyway, but you figure out that a lot of hotels don't have tables. They don't have like normal. It's weird desk, right? Yeah, they have it's not a center table. Yep. And if you want to get a nicer hotel, whether it's more spacious and so on, they usually have these like boutique, fancy looking like modernist tables. They don't do design. They're not real tables. What if you get a key? Buy a key. Yeah, before you arrive, you order a key. Like no, my students, they get desks. I feel like you should be able to show up to a place and have the desk. Like it's not unless you stay there for a long time. Just the entire assembly or that. Airbnb is so unreliable. It's the the the ranging quality that you get is huge. Hotels have a lot of problems, pros and cons. Like hotels have the problem that the pictures somehow never have good representative pictures of what's actually going to be in the rooms. And that's a problem. And you fake photos, man. If I could have the kind of data you have on nomad list for hotels, yeah, man, I would and I feel like you can make a lot of money on that too. Yeah, the booking fees, the fillings, right? I thought about this idea because we have the same problem. Like I go to hotels and there's specific ones that are very good and I know now the chains and stuff. But even if you go to some chains are very bad in a specific city and very good in other cities. And each individual hotel has a lot of kinds of rooms. Yeah, like you someone more expensive, some cheaper and so on. But you can get the details of what's in the room, like what's the actual layout of the room? What is the view of the room? I feel like as a hotel, you can win a lot. So first you create a service that allows you to have like high resolution data about a hotel. Then one hotel sign signs up for that. I would 100% use that website to look for a hotel instead of the crappy alternatives that don't give any information. And I feel like there'll be this pressure for all the hotels to join that site. And you can make a shit ton of money because hotels make a lot of money. I think it's true. But the problem is with these hotels, like it's same with airline industry. Why does every airline website suck when you try book a flight? It's very strange. Why doesn't have to suck? Obviously, there's competition here. Why doesn't the best website win? What's the explanation for that? Man, I thought about this for years. So I think it's like, I have to book the flight anyway. Like I know there's a route that they take. And I need to book for example Qatar airlines. And I need to get through this process. And with hotel simmers, you need a hotel anyway. So do you have time to figure out the best one? Not really. You kind of just need to get the place booked. And you know, you need to get the flight. And you'll go through the pain of this process. And that's why this process always sucks so much with hotels and airline websites and stuff. Because they don't have any incentive to improve it. Because generally, only for like a super opera segment of the market, I think like super high luxury, it affects the actual booking, right? I don't know. I think that's a good interesting theory. I think that must be a different theory. My theory will be that great engineers, like great software engineers are not a lot to make changes. Yeah, basically like there's some kind of bureaucracy. There's way too many managers. There's a lot of bureaucracy. And great engineers show up to try to work there. And they get there not a lot to really make any contributions than they leave. And so you have a lot of mediocre software engineers. They're not really interested in improving any other thing. And like literally they would like to improve the stuff. But the bureaucracy of the place plus all the bosses, all the higher people are not technical people probably. They don't know much about what web dev, they don't know much about programming. So they just don't give any respect. You have to give the freedom and the respect to great engineers as they try to do great things. That feels like an explanation. Like if you were a great programmer, would you want to work at America Airlines? No. I'm torn on that. I actually, as somebody who lost program, would love to work at America Airlines. So I can make the thing better. Yeah, but I would work there just to fix it for myself, you know? Yeah, for yourself. And then you just know how much suffering you were alleviated. How much for a specific society. Just all you imagine, all the thousands, maybe millions of people that go to that website, and have to click like a million times. It often doesn't work. It's clunky, all that kind of stuff. You're making their life just so much better. Yeah, but there must be an explanation. That's to do with managers and bureaucracies. I don't. I think it's money. Do you know booking.com? Sure. So it's the book. It's the biggest book in the world. It's Dutch actually. And they have teams, because my friend worked that. They have teams for a specific part of the website, like a 10 by 10 pixels area, where they run tests on this. So they run tests like, and they're famous for this stuff. Like, oh, there's only one room left, right? Which is red letters. One room left, book now. And they got to find from the European Union about this. Kind of interesting. So they have all these teams, and they run the tests for 24 hours. They go to sleep, they wake up next, then they come to the office, and they see, okay, this performed better. This website has become a monster, but it's the most revenue generating hotel, booking website in the world. It's number one. So that shows that it's not about like user experience. It's about like, I don't know, about making more money. Not every company, but you know, if they're optimizing, it's a public company. If they're optimizing for money, but you can optimize for money by disrupting, like making it way better. Yeah, but it's always start. If they start with disrupting, like booking, it'll start at the start of 1997. And then they become like the old shit again. Like, you know, Uber now starts to become like a taxi again, right? It was very good in the beginning. Now it's kind of like, taxi's now in many places are better. They're nicer than Uber's, right? So it's like the circle. I think some of it is also just, it's hard to have ultra competent engineers. Like, stripe seems like a trivial thing, but it's hard to pull off. Like, why was it so hard for Amazon to have buy with one click? Do you think it's a genius idea? Make buying easier. Like, make it as frictional as possible. Just click about one thing you bought the thing. As opposed to most of the web was a lot of clicking. And it often doesn't work like with the airlines. Remember the forums would delete you could like next submit and with four or four or something or your internet would go down. Yeah, your modem. Yeah, man. And I would have an existential crisis. Like, the frustration would take over my whole body. And I would just wanted to quit life for a brief moment there. Yeah. I'm so happy to form stays in Google Chrome now when someone goes wrong. But that's so Google somebody at Google improved society with that, right? Yeah. And one of the challenges of Google is to have the freedom to do that. They don't anymore. There's a bunch of bureaucracy. Yeah. There's so many brilliant, brilliant people there. But it just moves slowly. Yeah. I wonder why that is. Maybe that's the natural way of a company. But you have people like Elon who rolls in and just fires most of the folks and always operate. They push the company to operate as a startup. People in what's already big. Yeah, but I mean, Apple does this. Like I started in business school. Apple does competing product teams that operate at startups. So it's three to five people. They make something they have multiple teams to make the same thing. The best team wins. So you need to, I think you need to emulate like a free market inside a company to make it entrepreneurial, you know? Yeah. You need entrepreneurial mentality in a company to come up with new ideas and do it better. So one of the things you do really, really well is learn and you think. Like you're trying to, you have an idea, you try to build it. And then you learn everything you need to in order to build it. You have your current skills, but you need to learn just the minimal model stuff. So you're a good person to ask like, what? How do you learn? How do you learn quickly and effectively and just the stuff you need? You did just by way of example, you did a 30 days learning session on 3D. Yeah. Were you documented yourself giving yourself only 30 days to learn everything you can about? Yeah, I tried to learn virtual reality because I was like, this was like same as AI. It came up suddenly like 2016 to 2017 with I think HEC Vive. This big VR glasses before Appolvation Pro. And so I was like, oh, this is going to be big. So I need to learn this. So I know nothing about 3D. I installed like, I think Unity and like, blend their stuff and I started learning all the stuff. Because I thought this was like a new, you know, nascent technology that was going to be big. And if I had to skills for it, I could use this to build stuff. And so I think learning for me is like, I think learning is so fun. Because people always ask me like, how do I, how do you learn to code? Like should I learn to code? And I'm like, I don't know, like I'm, every day I'm learning this kind of cliche, but every day I'm learning new stuff. So every day I'm searching on Google or asking out chat GPT, how to do this thing? How to do this thing? Every day I'm getting better at my skill. So you never stop learning. So the whole concept of like, how do you learn? Well, you never ends. So where do you want to be? Do you want to know a little bit? Do you want to know a lot? Do you want to do it for your whole life? So I think taking action is the best step to learn. So making things like you know nothing. Just start making things. Okay. So like how to make a website search, how to make a website? Or now it is you ask chat GPT, how do I make a website? Where do I start? It generates codes for you, right? Copy the code, put it in a file, save it, open it in Google Chrome or whatever. You have a website. And then you start tweaking with it and you start, okay, how do I add a bot and how do I add AI features, right? Like nowadays. So it's like by taking action, you can learn stuff much faster than reading books or like some more curious. Let me ask for complexity. How do I make a website? I'm just curious what it would say. I hope it goes with like really basic vanilla solutions. To find your website's purpose, choose a domain name, select the web hosting provider, choose a website or builder or CMS. Website build a platform which tells like weeks or squares spaces what I said. Yeah. And landing page. What do I, how do I say if I want to programming it, program it myself, design your website, create essential pages? Even tell city launches, right? Like start launching. Why would you say, cool, why do you do that? Yeah, but this is literally it. Like it's, this is if you want to make a one, this is the basis like Google analytics, but you can't make no mad list with this way. You can with wicks like with, no, you can get pretty far. I think you can get pretty far. These websites are pretty advanced. Like when you do this is a grid of images, right? Yeah, that are clickable, that open like another page. Yeah, you can get quite far. How do I learn the program? Choose a programming language to start with. If free, podcast good. Work through a resource systematically. Practice calling regularly for 30, 60 minutes a day. Consistency, skeet, joint programming communities like reddits. Yeah. Yeah, it's pretty, it's pretty good. Yeah, it's pretty good. So I think it's, it's a very good starting ground because imagine you know nothing and you want to make a website. You want to make a startup. This is like, that's why the, man, the power of AI for education is going to be insane. Like people anywhere I can, can ask this question and start building stuff. Yeah, clarifies it for sure. And just start building. Like keep, yeah, build build. Like actually apply the thing. Whether it's AI or any of the programming for web development. Yeah, just have a project in mind. I love the idea of like, 12 stars in 12 months or like, like, build a project almost every day. Yeah. Just build the thing and get it to work and finish it every single day. That's a cool experiment. I think that was inspiration. There was a girl who did 160 websites and 160 days or something, literally mini websites. Yeah. And she learned to code that way. So I think it's good to set yourself challenges, you know? Like don't, you can go to some coding bootcamp, but I don't think they actually work. I think it's better to do like, for me, I'll do the doc itself learning and setting yourself like challenges and just getting in, but you need discipline, you know, you need to discipline to keep doing it. And coding, you know, coding is very, it's a steep learning curve to get in. It's very annoying. Working with computers is very annoying. So it can be hard for people to keep doing it now. Yeah, that thing of just keep doing it. And don't quit that urgency that's required to finish a thing. That's what it's really powerful when you documented this, the creation of hoodmaps, or though like a working prototype, that there's just a constant frustration, I guess, is like, how do I do this? And then you look it up and you know, like, okay, you have to interpret the different options you have. You're like, and then just try it. And then, and then there's a dopamine rush of like, oh, it works. Man, it's amazing. And it's on a live stream, dude. It's on YouTube and stuff. People can watch it and it's amazing when things work. It's just like a main that you, I look very, I don't look far ahead. So I only look, okay, what's the next problem to solve? And then the next problem. And at the end, you have a whole app or website or thing, you know? But I think most people look way too far ahead. You know, they look like this poster again. Like you shouldn't, you don't know how hard it's going to be. So you should only look like for the next thing, the next little challenge, the next step. And then see where you end up. And assume it's going to be easy. Yeah, exactly. Like being naive about it because it's, you're going to have very difficult problems. A lot of the big problems won't be even tech. We'll be like public, right? Like maybe people don't like your website. Like, you will get canceled for a website, for example. Like a lot of things can happen. What's it like building in public like you do? Like openly, we're just iterating quickly and you're getting people to see back. So there's the power of the crowdsourcing, but there's also the, the negative aspects of people being able to criticize. So man, I think haters are actually good because I think a lot of haters have good points. And it takes like stepping away from the emotion of like, your website sucks because blah blah blah. You're like, okay, just remove this, your website sucks because personally, what does he say? Why did he didn't not like it? And then you figure out, okay, he didn't like it because the signup was difficult or something. Or it wasn't the data. They say, no, this data is not accurate or something, right? Okay, I need to improve the quality of the data. This haters has a point. Because it's dumb to completely ignore your haters, you know? And also, yeah, man, I think I've been there when I was like 10 years old or someone you're on the internet just shouting crazy stuff. That's like most of Twitter, you know, or the half Twitter. So you have to take it with grain of salt. Yeah, man, you need to grow a very thick skin like on Twitter, on X. People say, but I'm new to a lot of people. Like I found out I'm new to already 15,000 people recently I checked. So in 10 years, I moved to 15,000 people. So that's like, that's one by one manual. 15, yeah. So 1500 people per year. And I don't like to block because then they get angry to make a screenshot and they say, ah, you block me. So I just mute and it disappear and it's amazing. So you mentioned Reddit. So hood maps, that make it to the front page of Reddit. Yeah, yeah, I did. Yeah, I did. It was amazing. And my server almost went down and I was checking like Google Analytics. Like 5,000 people on the website or somewhere crazy. And it was at night and was amazing. I think nowadays honestly, TikTok, YouTube, Reels, Instant Reels, a lot of apps get very big from people making TikTok videos about it. So let's say you make your own app. You can make a video for yourself. I thought I made this app. This is how it works blah, blah. And this is why I made it, for example. And this is why you should use it. And if it's a good video, it will take off and you will get, man, I got like $20,000 extra per month for something from a TikTok, from one TikTok video. Like it made a photo of you or somebody else. By some random guy. So there's all these AI influences that they write about. They show AI apps and then they ask money later like when a video goes, why all I can do it again and send me $4,000 something. I'm like, okay, I did that, for example. But it works. Like TikTok is a very big platform for user acquisition. And organic, like the best user acquisition I think is organic. You don't need to buy ads. You probably don't have money when you start to buy ads. So use organic or write a banger tweet that can make an app take off as well. Well, I mean, yeah, fundamentally create cool stuff. I have just a little bit of a following enough to like, for the cool thing to be noticed and then it becomes viral if it's cool enough. Yeah, you don't need a lot of followers anymore because on X and a lot of platforms, because TikTok X, I think it's in reals. Also, they have the same algorithm now. It's not about followers anymore. It's about they test your content on a small subset, like 300 people. If they like it, it will get tested to 1000 people and on and on. So if the thing is good, it will rise anyway. It doesn't matter if you have half a million followers or a thousand followers are honored. What's your philosophy of monetizing how to make money from the thing you build? Yeah, so a lot of stars, they do like free users. So you could sign up and get used to app for free, which is it never worked for me well because I think free users generally don't convert. And I think if you have VC funding, it makes sense to get free users because you can spend your funding on ads and you can get like millions of people come in, predictably, how much they convert and give them like a free trial, whatever, and then they sign up. But you need to have that flow worked out so well for you to make it work that you need like, it's very difficult. I think it's best to start and just start asking people for money in the beginning. So show your app, like what are you doing in a landing page, like make a demo or whatever video and then if you want to use it, pay me money, pay $10, $20, $20, $3. I would ask more than $10 per month, like Netflix, like $10 per month, but Netflix is a giant company that can, you know, they can afford to make it so cheap, relatively cheap. If you're an individual, like an indie hacker, like you are making your own app, you need to make like at least $30 or more on a user to make it worthy for you. You need to make money, you know, and it builds the community of people that actually really care about the product. Also, yeah, making a community, like making a discord is very normal now. Every AI app has a discord and you have the developers and the users together in like a discord and they talk about the ask for features they built together is very normal now. And you need to imagine like if you're starting out getting a thousand users is quite difficult, getting 1000 pages is quite difficult. And if you charge them like $30, you have $30 a month, that's a lot of money. That's enough to like live a good life. Yeah, a little pretty good life. I mean, that could be a lot of costs associated with hosting. Yeah, so that's not a thing. I make sure my profit margins are very high. So I try to keep the costs very low. I don't hire people. I try to negotiate with like AI vendors now. Like can you make it cheaper, you know, which is I discovered is you can just email companies and say, can you give me discount because it's too expensive. And they say sure, 50%. I'm like, wow, very good. And I didn't know this. You can just ask and especially in like now it's kind of recession. You can ask companies like, I need a discount or I kind of need to like, you don't need to be asked about it. Say, I kind of need a discount or I need to go maybe two or another companies. Or maybe like this kind like here and there. And they say sure, a lot of them will say yes. Like 20 represent this confidence and discounts. Because you think the price on the website is the price of the API or something. It's not like, you know, and also you're a public facing person. Or that helps also. And there's love and good vibes you put on to the world. Like you're actually legitimately trying to build cool stuff. So a lot of companies probably want to associate with you because you're trying to do. Yeah, it's like secret hack. But I think even without secret hack, they give it person. It's the best. How much discount they will give you. You know, they'll maybe give more. But you know, that's why you should shit post on Twitter. So you get, you know, discounts maybe. Yeah, yeah. But and also the when it's crowdsource, I mean, paying does prevent spam or help prevent spam. Also, yeah, it gives you high quality users. I'm body. Free users are. Sure, but they're horrible. Like it's just like millions of people. Especially with AI starbs, you get a lot of abuse. So you get millions of people from anywhere. Just abusing your app. Just hacking it and whatever. Like there's something on the internet. You mentioned like four-champ discovered hood maps. But I love fortune. I don't love fortune, but you know what I mean? Like they're so crazy, especially back then. Like that's it's kind of funny what they do, you know. I actually, what is it? There's new documentary on Netflix, anti-social network or something like that. That was really was fascinating. Just fortunate. Just the, you know, the spirit of the thing. Fortune and agent. People misunderstand fortune. It's so much about freedom. And also like the humor involved in fucking with the system and fucking with the man. It's just anti-system. But for fun, the dark aspect of it is you're having fun. You're doing anti-system stuff. But like the Nazis always show up. And somehow, you guys should start happening. It starts drifting somehow. Yeah, it's cool shooting some stuff. So it's a very difficult topic, but I do know it's especially early on. I think 2010 I would go to fortune and for fun. And they would post like crazy offensive stuff. And this was just to scare off people. So it showed to other people say, Hey, do you know this internet website for changes? Check it out. And they'd be, what the fuck is that? I'm like, no, no, you don't understand. Yeah. That's to scare you away. But actually when you go through a scroll, there's like deep conversations. And they would already be, this was like a normie filter like to stop. Yeah. So kind of cool. But yeah, it goes dark. It goes dark. And if you have those people show up, they'll, for the fun of it, do a bunch of racist things and all that kind of stuff. You're saying. But everything's, I think it was never, man, I'm not a fortune. But like I, it was always about provoking. It's just both of a curiosity, you know, but the, the provoking in the case of hood maps or something like this can, can, can damage the. A good thing. Like, you know, a little poison in a town is always good. It's like the town weights thing. But you don't want too much. Otherwise it, it destroys the town. It destroys the thing. They're kind of like benthesters, you know, like penetration testers, hackers. Yeah. They just test your app for you. And then you add some stuff like an ad like, I had like an NSFW word list. They would say like bad words. So when they would write like a bad words, they would get forward to YouTube, which was like a video, it was like a very relaxing video that kind of a's a mar with like glowing jelly, streaming like this to relax them, you know, or cheese melting on the toes. Not a nice. Chill them out. Yeah, I like it. Like, but actually a lot of stuff, I didn't realize how much originated fortune in terms of memes. To the right. Rick Roll. I didn't understand. I didn't know the Rick Roll originated for a chance. Like there's so many memes, like most of the memes that you think they get. The word roll, I think comes in for a chance. Like not the word roll, but like in this case, in the meme use, like you would get like roll doubles because every, there was like post IDs on for a chance. So they were, they were kind of like random. So if I get doubles like this happens for something. So you'd get like two, two. Anyways, like a betting market kind of on these doubles on these post IDs. It's so much funny stuff. Yeah. I mean, that's the internet that's pureist. But yeah, again, the dark stuff kind of seeps in. Yeah. And you it's nice to keep the dark stuff to like some low amount. It's nice to have a bit of noise of the darkness, but not too much. Yeah. And but again, like you have to pay attention to that with, I mean, I guess spam in general. You have to fight that with no mad list. How do you fight spam? Man, I use GPT-4 now. It's amazing. So I have like user input. I've reviews. People can review cities. And I don't need to actually sign up. It's anonymous reviews. And they write like whole books about like sees and what's good and bad. So I run it through GPT-4 now. And I ask like, is this a, you know, is this a good review? Like is it offensive? Is it racist or some stuff? And that sends me a message on telegram when it rejects reviews and I check it. And it's man, it's so on point. It's so. Yes. And it's so accurate. It understands double meanings. I have GPT-4 running on the on the chat communities. It's a community of 10,000 people. And they're chatting and they start fighting with each other. And I used to have human moderators was very good. But they would start fighting the human moderator. Like this guy is biased or something. Now I have GPT-4 and it's really, really, really, really good. It understands humor and understands like, like you could say something bad, but it's kind of like a joke and it's kind of not like offensive so much. So it shouldn't be deleted, right? It understands that, you know? I would love to have a GPT-4 based filter of different kinds for X. Yeah, I thought this week, like a tweet is like a fact check. Like you can click fact check and then GPT-4. Look, GPT-4 is not always right about stuff, right? But it can give you a general fact check on a tweet. Usually what I do now when I write something like difficult about economics or something like AI, I put in GPT-4 I say can you fact check it? Because I might have said something stupid. The stupid stuff always gets taken out by the reply. It's like, oh, you said this wrong and then the whole tweet kind of doesn't make sense anymore. So I asked GPT-4 to fact check a lot of stuff. So fact check is tough one. Yeah. But it would be interesting to sort of rate a thing based on how well thought out it is and how well argued it is. That seems more doable. That seems like more doable. Like it seems like a GPT thing because that's less about the truth and it's more about the rigor of the thing. Exactly. And you can ask that. You can ask in the prompt like, I don't know, like for example, do you think create like a ranking score of x Twitter replies, where should this post be? If we rank on like, I don't know, integrity, reality, like fundamental deepness or something, interestness, and it would give you that pretty good score probably. I mean Elon can do this with crock, right? You can start doing using that to check replies. Because the replies actually is like chaos. Yeah. And actually the ranking that replies, doesn't make any sense. Doesn't make sense. No. And I would like to sort in different kinds of ways. Yeah, and you get too many replies now. If you have a lot of followers, I get too many replies. I don't see everything. And I love stuff. I just miss. And I don't want to see the good stuff. And also the notifications or whatever. It's just complete chaos. Yeah. It would be nice to be able to filter that in interesting ways, sort in interesting ways. Because like, I feel like I miss a lot. And I, what surfaced for me, I just like a random comment by a person with no followers. Yeah. That's positive or negative. It's like, okay. If it's a very good comment that should happen, but it should probably look a little bit more like to these people I follow, it's because they're probably more engaged in the platform. Right? Oh, no. If it's, I don't even care about how many followers. If you're ranking by the quality of the comment, great. Yeah. But not just like randomly, like chronological, just the sea of comments. Yeah. Yeah. It doesn't make sense. Yeah. Yeah. X could be very proof of that, I think. One thing you, you espouse a lot, which I love is the automation step. So like once you have a thing, once you have an idea and you build it and it actually starts making money and it's mixing people happy. There's a community of people using it. You want to take the automation step of automating the things we have to do as little work as possible for it to keep running indefinitely. Can you like explain your philosophy there what you mean by automating? Yeah. So the general theory of starters would be that when it starts like, you start making money, you start hiring people to do stuff, right? To stuff that you like marketing, for example, stuff that you would do in the beginning yourself. And whatever community management and organizing meetups for no means, for example, there would be a job, for example. And I thought like, I don't have the money for that and I don't really want to run like a big company with a lot of people because there's a lot of work managing these people. So I've always tried to like automate these things as much as possible. And this can literally be like for no means, it's literally like a, it's not the different other starters. It's like a web page where you can organize your own meetup, set a schedule, a date, whatever. You can see how many nomads will be there at that date so you know there will be actually enough nomads to meet up, right? And then when it's done, it sends a tweet out on the nomadist account. There's a meetup here. It sends a direct message to everybody in the city who are there, who are going to be there. And then people show up on a bar and there's a meetup and that's fully automated. And for me, it's not, it's so obvious to make this automatic. Why would you, why would you have somebody organize this? It makes more sense to automate it. And this with most of my things, like I figure out like how to do it with code. And I think especially now with AI, like you can automate so much more stuff than before because AI understands things so well. Like before I would use if statements, right? Now you ask GPD, you put something in a GPD for it. In API and it sends back like, this is good, this is bad. Yeah, so you basically can now even automate sort of subjective type of things. This is a difference now. And that's very recent, right? But it's still difficult. I mean, that step of automation is difficult to figure out how to, is you're basically delegating everything to code. And it's not trivial to take that step for a lot of people. So when you say automate, are you talking about like, cron jobs? Yes, man, a lot of cron jobs. A lot of cron jobs. It's like, I literally, I log into the server and I do like pseudo-crontab, dash e, and then I go into the editor and I write like hourly. And then I write PHP, you know, do this thing.pp, and that's a script. And it's script does a thing and it does it then hourly. That's it. And that's how all my web says work. Do you have a thing where it like emails you're something like this or emails somebody managing the thing if something goes wrong? I have these web pages I make. They are called like health checks. This is like healthcheck.p. And then it has like emojis like a, it's like a green check mark of his goods and a red one if it's bad. And then it does like database curious, for example, like what's the internet speed on in, for example, um, Amsterdam? Okay, it's a number. It's like 27 point megabits. So it's accurate number. Okay, check. Good. And then it goes to the next and it goes on all the data points. Did people sign up in the last 24 hours? It's important because maybe the sign up broke. Okay, check somebody sign up. Then I have optime roba.com which is like for uptime, but it can also check keywords. It checks for an emoji, which is like the red X, which is if something is bad. And so it opens that health check page every minute to check if something is bad. Then if it's bad, it sends it message to me on telegram saying, hey, what's up? Uh, what doesn't say? Hey, what's up? It sends me like alert. Hey, this thing is down. And then I check. So within a minute of something breaking, I know it. And then I can open my laptop and fix it. Yeah. But the good thing is like the last few years, things don't break anymore. And like definitely 10 years ago when I started, everything was breaking all the time. And now it's like almost it's the last people's like 100. 0.0% uptime. And these health checks are part of the uptime percentage. So it's like, everything works. Yeah, actually making me realize I should, I should have a page for myself. Like one page that has all the health checks. Just so I can go to and see all the green check marks. Yeah, it feels good to look at it. It just be like, okay, yeah, all right. We're okay. Everything's okay. And like you can see like one was the last time something wasn't okay. And it'll say, like never. Or like meaning like you've, you've, you've checked. Since you've last cared to check, it's all been okay. For sure. It used to send me to the good health checks. Like, yeah, you know, it all works. It all works. But it's been so often. And I'm like, it feels so good. But then I'm like, okay, obviously it's not going to need to hide the good ones and show only the bad ones. And now that's the case. Ain't you integrate everything into one place? Automate like everything. Yeah. They're also just a large set of crunches. A lot of the publications in this podcast is done. All everything's just on automatically. So I'll clip up all the all those kind of stuff. But it'll be nice to automate even more. Like translation, all this kind of stuff will be nice to automate. Every JavaScript, every PHP error gets sent to my telegram as well. So every user, whatever user it is, doesn't have to be page user. If they run into an error, the JavaScript sends the JavaScript error to the server. And then it sends to my telegram from all my websites. So you get like a message. So I get like an uncalled variable error, whatever, blah blah blah. And then I'm like, okay, interesting. And then I go check it out. And that's like a way to get to zero errors. Because you get flooded with errors in the beginning. And now it's like nothing almost. So that's really cool. But Matt, that's really cool. But this is the same stuff. People, they pay like very big SARS companies, like New Relic for right, like to manage the stuff. So you can do that too. You can use off the shelf. I like to build myself as easier. Yeah, it's nice. It's nice to do that kind of automation. I'm starting to think about what are the things in my life. I'm doing myself that could be automated. In the HTMLT for you know, give your daily your day and then ask what parts you to automate. Well, one of the things I would love to automate more is my consumption and social media. Yeah, both the output and the input. Matt, that's very interesting. I think there's some startups that do that. They summarize the cool shit happening on Twitter, you know, like with AI. I think the guy called SWX or something, he does like a newsletter. It's completely AI generated. We have the cool, the cool new stuff in AI. Yeah, I mean, I would love to do that. But also like across Instagram, Facebook, LinkedIn, all this kind of stuff. Just like, okay, can I, can you summarize the internet for me for today? Summarizeinad.com. Yeah, dot com. Because I feel like it pulls in which time, but also like I don't like the effect that has some days on my psyche. Because like haters or just general content for general. I just don't know. No, no, just general. Like for example, like TikTok is a good example of that for me. I sometimes just feel dumber after he's TikTok. I just feel like I don't use it anymore. Empty somehow. And I'm like, uninspired. Yeah, it's funny. In the moment, I'm like, how I look at that cat doing a funny thing. And then you're like, oh, look at that person dancing in a funny way to that music. And then you're like, time and then later, like I feel way dumber and I don't really want to do much for the rest of the day. Like girlfriend's sats, she saw me like watching some dumb video. She's like, dude, your face looks so dumb as well. Your whole face starts going like, oh, interesting. You know, so. I mean, it was social media with with X sometimes for me too. It's I think I'm probably naturally gravitating towards the drama. Yeah, hard wheel. Yeah. And so with following ad people, especially ad people that only post technical content has been really good. Because then I just look at them and then I go on down and rabbit holes of like learning new papers that have been published or good repos or just any kind of cool demonstration of stuff and the kind of things that they were tweet. And that's the rabbit hole going, I'm learning and I'm inspired, all that kind of stuff. It's been tough. It's been tough to control. It's difficult. You need to like manage your your your platforms. You know, I have a mute board list as well. So I mute like politics stuff because I don't really want it on my feet. And I think I've muted so much that now my feet is good. You know, I see like interesting stuff. And but the fact that you need to modify, you need to like mod your app, your social media platform just to function and not be toxic for you for your mental and all right. That's like a problem. Like it should be doing that for you. It's some level of automation. That would be interesting. I wish I could access X and Instagram through API easier. You need to spend $42,000 a month, which my friends do. Yeah, you can do that. No, but still even if you do that, that you're not getting, I mean, there's limitations that don't make it easy to do like, yeah, automate because they think that they're trying to limit like abuse or for you to steal all the data from the app to then train an LLM or something like this. Yeah, but if I just want to like figure out ways to automate my interaction with the X system or with with Instagram, they don't make that easy. But I would love to sort of automate that and explore different ways to how to leverage LLM so to control the content I consume. And I mean, be published that maybe they themselves can see how that could be used to improve their system. So there's not enough access to get data. You could screen cap your phone, right? Come here, you've got app that watches your screen with you. You couldn't, yeah. But I don't really know like what it would do. Like maybe it's going to hide stuff before you see it. You know, like I have I have Chrome extensions. I write a lot of Chrome extensions that hide parts of different pages and so on. Like for example, for my own, on my main computer, I hide all the use and lights and all that on YouTube content that I create. So that I don't it doesn't. Yeah, so you don't pay attention to it. I also high parts that I have a mode for X where I hide most of everything. So like there's no it's same with YouTube. I have the same. I have this extension. Like why I wrote my own because it's easier because it keeps changing. It's like it's not easy to keep it dynamically changing. But they're really good at like getting you to be distracted and like starting a related account, related stuff. I don't want to relate it. And like 10 minutes later, you're like or something that's trending. I have a weird amount of friends addicted to YouTube and I'm not addicted. I think because my attention spans too short for YouTube. But I have this extension to like YouTube Unhoog, which like it hides all the related stuff. I can just see the video. And it's amazing. And but sometimes I need to like, like I need to search a video how to how to do something. And then I go to YouTube. And I had these YouTube shorts. These YouTube shorts are like, they're like algorithmally designed to just make you tap them. And like I tap and then I'm like five minutes later with this face like, and you're just talking. And it's like what happened? I was gonna open. I was gonna play like the coffee mix. You know, like the music mix for drinking coffee together, like in the morning, like jazz. I didn't want to go to shorts. So it's very it's very difficult. I love how we're actually highlighting all kinds of interesting problems that all could be solved to start up. Okay, so what about the exit? When and how to exit? Man, you shouldn't ask me because I never sold my company. And I've never had all the successful stuff you've done. You never sold it. Yeah, it's kind of sad, right? I've been in so I've been in a lot of acquisition, like deals and stuff. I learn a lot about finance. People as well there are like manipulation and due diligence and then changing the valuation. Like people change the valuation after. So they a lot of people string you on to acquire you and then it takes like six months. It's a classic. It takes six to 12 months. They want to see everything. They want to see your stripe and your code and whatever. And then in the end, they'll change the price a lower because you're already so invested. So it's like a negotiation tactic, right? I'm like, no, then I don't want to sell. And the problem with my companies is like they make 90% profit margin. So the multiple companies get sold with multiples, kind of multiples of profit or revenue. And often the multiples like three times, three times or four times or five times, revenue or profit. So in my case, they're all automated. So I might as well wait three years and I get the same money as when I sell and then I can still sell the same company. You know, I mean, I can still sell it for three, five times. So financially, it doesn't really make sense to sell. Yeah, unless the price high enough. Like if the price gets to like six, or seven or eight, I don't want to wait six years for the money. But if you give me three, like three years, nothing, like I can wait. So I mean, they're really valuable stuff about the companies you create is not just the interface and the crowdsource content, but the people themselves. Like the user base. Yeah. Well, no one is, it's a community. Yeah. So I could see that being extremely valuable. I'm surprised. But no one of this is like, it's like my babies, like my first product, it took off. And I don't really know if I want to sell it. It's like something you will be nice when, when you're old, you're still working on this. It's like a, it has like a mission, which is like people should travel anywhere and they can work from anywhere and they can meet different cultures. And that's a good way to make the world get better. If you go to China, live in China, you'll learn that they're nice people. And a lot of stuff you hear about China is propaganda. A lot of stuff is true as well. But it's more, you know, you learn a lot from traveling. And I think that's why it's like a cool product to like not sell AI products. I have less emotional feeling with AI products. Like a photo AI, which I could sell. Yeah. Yeah, the thing you also mentioned is you have to price in the fact that you're going to miss the company. And the meaning it gives you, right? This is very famous like depression after start up on a seller company. Like they're like, this was my, this was me, I was like, who am I? And they immediately start building another one. You know, they never can stop. So I think it's good to keep working, you know, until you die, just keep working on cool stuff. And you shoot into retire, you know, I think retirement is bad probably. So you usually build the stuff solo and mostly work solo. What's the thinking behind that? I think I'm not so good working with other people. Not like I'm crazy, but like I, I don't trust other people to clarify you don't trust other people. It's a great job. Yeah. And I don't want to have like this consensus meeting where we all like, you know, you have like a meeting with three people and then you kind of get this compromise results, which is very European. Like it's very, it's all in the called pull the model where you put people in the room and you only let them out when they agree on the compromise, right? And politics and I don't think it, I think it, it breeds like averageness. You know, you get average, it is average company, average culture. You need to have like a leader or you need to be solo and just do it, you know, do yourself, I think. And I trust some people like now I, like with my best friend Andre, I'm making a new AI startup. But it's because we know each other very long and he's one of the few people I would build something with. And almost never. So what does it take to be successful when you have more than one? Like how do you build together with Andre? How do you build together with other people? So he codes, I shit post on Twitter. Literally, like I promoted on Twitter. I, I, we set like product strategy. Like I said, this should be better, this should be better. But I think you need to have one person coding it. He codes in Ruby. So all I cannot do Ruby. I'm a PHP. See, so you have you ever coded with another person for prolonged periods of time? Never in my life. What do you think is behind that? I know, it was always just me sitting on my laptop. Like I said, like, just coding. No, like you've never had another developer who like rolls in and like, I've had a once wherever, a photo, I like, there's a, I had a pro philipp. I hired him to do the, because I, I can't write bifone. And AI stuff is bifone. And I needed to get models to work on replicating stuff. And I needed to improve photo AI. And he held me a lot for like 10 months. He worked in the, man, I was trying bifone, working with non-P and package manager. And it was too difficult for me to figure this shit out. And I didn't have time. Like, I think 10 years ago, I would have time to like sit, you know, go do all nighters to figure this stuff out with bifone. I don't have the, and I don't have the, it's not my thing. It's not your thing. It's another programming language. I get it. AI, new thing, got it. Well, like, you never had a developer roll in. Look at your PHP, jQuery code. And yes, like, you know, like in conversation, or in a private talk about yes and, like basically, all right. I had for one week, I understand. And then it ended. Because he wanted to rewrite everything in the, No, that's the wrong guy. I know he wanted to rewrite and what? He wanted to rewrite the, he said, is jQuery, he can't do this. I'm like, okay, he's like, we need to rewrite a thing in view, if you're jazz, I'm like, are you sure? I can't just like, you know, like keep jQuery. No, man, like, and we need to change a lot of stuff. And I'm like, okay, and I was kind of like feeling it. Like this, you know, we're going to clean up shit. But then after weeks, it's not going to, it's going to take way too much time. I think I like working with people where, like, when I approach them, I pretended my head that they're the smartest person who has ever existed. So I look at their code, or I look at the stuff they've created, and try to see the genius of their way. Like you really have to understand people, like, really notice them. Like, and then from that place, have a conversation about what is the better approach. Yeah, but those are the top tier developers. Yeah. And they, those are the ones that are tech ambiguous, so they can work with, they can learn any tech stack, and they can, and that's like really few, like it's like, top 5%. Because if you try hard, devs, like no offense to devs, but most devs are not, man, most people in general, jobs are not so good at their job. Like even doctors and stuff. When you realize this, people are very average at their job, and especially with devs and with coding, I think. So sorry. I think that's a really important skill for, for developer to roll in, and like, understand the musicality, the style, and like, Empathy's like, yeah, empathy, right? It's code empathy. Yeah, it's the award, but that's it. You need to understand, like, go over the code, get a holistic view of it, and, man, you can suggest we, we change stuff for sure, but, and look, Jake, you're as crazy. It's crazy. I'm using Jake Curie. We can change that. It's not crazy at all. Jake Curie is also the beautiful and powerful. And PHP is beautiful and powerful, especially as you said recently, and the, as the versions evolved, it's much more serious programming language now. It's super fast. For sure. Like PHP is really fast now. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's crazy. Java's good. Much faster. Ruby, yeah. Really fast now. So if speed is something you care about, it's super fast. And like, there's gigantic communities of people using those programming languages. And there's frameworks if you like the framework. So there, whatever. It doesn't really matter what you use, but like, also, you, if I was like a developer working with you, like, you are extremely successful. You've shipped a lot. Yeah. So like, if I roll in, I'm going to be like, I don't assume you know nothing. I assume Peter's genius, like the smartest developer ever. And like, learn, learn from it. And yes, and, like, notice parts in the code where I like, okay, okay, I got it. Like, here's how he's thinking. And now if I want to add another, like a little feature, definitely stuff emoji. Yeah, right in front of it. And then like, just follow the same style and add it. And my goal is to make you happy, to make you smile, like to make you like, haha, fuck, I get it. And now you're going to start respecting me. And like trusting me. And like, you start working together in this way. I don't know. I don't know how hard it is to find developers. No, I think that exists. I think you need to, I need to hire more people, need to try more people. But that costs a lot of my energy in time. Yeah, but it's 100% possible. But do I want it? I don't know. Things kind of run fine for now. And I mean, like, okay, you can say like, okay, it's normally looks kind of clunky. Like people say the design is kind of clunky. Okay, I'll improve the design. It's like, next time I do this, for example, you know, like I can, I'll get there eventually. But it's true. I mean, you're also extremely good at what you do. Like I'm just looking at the interfaces. I'm like, photo AI. Like you would jake, I'm like, jQuery, right? Like how amazing is your grade? But like you can, these cobweights are getting, these are, there's these cobweights. This is a lot. It's a lot. But I'm glad they're all wearing shirts. Anyway, the interface here is just really, really nice. Like I could tell you know what you're doing. And with Nomad list, extremely nice, the interface. Thank you, man. And that's all you. Yeah, this everything's me. So all of this and every little feature, all of this looks kind of ADHD or ADD, you know, like it's so much. Because it has so many things. And design is as minimalist, right? Right, right, I hear you. But this is a lot of information. And it's useful information. And it's delivered in a clean way while still stylish and fun to look at. So like, minimal design is about like when you want to convey no information whatsoever and look cool. Yeah, it's very cool. It's pretentious, right? pretentious or not, that the function is like is useless. This is about a lot of information delivered to you in a clean. And when it's clean, you can't be too sexy. So it's sexy enough. Yeah, this is everything. How my brain looks, you know, like this love shit going on. Like drawing bass music. It's like very Yeah, but this is still the spacing of everything is nice. The fonts are really nice. Like very readable. Very small. I like it, you know, but I made it. So I don't trust my own judgments. No, this is really nice. Thank you. The emojis are somehow like this is a style. It's a thing. I need to pick the emoji. It takes a while to pick them. Like there's something about the emojis. Really nice, memorable, like placeholder for the idea. Yeah, like if it was just text, it would actually be overwhelming if you were just text. The emoji really helps. It's a brilliant addition. Like some people might look at it. Why do you have emojis everywhere? It's actually really for me. It's really nice. You don't need to remove the emoji. Yeah, what people don't know what they're talking about. And then the quiz. I'm sure people will tell you a lot of things. This is really nice. And then using color is nice. Small font, but not too small. And obviously you have to show a map, which is really tricky. Yeah. Yeah, this is nice. This is really, really really nice. And all of the, I mean, like, okay, like how this looks when you hover over it. Like that's transitions. No, I understand that, but like, I'm sure there's like how long is that take you to figure out how you wanted to look? Do you ever go down to rabbit hole? Will you spend like two weeks? No, it's all iterative. It's like 10 years of, you know, at a CSS transition here or do days or. Well, it was say like, see these are all, these are rounded now. Yeah. If you wanted to, like, round is probably the better way. But if you wanted to be rectangular, like sharp corners, what would you do usually? So I go to the index.css. And I do command f. And I search border radius 12px. And then I replace with border radius zero. And then I do command enter. And it gets deployed. It's it's pushed to the get hub. And then sends a webbook and then deploy to my server and it's live in five seconds. Are you often deployed to production? You don't have like a testing ground? No, so I. So I'm like famous for this because I'm too lazy to set up like a staging server on my laptop every time. So I nowadays I just deploy to production. And it's man, I'm going to be canceled for this, you know, but it works very well for me because I have a lot of, I have like PHP, Lint and Jaislin. So I tell him in his error. So I don't deploy. But my, literally, I, I have like 37,000 Git commits in the last 12 months or something. So I make like small fix and then command enter. And sends to get up, get up, sends a webbook to my server, web server pulls it, deploy to production and is there. What's the latency of that from you, present command? One second can be one, two seconds. So you make change and then you get really good at, like, not making mistakes. Man, you're 100% you're right. Like people are like, how can you do this? Why you get good at not taking the server down, you know, like, because you need to code more carefully. But it's, look, it's idiotic and any big company. But for me, it works because it makes me so fast. Like somebody will report a bug on Twitter. And I kind of did do like a stopwatch, like how fast can I fix this bug? And then two minutes later, for example, it's fixed. Yeah. And it's fun because it's, because it's annoying for me to work with companies where you report a bug and it takes like six months. Yeah. It's like horrible. And it makes people really happy when you can really quickly solve their problems. So, but it's, it's crazy. I'm, I don't think it's crazy. I mean, there's, I'm sure there's a middle ground, but I think that whole thing where there's a phase of like testing and there's the staging and there's a development. Like, and then there's like multiple tables and databases that you use for the state. Like it's filing just a mess. And there's different teams involved. It's, it's not good. I'm like a good, funny extreme on the other side, you know? But just a little bit safer, but not too much. It would be great. Yeah. Yeah. And I'm sure that's actually like how X now, how they doing rapid improvement. It's exactly more bugs. Yeah. I'm playing about like, oh, look, he bought this Twitter. Now it's full of bugs. Dude, he's shipping stuff. Like things are happening now. And it's a dynamic app now. Yeah, the bugs is actually a sign of a good thing. Yes. The bugs of the feature because it shows that the team is actually building shit. 100%. Well, one of the problems is like I see with YouTube, there's so much potential to build features. But I just see how long it takes. So I've gotten a chance to interact with many other teams. But one of the teams is MLA multi-language audio. I don't know if you know this, but in YouTube, you can have audio tracks in different languages for overdubbing. And that there's a team. And not many people are using it. But like every single feature, they have to meet and agree and like there's allocate resources. Like engineers have to work on it. But I'm sure it's a pain in the ass for the engineers to get approval to like do it. Because it has to not break the rest of the site, whatever they do. But like if you don't have enough dictatorial like top down, like we need this now, it's going to take forever to do anything multi-language audio. But multi-language audio is a good example of a thing that seems niche right now. But it quite possibly could change the entire world. When I upload this conversation right here, if instantaneously it dubs it into 40 languages. And everybody consume every single video can be watched and listened to in those different, it changes everything. And YouTube is extremely well positioned to be the leader in this. They got the compute, they got the user base, they have the experience of how to do this. So like the multi-language audio should be hyper-eater feature. Yeah, that's high priority. Like that's, and it's a way Google's obsessed with AI right now. They want to show off that they could be dominant in AI. That's a way for Google to say like we use the AI. Like this is a way to break down the walls, the language craze. The preferred outcome for them is probably their career and not the overall result of the cool product, you know? I think they're not like selfish or whatever. They want to do good. There's something about the machine. The organization, the organizational stuff that she's got. I have to say when I report box and like become a user work with, I get, I talk to a lot of different people on DM and they're all really trying hard to do something. They're all really nice. And I'm the one being kind of asshole because I'm like, guys, I'm talking to 20 people about this for six months. And nothing is happening to say, man, I know, but I'm trying my best. And yeah, so it's systemic. Yeah. Well, it requires, again, I don't know if there must be a nice award, but like a digital type of top down, the CEO rolls in. And just says like for YouTube is like MLA, get this done now. This is the highest priority. I think big companies, especially in America, a lot of it is legal, right? They need to pass everything to legal. Yeah. And you can't, like, man, the things I do, it could never do it in a big corporation because it's, everything has to be, probably get deployed, has to go to legal. Well, again, take tutorial. You basically say Steve Jobs did this quite a lot. I've seen a lot of leaders do this, ignore the lawyers, ignore the problems, ignore PR, ignore everybody, give power to the engineers, like listen to the people on the ground, get this shit done and get it done by Friday. Yeah. That's it. And the law can change. Like for some, let's say you launched this AI dubbing and there's some legal problems with lawsuits. Okay, so the law changes. There will be appeals, there will be some Supreme Court thing, whatever. And the law changes. So just by shipping it, you change society, you change the legal framework. By not shipping being scared of the legal framework all the time, like you're not changing things. Just out of curiosity. What ID do you use? Let's talk about your whole setup. Given how ultra productive you are, are they you often program me on the word slouching in the couch? Is there, does it matter to you in general? Is there like a specific ID use? You use VS code? Yeah, VS code. Before I used sublime text, I don't think it matters a lot. I think I'm very skeptical of tools when people think they say it matters, right? I don't think it matters. I think whatever tool you know, very low, you can go very fast and like, you know, the shortcuts, for example, ID, you know, like, I love sublime text because I could use like multi cursor, you know, you serve something. And I could like make mass replaces in a file with the cursor thing. And VS code doesn't really have that as well. It's actually interesting. Sublime is the first editor where I've learned that. And I think they just make that super easy. So like what would that be called? Multi-edit multi-multi-curse-edit. I think whatever. I'm sure like almost every editor can do that. It's just probably hard to set up. Yeah. And so why is it not so good? I think at least I tried. But I would use that to like process data. Like data sets, for example, in World Bank, I would use multi-curse or mass change everything. But yeah, VS code. I mean, I was bullied into using VS code because Twitter would always see my screenshots of sublime text and say, why are you still using sublime text? Like, boomer. You need to use VS codes. And I'm like, well, I'll try it. I got a new MacBook and then I never install like, I never copy the old MacBook. I just make it fresh, you know? Like a clean, like format C, you know, Windows. Like clean start. And I'm like, well, I'll try VS code and it's stuck, you know? But I don't really care. Like it's not so important for me. Well, you know the format C reference, huh? Dude, it was so good. You would install Windows. And then after three or six months, it would start breaking and everything was like, it gets slow. Then you would restart, go to dolls. Format C, you would delete your hard drive and then install the Windows 95 again. It was so good times. And you would design everything like, now I'm going to install it properly. Now I'm going to design my desktop properly, you know? Like, yeah, I don't know if it's peer pressure, but like I use the E-max for many, many years. And I know, you know, I love Lisp. So a lot of the customization is done in Lisp. It's a programming language. It partially was peer pressure, but part of it is realizing like, you need to keep learning stuff. Like, the same issue with JQuery. I still think I need to learn Node.js, for example. Even though that's not my main thing or even close to the main thing, but I feel like you need to keep learning this stuff. And even if you don't choose to use it long term, you need to give it a chance. So you're understanding of the world expands. Hey, you want to understand the new technological concepts and see if they can benefit you, you know? It would be stupid not to even try. It's more about the concepts, I would say, than the actual tools like expanding. And that can be a challenging thing. So going to VS Code and like really learning it, like all the shortcuts, all the extensions, and actually installing different stuff, and playing with it, that was an interesting challenge. It was uncomfortable at first. Yeah, for me too. Yeah, but you just dive in. It's like neuroflex. Like you keep your brain fresh, you know? This kind of stuff. I gotta do that more. Have you given a reactive chance? No, but I want to learn it. I want to, I understand the basics, right? I don't really know where it starts, but would you like, I guess you got to use your own model, which is like build the thing using it. No, man, you're, so I kind of did that. Like I kind of, like the stuff I do in jacory is essentially, a lot of it is like, I start rebuilding whatever tech is already out there, not based on that, but just an accident. Like I keep going long enough that I build the same, start getting the same problems everybody else has, and you start building the same frameworks kind of. So I essentially, I use my own kind of framework. So you basically build the framework from scratch that's your own understanding. Kind of, yeah, with Ajax calls, but essentially it's the same, same thing. Look, I don't have the time. I don't, and this is, I think saying you don't have the time is like always a lie, because you just don't prioritize it enough. My priority is still like the running the businesses and improving that and AI. I think learning AI is much more valuable now than learning from that framework. Yeah, like it's just more impact. I guess you should be just learning every single day, a thing. Yeah, you can learn a little bit every day, like a little bit of react, or I think now like next is very big. So learn a little bit of next, you know, but I call them the military industrial complex. So if I, but you need to know, you need to know it anyway. So you got to learn how to use the weapons of war and then you could be a peacenegg. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, but you got to learn in the same exact way as we were talking about, which is learn by trying to build something with it and actually deploy it. The frameworks are so complicated and it changes so fast. So it's like where do I start, you know? And I guess it's the same thing when you're starting out making websites. Like how where do you start? As GPT-4 I guess, but it, yeah, it's just so dynamic. It changes so fast that I don't know if it would be a good idea for me to learn it, you know? Maybe some combination of like few next with PHP, Laravel, Laravel is like a frame of PHP. I think that would be, it could benefit me, you know? Maybe Tailwind for CSS, like a styling engine. That stuff could probably save me time. Yeah, but like you won't know until you really give it a try and it feels like you have to build, like, if maybe I'm talking to myself, but like I should probably recode like my personal one page in Laravel or, and even though it might not have almost any dynamic elements, maybe have one dynamic element, but it has to go end to end in that framework. Yeah. Or like end to end building Node.js. Some of it is, I don't, figuring out how to even deploy the thing. I've got the old stack. All I know is right now, I would send it to GitHub and it sends it to my server. I don't know how to get JavaScript running. I have no clue. Yeah. So I guess I need like a, a, a, a, a, like a, first all right, or, you know, a local kind of those kind of platform. I actually kind of just might give myself the idea of like, I kind of just want to build a single web page. Like one web page that has like one dynamic element and just do it in every single like in a lot of frameworks. Like just on the same page. Same all the same page. Kind of page. That's a cool product. All these frameworks. Yeah. You can see the differences. Yeah. That's interesting. It only takes to do it. Yeah, stop watching. I have to figure out actually something sufficiently complicated because it should probably do, it should probably do some kind of thing where it accesses the database and dynamically changing stuff. Some AI stuff, some add-on-em stuff. Yeah, maybe some, it doesn't have to be AI alone, but maybe API calling, API call to some tool. Yeah, to replicate for example, then you have, yeah, that would be a very cool part. Yeah. And like time it. And also report on my happiness. Yeah. I'm going to totally do this. Because nobody benchmarks this. Nobody's benchmarked happy, developer happiness with frameworks. Yeah. Nobody's benchmarked the shipping time. It just takes like a month and do this. How many frameworks are there? There's, how many, how many, there's like five main ways of doing it. So there's like, there's no, there's back end front end. And this stuff confused me too. Like React now apparently has become back end. Yeah. Or something used to be only front end. And you're forced to do now back end. Also, I don't know. And then, but there's not really, you're not really forced to do anything. So like, according to the internet. So like, there's no, it's actually not trivial to find the canonical way of doing things. So like the standard vanilla, like, you go to the ice cream shop. There's like a million flavors. I want vanilla. If I've never had ice cream in my life, can we just like learn about ice cream? Yeah. I want vanilla. Nobody actually sometimes own little name vanilla. But like, I want to know what's the basic way. But not like, dumb, but like the standard canonical. Yeah. I want to know the dominant way. Like the dominant way. So like, the standard developers do it like this. Yeah. It's hard to figure that out, you know? That's the problem. Yeah, maybe all the lumps can help. Maybe you should explicitly ask, what is the dominant? They usually know like the dominant. You know, they give answers that are like the most probable kind of. Yeah. So that makes sense to ask them. And I think honestly, maybe it would help is if you want to learn, or I wouldn't want to learn like a framework, hire somebody that already does it and just sit with them and make something together. Like I've never done that, but I thought about it. So it would be a very fast way to, you know, take their knowledge. I am a brain of try these kinds of things. What what happens is, depends what kind of, if they're like a world-class developer, yes. Oftentimes, they themselves are used to that thing. And they have not themselves explored in other options. So they have this dogmatic like talking down to you. Like this is the right way to do it. It's like, no, no, no, we're just like exploring together. Okay, show me the cool thing you've tried, which is like, it has to have open mindedness to like, you know, no JS is not the right way to do web development. It's like one way. And there's nothing wrong with the old lamp, PHP, jQuery, vanilla JavaScript way. It just has its pros and cons. And like, you need to know what the pros and cons are. Yeah, but there's people who exist. You can find those people probably. Yeah. Like if you want to learn AI, imagine you have Karpati sitting next to you. Yeah. Like he does his YouTube videos. It's amazing. He can teach it to like a five-year-old about how to make LLM. It's amazing. Like imagine this guy sitting next to you and just teaching you like, let's make LLM together. Like how the shit would be amazing. Yeah, I mean, Karpati has his own style. And I'm not sure he's for everybody. For example, five-year-old, it depends on five-year-old. Yeah. He's like super technical. But he's amazing because he's super technical. And he's the only one who can explain stuff in a simple way, which shows his complete genius. Yes. Because if you can explain it without jargon, you're like, wow. And build it from scratch. Yeah. It's like top tier, you know, like what a guy. But he might be anti-framework. Because he builds from scratch. Exactly. Yeah, actually, it probably is. Yeah. He's like you, but for AI. Yeah, so maybe learning a framework is a very bad idea for us, you know. Maybe we should stay in VHV and like script kitty and the... But you have to maybe by learning the framework, you learn what you want to yourself build from scratch. Yeah, maybe you learn concepts, but you don't actually have to start using it for your life, right? Yeah. And you're still a Mack guy. What was a Mack guy? Yeah. I switched to Mack in 2014. Because it was because when I wanted to start traveling, and my brother was like, dude, get a MacBook, because like the standard now, and like, wow, I need to switch from Windows. And I had like three screens, you know, like Windows. At this whole setup for music production, I had to sell everything, and then I had a MacBook, and I remember opening up this MacBook box like, and it was so beautiful. It was like this aluminium, and then I opened it. I removed the, you know, the screen protector thing. It's so beautiful. And I didn't touch it for two days. I was just like looking at it. Yeah. Really? And I was still in the Windows computer, and then I went traveling with that. So I, and all my great things started when I switched to Mack, which sounds very dogmatic, right? But what great things are you talking about? Well, the business started working out. Like I started traveling, I started building startups, I started making money. It all started when I switched to Mack. Listen, I kind of, you're making me want to switch to Mack. So I use either use Linux inside Windows with WSL, or just Ubuntu Linux, but Windows for most stuff like editing, or any like, any like dogmatic stuff, right? Yeah. Well, you could use, I guess you could do my stuff there. I wonder if I should switch. What do you miss about Windows? What was the pros and cons? I think the Finder is horrible, Mack. Like it's like, it's the, what is horror? The Finder. Oh, you don't know the, so there's the Windows Explorer. Yeah. This is for us amazing. Finder is strange, man. It's like strange things. This is bug where if you, if you send like, attach your photo in WhatsApp or Telegram, it just selects the whole folder, and you almost accidentally can click enter. And you send all your photos, all your files to this chat group. Happy to my girlfriend. Just start sending me photo, photo, photo, photo, photo. So Finder is very unusual, but it has Linux. Like the whole thing is like it's Unix based, right? So you use the command, like all the time, like all the time. And the cool thing is you can run things like Unix, like Debbie, or whatever. You can run most Linux stuff on macOS, which makes it very good for development. Like I have my engine X server. You know, if I said, if I'm not lazy and set up my staging on my laptop, it's just the engine X server, the same as I have on my cloud server, right? The same where the website is run. And I can use almost everything, the same config files, configuration files. And it just works. And that makes Mac a very good platform for Linux stuff, I think. Yeah. Yeah. Real Ubuntu is like better of course, but. Yeah. I'm in this weird situation where somewhat of a powered user in Windows and, let's say Android. And all the much smarter friends I have, all using Mac and iPhone. And it's like, if you don't want to go through the peer pressure, you know, it's not peer pressure. It's like, like one of the reasons I want to have kids is that there's a lot of, like I would love to have kids as a base as a baseline. But you know, there's like a concern. Maybe there's going to be a trade off or all this kind of stuff. But you see like these extremely successful smart people who are friends of mine, who have kids and are really happy with kids. So that's that's not peer pressure. That's just like a strong signal. Yeah, it works for people. They work. And the same thing with Mac. It's like, yeah. Like the fun, like I don't see fundamentally. I don't like closed systems. So like fundamentally, I like Windows more because there's much more freedom. Same with Android. There's much more freedom. It's much more customizable. But like all the, the cool kids, the spark kids are using Mac and iPhones. Like, all right, I need to really, I need to give it a real chance, especially for development. Since more and more stuff is done in the cloud anyway. Yeah. Anyway, but it's funny to hear you say all the good stuff started happening. Maybe I'll be like that guy too. When I switch to Mac, all the good stuff started happening. I think it's just about the hardware. It's just much about the software. Yeah. The hardware is so well-built, right? The keyboard and... Yeah, but look at the keyboard I use. So... That is pretty cool. That's one word for it. What's your favorite place to work? On the couch. Does the couch matter? Is it couch or home? Or is it an eggy couch? No, an eggy hotel couch also. Like in the room, right? Yeah. But I used to work very ergonomically with a standing desk and everything like perfect. Like, I hide, screen blah blah blah. And I felt like, man, it's has to do with lifting too. I started getting RSI, like repetitive string injury, like tingling stuff and it would go all the way on my back. And I was sitting in a co-work space, like 6am, Sun comes up and I'm working and I'm coding. And I hear like a sound or something. So I do like, I look left and my next gets stuck. Like, I'm like, wow, fuck. And I'm like, what's, am I dying? You know, and I'm probably dying. Yeah, probably done. So I don't want to die in a co-work space. I'm going to go home and die in like, you know, peace and honor. Yeah. So I close my laptop and I put it in my backpack and I walk to the street. I've got on my motorbike, went home. And I lie down on like a pillow with my legs up and stuff. To get rid of this, like, because it was my whole back. And it was because I was working like this all the time. Yeah. So I started getting like a laptop stand, everything economically, correct. But then I started lifting. And since then, like, it seems like everything gets straight and out. Your posture kind of, you're more straight. And I'd never have RSI anymore, repetitive string injury. I never have tingling anymore, no pains and stuff. So then I started working on the sofa. And it's great. Like, it feels, you're close to the... I sit like this. Yeah. I like to get in a pillow and then a laptop. And then I work. Are you like leaning back? Kind of like, together like legs and then... Where's the mouse using the... No, so everything is trackpad on the macOS, on the MacBook. I used to have the Logitech MX mouse, the perfect economic mouse. And you should do like this little thing. Two things. Yes. One screen. One screen. And I used to have three screens. So I come from the... I know where people come from. I had all the stuff. But then I realized that having it all condensed in one laptop, it's a six-manage MacBook. So it's quite big. But having an old one there is amazing. Because you're so close to the tools. You're so close to what's happening. You know? Is that working on a car or something? It's like so... Like, man, if you have three screens to look here, look there, you can also neck injury, actually. So it's... I don't know. This sounds like you're part of a cult. And you're just trying to convince me. But I mean, but it's good to hear that you can be ultra productive on a single screen. That's crazy. Come on tap. You all talk... When is all talk? Mac OS, come on tap. Switch very fast. So you have like one... The entire screen is taken out by VS Code. Say you look at the code and then... And then if you deploy a website, you watch Switch screen. Come on tap the Chrome. I used to have this swipe screen. You know, you could do like a different screen. Yeah, yeah. Spaces. Yeah. I was like, ah, two difficult. Let's just put it on one screen on the MacBook. And then... And he'd be productive that way. Yeah. Very productive. Yeah. More productive than before. Interesting. Because I have three screens and two of them are vertical. Like the inside. Code, right? Yeah. For the code, you can see it. Yeah. No, man, I love it. Like I love seeing it with friends. Like they have amazing like battle stations, right? It's called. It's amazing. I want it, but I don't want it, right? Like... You like the constraints. There's... That's it. There's some aspect of the constraints, which... Like once you get good at it, you can focus your mind. And you can... Man, I'm suspicious of like more, you know? Yeah. To really need all the stuff, like it might slow me down, actually. It's a good way to put it. I'm suspicious of more. Me too. I'm suspicious of more and all, and always. Because you can defend more, right? You can defend. Yeah, my developer, I make money. I need to get more screens, right? I need to be more efficient. And then you read stuff about like, mythical man-month where like, hiring more people, slows down a software project, that's famous. I think you can use that metaphor maybe for, you know, tools as well. And I see friends just with gear, acquisition syndrome that buying so much stuff. But they're not that productive. They have the best, beautiful, battle stations, desktops, everything. They're not that productive. And it's also like kind of fun. Like it's all from my laptop in a backpack, right? It's kind of no mad minimalists. Take me through like the perfect ultra-productive day in your life. Like, say like, where you get a lot of shit done. Yeah. Are you... And it's all focused on getting shit done. What, what, when are you waking up? Is it a regular time? Super early, super early. Yes. So I go to sleep like 2 a.m. usually. So I'm like that. And before 4 a.m. But my girlfriend would go sleep midnight. So we did a compromise like 2 a.m. You know? Mm-hmm. So wake up around 10 11. Then more like 10. Uh, shower, make coffee. I make coffee like drip coffee like the V60, you know, the filter. And I boil water and then put the coffee in. And then chill a little bit with my girlfriend. And then open laptops are coding. Check what's going on like bugs or whatever. How long are you? Like how stretches of time are you able to just sit behind like a beta coding? So I used to need like really long stretches where I would do like all nighters and stuff to get shit done. But I've gotten trained to like have more interruptions where I can like... Because you have to. This life, like there's a lot of distractions like your girlfriend asks stuff, people come over or whatever. So I'm very fast now. I can lock in and lock out quite fast. And I heard people, developers or entrepreneurs with kids have the same thing. Like before they're like, I cannot work but they get used to it. And they get really productive in like short time because they only have like 20 minutes and then shit goes crazy again. So I'm not a constraint, right? Yes, funny. So think that works for me. Yeah, and then you know cook food and stuff like have lunch, steak and chicken and we eat a bunch of times a day. So you say coffee. Yeah. Yeah, so a few hours later, cook foods, we get like locally sourced like meat and stuff and vegetables and cook that. And then second coffee and then go some more maybe go outside for lunch. Like you can mix fun stuff, you know? How many hours are you seeing a perfectly productive day? Are you doing programming? Like if you were like to kill it, are you doing like all day basically? You mean like the special days where like... Girlfriend leaves to like bears or something and you're alone for a week at home which is amazing. Yes. You can just code. It's like and you stay up all night and eat chocolate and... Yeah. That's chocolate. Yeah, you know? Yeah, yeah, yeah, okay. Let's remove girlfriend from pictures, social life from pictures. It's just you. Man, then shit goes crazy. Okay, like when shit goes crazy. Now shit goes crazy. So shit, you... Let's rewind. Are you still waking up? There's coffee. There's no girlfriend to talk to. There's no... Now we wake up. Like 1 p.m. 2 p.m. Because you weren't a bad at 6 p.m. Yeah, because I was coding. I was finding some new AI shit. Yeah. I was studying it and it was amazing and I cannot sleep because it's too important. We need to stay awake. We need to see all of this. We need to make something now. And but that's the time I do make like new stuff more. So I think... I have a friend who actually books a hotel for like a week to like leave his... And he has a kid too. And his girlfriend and his kid staying out and he goes to another hotel. Sounds a little suspicious right going to the hotel. But all he does is like writing or coding. He's a writer and he needs like this alone time, this silence. And I think for this flow state, it's true. You know, I'm better maintaining stuff. When I love disruptions, then like creating new stuff. I need this... And it's common. It's flow state. It's this uninterrupted period of time. So yeah, wake up like 1 p.m. You know, still coffee shower. We still shower, you know. And then this code like nonstop. Maybe my friend comes over. He comes over from distraction. Yeah, he also, Andre, he calls too. So he comes over. We code together, we listen. You know, it starts going back to the body days. You know, like co-working days. So you're not really working with him, but you're just both working. Because it's nice to have like the vibe where you both sit together on the couch and coding or something. And you actually, it's mostly silent or there's music, you know. Sometimes you ask something. And but generally like you're really locked in. And what are what music are you listening to? I think like like techno, like YouTube techno. There's a channel called HOR with a umlaut, like H. Oh, like double dot. It's brilliant techno, whatever. It looks like it's, they're filming in like a toilet with like white tiles and stuff. And it's very cool. And they always have like very good like kind of industrial like. It does. So fast, fast, heavy. Heavy. Yeah. That's not distracting to you, brain. That's amazing. Like I think distracting man jazz. Like I listen coffee jazz with my girlfriend when I wake up. And it's kind of like this piano starts getting annoying. It's like. Too many tones. It's like too many things wrong. This industrial techno is like, you know, this African like rain dances. Like. It's this transcendental trans. That's interesting. Because I, I actually mostly now listen to uh, brown noise noise. Yeah. Wow. Like pretty loud. Wow. And one of the things you learn is your brain gets used to whatever. So I'm sure to techno if I actually give it a real chance. My brain will get used to it. But like with, with noise, what happens to something happens to your brain. I think there's a science to it, but I don't really care. You just have to be a scientist of one like study yourself. You know, Brad, for me, it like, it does something. I discovered it right away when I tried it for the first time. After about like a couple of minutes, you're everything, every distraction just, like disappears. And it goes like, you can like hold focus on things like really well. It's weird. Like you can like, really focus on a thing. It doesn't really matter what that is. I think that's what people achieve with like meditation. You can like, my focus on your breath, for example. And it's normal brown. It's not like binaril. No, it's normal. It's like white noise, I think it's the same as it's like, make noise white noise. Brown noise, I think is what it's like bass here. Yeah, it's more diffused, more dampened. Dampered. Yeah, Casita. No sharp sharp brightness. Yeah, I can see that. And you use the headphones, right? Yeah, headphones. I actually like walk around in life often with brown noises. Dude, it's like psychopath shit, but it's cool. Yeah, yeah, when I murder people, it helps. It drowns out their screams. Jesus Christ. Yeah. I said too much. And I'm going to try brown noise with a murder or with a coating. Yeah, for the coating. Okay, good. Try it, try it. But you have to like, with everything else, you give it a real chance. Yeah, I find, I also like I said, do techno-y type stuff, electronic music on top of the brown noise. But then control the speed, because the faster it goes, the more anxiety. So if I really need to get shit done, especially with programming, I'll have a beat. Yeah. And it's great. And it's cool. I say it's cool to play those little tricks of your mind, just study yourself. I usually don't like to have people around, because when people, even if they're working, I don't know, I like people too much. They're like interesting. No, this might be, yeah, in co-work space, I would just start talking too much. Yeah, yeah. So there's social distraction. Yeah, we would do it in the co-work space. We would do like a money, like pot, like a mug. So if you would work for 45 minutes, and then if you would say, one pair of words, you would get a fine, which is like $1. So you'd put $1 to say, hey, what's up? So $3, you put in the mug. And then 15 minutes free time, like we can like, part of it would have an 45 minutes again, working. And that worked. But you need to shut people up, where they, you know, I think there's, there's an intimacy in being silent together. Yeah. Then maybe I'm uncomfortable with, like, but you need to make yourself vulnerable and actually do it. Like, put close friends to just sit there and silence for a moment, a few hours of time, and like doing a thing. Dude, I watched this video of this podcast. It was like this Buddhism podcast with people meditating. And they were interviewing each other or whatever, and like a podcast. And suddenly after questions like, yeah, yeah. And they were just silent for like three minutes. And then they said, that was amazing. Yeah, that was amazing. I was like, wow, pretty cool, you know? Elon's like that. And I really like that when you'll ask a question. Like, I don't know. What's a perfectly productive day for you? Like, I just asked, and you just sit there for like 30 seconds. Like, yeah, he thinks. Yeah. Better. It's so cool. I wish I was. I wish I could think more about. But I want to like, I want to show you my heart, you know? I want to show you, go straight from my heart to my mouth to like, saying the real thing. And the more I think, the more I start like filtering myself right, and I want to just throw it out there immediately. I do that more with team. I think he has a lot of practice in that. I do that as well. And in team setting, when you're thinking brainstorming, and you allow yourself to just like think and silence. Just like, because even in meetings, people want to talk. It's like, no, you'd think before you speak and just like, it's okay to be silent together. If you allow yourself to do that, you can actually come up with really good ideas. So, okay, this perfect day. How much caffeine are you consuming in this day? Too much, right? Because normally I took two cups of coffee, but on this perfect day, like we go to like four maybe. So we're starting to hit like the anxiety levels. So four cups is a lot for you. Well, I think my coffees are quite strong when I make them. It's like 20 grams of coffee powder in the V60. So, like my friends call them like nuclear coffee, because it's quite heavy. So it's quite strong. But it's nice to hit that anxiety level, where you're like almost panic attack, but you're not there yet. But that's like, man, it's like super locked in just like, it's amazing. But I mean, there's a space for that in my life. But it's, I think it's great for making new stuff. It's amazing. Starting from scratch, creating a new thing. Yes. I think girlfriends should let their guys go away for like two weeks, every few, no, every year at least, maybe every quarter, I don't know. And just sit and make some shit without, you know, they're amazing. But like, no, the services, just be alone. And then, you know, people can make something very, very amazing. Just wearing cobwe heads in the mountains like we showed you. Exactly. We can do that. There's a movie about that. We've do laptops. They didn't do much programming now. Yeah, you can do a little bit of that. Okay. And then a little bit of shipping, you know, can do both. It's a different program. But they need to allow us to go, you know, you need like a man cave, right? Yeah, to ship. Yeah, to ship. It should done. Yeah, into balance. Okay, cool. What about sleep, naps and all that? You're not sleeping much. I don't do naps in a day. I think it's power naps are good, but I don't read. I'm never tired anymore in the day. And also because of gym, I'm not tired. I'm tired when I want to, when it's night, I need to sleep. Yeah, me and I love naps. I love naps. Yeah. I don't know. I don't know why. Brain shots off turns on. I don't know if it's healthy or not. It just works. Yeah. I think with anything mental, physically, you have to be a student of your body. And like, no, no, what the limits are. Like, you have to be skeptical, take an advice from the internet in general. Because a lot of advice is just like a good baseline for the general population. It's a nice, yeah. You have to become a student of your own, like of your own body, of your own self, of how you work. That's, I've done a lot of, like for me, fasting was an interesting one. It's like, you know, eat a bunch of meals a day, especially when I was lifting heavy, like, because everybody says that you have to eat, kind of a lot, you know, multiple meals a day. But I realize I can get much stronger, feel much better if I eat once or twice a day. Yeah, me too. Yeah. It's crazy. I never understood this small meal thing. Yeah. It didn't work for me. Well, let me just ask you, it'd be interesting if you can come in on some of the other products you've created. We talked about nomad list, interior AI, photo AI, therapist AI. What's your mode? Okay. It's a job board for remote jobs. Because back then, like 10 years ago, there was job boards, but it was not really specifically remote job job boards. So I made one, made like, first on nomadism, made like nomad jobs, like a page. And a lot of companies started hiring, and they pay for job posts. So I spin it off to remote decay. And I was like this, number one or number two, biggest remote job boards. And it's also fully automated. And people just post a job and people apply. It has like profiles as well. It's kind of like LinkedIn for remote work. Just focus on remote only. Yeah. It's essentially like a simple job board. And it's covered job boards are way more complicated than you think, but yeah, it's a job board for remote jobs. But the nice thing is you can charge a lot of money for job posts. It's man, it's a good money. B2B, you can charge like, you start with $299. But at the peak during when the fed started printing money, like 2021, I was making like 140K a month with remote decay with just job posts. And I started like adding crazy upsells, like rainbow color, it's job posts. You can add your background image just upsells, man. And you charge $1,000 for an upsell. It was crazy. And all these companies just upsell. So yeah, we want everything. Job posts would cost $3,400, $4,000. And I was like, this is good business. And then the fed stopped printing money. And I all went down and it went down to like 10K a month from 140. Now it's back. I think it's like 40. It was good times, you know? I got to ask you about back to the digital nomad life. You wrote a blog post on the reset. And in general, just give them away everything, living a minimalist life. Yeah. What did it take to do that? Like to get rid of everything? 10 years ago was like this trend in the blog. Back then, blogs were still popular. It was like a blogosphere. And it was like the 100th Fing's challenge. What is that? The 100th thing. I mean, it's ridiculous. But like you write down every object you have in your house and you count it, you make like a spreadsheet. And you're like, okay, I have 500th Fing's. You need to get it down to 100th. Why, you know, it's just a trend. So I did it. I started selling stuff, sort of throwing waste off. And I did like MDMA and XC, like 2012, kind of. After that trip, I felt so different. And I felt like I had to start throwing shit away. Like I swear. And I started throwing shit away. And I felt that was like, it was almost like the drug sending me to a path of like, you need to troll your shit away. You need to start going on a journey. You need to get out of here. And that's what the MDMA did, I think. How hard is it to get down to 100 items? Well, you need to like sell your PC and stuff. So you need to go on eBay and then, man, going email selling or your stuff is very interesting because you discover society. You just, man, you meet the craziest people. You meet every range from rich to poor. Everybody comes to your house to buy stuff. It's so funny. It's so interesting. I recommend everybody to do this. Just to meet people that want your shit. Yeah, it was so, like I didn't know. I was living in Amsterdam and I didn't know I have my own subculture, whatever. And I discovered the Dutch people, like as they are from eBay, you know. So I sold everything. It was like the weirdest thing you had to sell. And you had to find a buyer for not the weirdest. But like, what's my mobile? So back then I was making music. And we would make music videos with like a Canon 5D camera. Back then, everybody's making films and beat music. And we bought it with my friends and stuff. And it was kind of like, I had to sell this thing too. Because it was like, it was very expensive. Like, 6K or something. But it meant that selling this man that we wouldn't make music videos to get anymore. I would leave Holland. This kind of stuff we were working on with, and I was kind of saying, this music video stuff, we're not getting famous in this or successful. We need to stop doing this. This music production also, it's not really working. And it was kind of like, it felt very bad, you know, for my friends. Because we would work together on this. And to sell this camera that we would make stuff with. And that was a hard goodbye. It was just a camera, but it felt like, sorry guys, it doesn't work. And I need to go, you know. Who bought it, do you remember? It was some guy who couldn't possibly understand the journey. The motion of it. Yeah. He just showed up here. Here's the money. Thanks. Yeah. But it was like, it was like cutting your life. Like, this shit ends now. And now we're going to do new stuff. And I think it's beautiful. I did that twice in a while. I give away everything. Everything, everything. Like, down to just pants, underwear, backpack. I think it's important to do. It shows you what's important. Yeah, I think that's what I learned from it. Like, you learned that you can live a very little objects, very little stuff. But there's a car to it. Like, you lean more on the stuff on the services, right? Like, for example, you don't need a car. You use Uber, right? Or you don't need kitchen stuff because you go to restaurants, you know, when you're traveling. So you lean more on other people's services. But you spend money on that as well. So that's good. Yeah, but just letting go of material possessions, which gives a kind of freedom to how you move about the world. Yeah. It gives you a complete freedom to go into another city to... Yeah, but if you're backpack. With a backpack. There's a kind of freedom to it. There's something about material possessions and having a place and all that that ties you down a little bit. Yeah. Next spiritually. Yeah. It's good to take a leap onto the world, especially when you're younger. To like... Matt, I recommend if you're 18, you get out of high school. Do this, go travel, and build some internet stuff, whatever. If you're in your laptop and it's an amazing experience. Five years ago, I was still going to university, but now I'm thinking like, no, maybe skip university. Just go first, like travel around a little bit, figure some stuff out. You can go back to university when you're 25. You can like, okay, now I learn, I'd be successful in business, you have money at least. Now you can choose what you really want to study, you know? Because people at 18, they go study what's probably good for the job market, right? So it probably makes more sense. If you want that, go travel, build some businesses, and go back to university if you want. So one of the biggest uses of universities, the networking, you gain friends, you gain, like, you meet people, it's a forcing function to meet people. But if you can meet people out into the world by traveling, and you meet so many different cultures, I mean, the problem for me is like, if I travel at that young age, I'm attracted to people at the outskirts of the world. Like for me, like where? No, not geographically. Oh, like the subcultures, the subcultures, yeah, like the weirdos, the darkness, the love. Yeah, me too. But that might not be the best networking in 18 years. For no, but it can, man, if you're smart about it, you can stay safe. And I met so many weirdos from traveling. You meet this, how travel works. If you really have to lose, you meet the craziest people. Yeah. And it's the most interesting people. And it's just, I cannot recommend enough. Well, see the thing is, when you're 18, I feel like, depending on your personality, you have to learn both how to be a weirdo and how to be a normie. Like you still have to learn how to fit into society. Yeah. For a person like me, for example, who's always in outcast, like there's always a danger of going full outcast. Yeah. And that's a harder life. If you like, if you go to like, go full artists and full darkness, it's just a harder life, you can come back. You can come back to normie. That's a skill. That's like, I think you have to learn how to, how to fit into like polite society. But I was very strange outcast as well. And then I'm more adaptable to normie now. You learned it. Yeah. After 30s, you know, you're like, yeah. But you need to skill. You have to learn. Yeah. I feel, man, I feel also that you start as an outcast, but the more you work on yourself, the less like shit you have, you kind of start becoming more normie because you become more chill with yourself, more happy and it kind of makes you honest. Yes. Right? A little bit? Yes. Yes. Like the most, the crazy people are always the most interesting. If you've solved your internal struggles and your therapy and stuff and you kind of become kind of, you know, it's not so interesting anymore, maybe. You don't have to be broken to be interesting. I guess is what I'm saying. Yeah. What kind of things were left when you minimalized? So the backpack, yeah, MacBook, toothbrush, some clothes unaware of socks. You don't need a lot of clothes in Asia because it's hot. So you just wear a swim pants, swim shorts, you walk around, flip flops. So very basic, t-shirt, and go to the laundromat and wash my stuff. And I think it was like 50 things or something. Yeah. Yes, nice. There's, as I mentioned to you, there's a show alone. They really test you because they only get 10 items and you have to survive out in the wilderness. And the acts, like everybody brings an axe. Some people, also have a saw. But usually acts does the job. You basically have to, you know, to build a shelter, you have to cut down and cut the trees and make, and like, grind a Minecraft. You know, everything I learned about life. Let me know my craft, bro. Yeah, yeah. You could, it's a, it's nice to create those constraints for yourself to understand what matters to you and also how to be in this world. And one of the ways to do this is to live a minimalist life. But like, some people, like I've met people that really enjoy material possessions. And I bring some happiness. And that's a, that's a beautiful thing. Like for me, it doesn't. But people are different. It gives me happiness for like two weeks. Yeah. I'm very quickly adapting to like a baseline. He didn't, he didn't stick adaptation. Very fast. Yeah. But man, if you look at the studies, most people, like, like a, getting a new car, six months, you know, getting a new house, six months, you just feel the same. She's like, wow, she'd have biode this stuff. And studying hedonistic adaptation made me think a lot about minimalism. And so that you don't even need to go through the whole journey of getting in. Just, just focus on the, the thing that's more permanent. Yeah. Like building shit. Yeah. Like people around you, like to be loved, nice food, nice experiences, meaningful work. Those things exercise, you know, those things make you happy, I think make me happy for sure. You're the blog post. Why I'm unreachable and maybe you should be too. What's your strategy in communicating with people? Yeah. So when I wrote that, I was getting so many DMs, as you probably have, you have a million times more, but, um, and people were getting angry that I wasn't responding. And I was like, okay, I'll just close down this DMs completely. And people go angry that I closed my DMs down, that I'm not like, man of the people, you know, it's like, you've changed, man. Yeah, you've changed. You got to, you know, like this. And I'm like, I'll explain why. I just don't have the time in a day to, you know, answer every question. And also people send you like crazy shit, man, like stalkers and like, people write like their whole life story for you. And then ask you to find it's like, man, I have no idea. I'm not a therapist. I don't know. I don't know the stuff. But also beautiful stuff. No, absolutely sure. Like life story. I've posted a coffee form. Like if you wanted to have a coffee with me, and I've gotten an extremely large number of submissions. And when I look at them, there's just like beautiful people in there. Like beautiful people are being such really powerful stories. And like, breaks my heart that I won't get to meet those people, you know? Like, so this part of it is just like, there's only so much bandwidth to truly see other humans and help them or like understand them or hear them or see them. Yeah. I have this problem that I try, I want to try help people. And like also like, oh, let's make startups and whatever. And it's, I've learned over the years that generally for me, and it sounds maybe bad, right? But like I helped my friend Andre, for example, he came up to me in the co-work space. That's how I met him. He said, I want to learn the code. I want to do startups. How do we do it? I said, okay, let's go install engine X. Let's start coding. And he has this self-energy that he actually, he doesn't need to be pushed. He just goes and he just goes and he asks questions. And he doesn't ask too many questions. He just goes and learns that now he has a company and makes a lot of money as his own startups. So, and the people that I had to kind of like, that asked me for help, but then I gave help and then they started debating it, you know? Do you have that? Like people ask you advice and they go against you say, no, you're wrong because I'm like, okay, bro, I don't want to debate. You asked me for advice, right? And the people who need to push generally, it doesn't happen. You need to have this energy for yourself. Well, they're searching. They're searching. They're trying to figure it out. But oftentimes they're search. If they successfully find what they're looking for, it'll be within. Sounds very like spiritual, but it's really like figuring that shit out on your own. But they're reaching, they're trying to ask the world around them like, how do I live this life? How do I figure this out? But ultimately the answer is going to be them working on themselves. And like literally, it's a stupid thing, but like Googling and doing like searching as procrastination. If you're sending messages to people, there's a lot of procrastination. Like, like, how do we become successful podcasts? Yeah. Bro, just, you know, start, like just go. Yeah. And just go. I would never ask you how to be successful podcasts. Like I would just start it and then I would copy your methods, you know, I would say, oh, this guy's a black background. We probably need to just as well. Yeah, try it. Yeah, try it. And then you realize it's not about the black background. It's about something else. So you find your voice, like keep trying. Exactly. The meditation is a difficult thing. Like a lot of people copy and they don't move past it. Yeah. You should understand their methods and then move past it. Like find yourself, find your own voice. And then you imitate and then you put your own spin to it, you know, and that's like creative process. That's like legitimate whole create. Everybody always builds on the previous work. You shouldn't get stuck 24 hours in a day, eight hours of sleep. You're like breaking down into a math equation. 90 minutes of showering, clean up coffee. It just keeps whittling down to zero. Man, it's not this specific, but I had to make like a, you know, an average or something. Firefighting. Oh, like that. One hours of groceries and errands. I've tried breaking down a minute by minute what I do in a day. Yeah, especially when my life was simpler. It's really refreshing to understand where you waste a lot of time. Yeah. And what you enjoy doing, like how many minutes it takes to be happy doing the thing that makes you happy. And how many minutes it takes to be productive. And you realize there's a lot of hours in the day if you spend it right. Yeah, a lot of his waste. For me, it's been the biggest battle.