I hope with my books, I'm saying, this isn't a how-to guide, but this is somebody you can walk alongside. You can see Einstein growing up Jewish in Germany. You can see, Jennifer Daudner growing up as an outsider, Leonardo da Vinci or Elon Musk, you know, in really violent South Africa, with a psychologically difficult father and getting off the train when he goes to anti-aparctide concert with his brother and there's a man with a knife sticking out of his head and they step into the pool of blood and it's sticking on their souls. This causes, you know, scars that last the rest of your life and the question is not how do you avoid getting scarred? It's, you know, how do you deal with it. The following is a conversation with Walter Isaacson, one of the greatest biography writers ever. Having written incredible books on Albert Einstein, Steve Jobs, Leonardo da Vinci, Jennifer Daudner, Benjamin Franklin, Henry Kissinger, and now a new one on Elon Musk. We talked for hours on and off the mic. I'm sure we'll talk many more times. Walter is a truly special writer thinker, observer, and human being. I highly recommend people read his new book on Elon. I'm sure there will be short-term controversy, but in long term, I think it will inspire millions of young people, especially with difficult childhoods, with hardship in their surroundings or in their own minds, to take on the hardest problems in the world and to build solutions to those problems, no matter how impossible they are. In this conversation, Walter and I cover all of his books and use personal stories from them to speak to the bigger principles of striving for greatness, in science, in tech, engineering, art, politics, and life. There are many things in the new Elon book that I felt are best saved for when I speak to Elon directly, again, on this podcast, which will be soon enough. Perhaps it's also good to mention here that my friendships like with Elon, nor any other influence like money, access, fame, power will ever result in me sacrificing my integrity, ever. I do like to celebrate the good in people, to empathize and to understand, but I also like to call people out on their bullshit, with respect and with compassion. If I fail, I fail due to a lack of skill, not a lack of integrity. I'll work hard to improve. This is the Lex Friedman podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Walter, Isaacson. What is the role of a difficult childhood in the lives of great men and women, great minds? Is that a requirement? Is it a catalyst? Or is it just a simple coincidence of fate? Well, it's not a requirement. Some people with happy childhoods do quite well, but it certainly is true that a lot of really driven people are driven because they're harnessing the demons of their childhood. Even Barack Obama's sentence in his memoirs, which is I think every successful man is either trying to live up to the expectations of his father or live down the sins of his father. And for Elon, it's especially true because he had both a violent and difficult childhood and a very psychologically problematic father. He's got those demons dancing around in his head. And by harnessing them, it's part of the reason that he does riskier, more adventurous, wilder things, and maybe I would ever do. You've written that Elon talked about his father and that at times it felt like mental torture, the interaction with him during his childhood. Can you describe some of the things you've learned? Well, Elon and Kimball would tell me that, for example, when Elon got bullied on the playground, and one day was pushed down some concrete steps and had his face pummeled so badly that Kimball said I couldn't really recognize him. He was in a hospital for almost a week. But when he came home, Elon had to stand in front of his father and his father berated him for more than an hour. And said he was stupid and took the side of the person who had beaten him. That's probably one of the more traumatic events of Elon's life. Yes, and there's also Veld School, which is this sort of paramilitary camp that young South African boys got sent to. And at one point, he was scrawny. He has very bad at picking up social cues and emotional cues. He talks about being assburgers. And so he gets traumatized at a camp like that. But the second time he went, he got bigger. He had shot up to almost six feet and he learned a little bit of judo. He realized that if he was getting beaten up, he might hurt him, but he would just punch the person in the nose as hard as possible. So that sense of always punching back has also been ingrained in Elon. I spent a lot of time talking to Errol Musk as father. Elon doesn't talk to Errol Musk anymore. His father, Nordisk Kimball has been years. And Errol doesn't even have Elon's email. So a lot of times Errol would be sending me emails. And Errol had one of those jekyll and hide personalities. He was a great mind of engineering, and especially material science. I knew how to build a wilderness camp in South Africa using Micah and how it would not conduct the heat. But he also would go into these dark periods in which he would just be psychologically abusive. And of course, May Musk says to me, his mother, who divorced Errol early on, said, the danger for Elon is that he becomes his father. And every now and then you've been with him so much, Lex, and you know him well, he'll even talk to you about the demons, about the upload dancing in his head. I mean, he gets it. He's self-aware. But you've probably seen him at times where those demons take over and he goes really dark and really quiet. And Grimes says, you know, I can tell a minute or two in advance when demon modes about to happen. And he'll go a bit dark. I was here at Austin, wanted to dinner with a group. And you could tell suddenly something had triggered him. And he was going to go dark. I've watched it in meetings where somebody will say, we can't make that part for less than $200 or know that wrong. And he'll berate them. And then he snaps out of it. As you know that too, the huge snap out where suddenly he's showing you a money python on his phone and he's joking about things. So I think coming out of the childhood, there were just many facets, maybe even many personalities, the engineering mode, the silly mode, the charismatic mode, the visionary mode, but also the demon and dark mode. I quote you, side to body, he launched and released it out to me. I forget who was from, but inside the man, he's still there as a child, the child standing in front of his dad. That was Tallula, his second wife. And she's great. She's an English actress. They've been married twice actually. And Tallula said that's just him from his childhood. He's a drama addict. Kimball says that as well. And I asked why. And he said, and Tallula said, you know, for him, love and family are kind of associated with those psychological torment. And in many ways, he'll channel. I mean, Tallula would be with him in 2008 when the company was going back, or whatever it may have been, or later. And he would be so stressed, he would vomit. And then he would channel things that his father had said, use phrases, this father had said to him. And so she told me, deep inside the man, is this man child still standing in front of his father? To a degree is that true for many of us, do you think? I think it's true, but in many different ways. I'll say something personal, which is, I was blessed, and perhaps it's a bit of a downside too, with the fact that I had the greatest father, he could ever imagine, and mother. They were the kindest people you'd ever want to meet. I grew up in a magical place in New Orleans. My dad was an engineer, an electrical engineer, and he was always kind. Perhaps I'm not quite as driven or as crazed. I don't have to prove things. So I get to write about Elon Musk. I get to write about Einstein or Steve Jobs or Leonardo DaVinci, who, as you know, was totally torn by demons and had different, difficult childhood situations, not even legitimized by his father. So sometimes those of us who are lucky enough to have really gentle, sweet childhood, we grow up with fewer demons, but we grow up with fewer drives, and we end up maybe being Boswell and not being Dr. Johnson. We end up being the observer, not being the doer. And so I always respect those who are in the arena. I don't, you know, you don't see yourself as a man in the arena. I've had a gentle, sweet career, and I've got to cover really interesting people. But I've never shot off a rocket that might someday get to Mars. I've never moved this into the era of electric vehicles. I've never stayed up all night on the factory floor. I don't have quite those either the drives or the addiction to risk. I mean, Elon's addicted to risk. He's addicted to adventure. Me, if I see something that's risky, I spend some time calculating, okay, upside, downside here. But that's another reason that people like Elon Musk get stuff done, and people like me write about the Elon Musk's. One other aspect of this given a difficult childhood, whether it's Elon or DaVinci, I wonder if there's some wisdom, some advice almost that you can draw that you can give to people with difficult childhoods. I think all of us have demons, even those of us who grew up in a magical part of New Orleans with sweet parents. Yes. And we have demons. And real one in life is harness your demons. Know that you're ambitious or not ambitious, you're lazy or whatever. Leonardo daVinci knew he was a procrastinator, you know. I think it's usual to know what's eating at you, know how to harness it. Also know what you're good at. I'll take Musk as another example. I'm a little bit more like Kimball Musk than Elon. I maybe got over and down with the empathy gene. And what does that mean? Well, it means that I was okay when I ran Time Magazine. It was a group about 150 people on the editorial floors and I knew them all and we had a jolly time. When I went to CNN, I was not very good at being a manager or an executive of an organization. I cared a little bit too much that people didn't get annoyed at me or mad at me. And Elon said that about John McNeil, for example, who was president of Tesla. It's in the book. I talked to John McNeil a long time and he says, you know, Elon just would fire people. We really rough on people. He didn't have the empathy for the people in front of him. And Elon says, yeah, that's right. And John McNeil couldn't fire people. He cared more about pleasing the people in front of him than pleasing the entire enterprise or getting things done. Being over and down with the desire to please people can make you less tough of a manager. And that doesn't mean there aren't great people who are over and down. Ben Franklin over and out with the desire to please people. The worst criticism of him from John Adams and others was that he was insinuating, which kind of meant he was always trying to get people to like him. But that turned out to be a good thing. When they can't figure out the big state little state issue at the constitutional convention, when they can't figure out the treaty of powers, whatever it is, he brings people together. And that is his superpower. So to get back to the lessons you asked. And you know, the first was harness your demons. The second is to know your strengths and your superpower. My superpower is definitely not being a tough manager. After running CNN for a while, I said, okay, I got proven. I don't really enjoy this or know how to do this well. You know, do I have other talents? Yeah, I think I have the talent to observe people really closely to write about it and astrate. But I hope interesting narrative style. That's a power. It's totally different from running an organization. It took me until three years of running CNN that I realized, I'm not cut to be an executive in a really high-intense situations. Elon Musk is cut to be an executive in highly intense situations. So much so that when things get less intense, when they actually are making enough cars and rockets are going up and landing, he thinks of something else. So he can surge and have more intensity. He's addicted to intensity. And that's his superpower, which is a lot greater than the superpower of being a good observer. But I think also to build on that, it's not just addiction to risk and drama. There's always a big mission above it. So I would say it's an empathy towards people in the big picture. It's an empathy towards humanity. More than the empathy towards the three or four humans who might be sitting in the conference room with you. And that's a big deal. You see that in a lot of people. You see it, Bill Gates, Larry Summers, Elon Musk. They always have empathy for these great goals of humanity. And at times they can be clueless about the emotions of the people in front of them or Calus. Sometimes Musk, as you said, is driven by mission more than any person I've ever seen. And it's not only mission, it's like cosmic missions. Meaning he's got three really big missions. One is to make humans a space-faring civilization, make us multi-planetary or get us to Mars. Number two is to bring us into the era of sustainable energy, to bring us into the era of electric vehicles and solar roofs and battery packs. And third is to make sure that artificial intelligence is safe and is aligned with human values. And every now and then I'd talk to them and we'd be talking about Starlink's satellite or whatever. Or he would be pushing the people in front of him in SpaceX and saying, if you do this, we'll never get to Mars in our lifetime. And then he would give the lecture how important it was for human consciousness to get to Mars in our lifetime. And I'm thinking, okay, this is the pep talk of somebody trying to inspire a team or maybe it's the type of pontification you're doing, a podcast. But unlike the 20th time, I watched him, I was, okay, I believe it. He actually is driven by this. He is frustrated and angry that because of this particular minor engineering decision, the big mission is not going to be accomplished. It's not a pep talk. It's a literal frustration. And impatience, a frustration. And it's also just probably the most deeply ingrained thing in him is his mission. He joked at one point to me about how much he loved reading comics as a kid. And he said, all the people in the comic books, they're trying to save the world, but they're wearing their underpants on the outside and they look ridiculous. And then he paused and said, but they are trying to save the world. And whether it's Starlink and Ukraine or Starship going to Mars or trying to get a global new Tesla, I think he's got this epic sense of the role he's going to play in helping humanity on big things. And like the characters in the comic books, it's sometimes ridiculous. But it also is sometimes true. When I was reading this part of the book, I was thinking of all the young people who are struggling in this way. And I think a lot of people are in different ways, whether they go up without a father, whether they grow up with physical emotional mental abuse or demons of any kind, as you talked about. And it's really painful to read, but also really damn inspiring, that if you sort of walk side by side with those demons, if you don't let that pain break you or somehow channel it, if you can put it this way, that you can achieve, you can do great things in this world. Well, that's an epic view of why we write biography, which is more epic than I had even thought of. So I say thank you. Because in some ways what you're trying to do is say, okay, I mean Leonardo, you talk about being a missus, he's born illegitimate in the village of Venti and he's gay and he's left handed and he's distracted and his father won't legitimize him. And then he wanders off to the town of Florence and he becomes the greatest artist and engineer of the early Renaissance, of that part of the Renaissance. I hope this book inspires. Jennifer Dowden of the gene editing pioneer who discovers helps discover CRISPR gene editing tool, which my book, The Codebreaker, she grew up feeling like a misfit, you know, in Hawaii, in a Polynesian village being the only white person and also trying to live up to a father who pushed her. So if people can read the books, and I should have said about Jennifer Dowden, my point was that she was told by her school guidance counselor, no, girls don't do science. Science's not for girls. You're not going to do math or science. And so it pushes her to say, all right, I'm going to do math and science. Sarah sets into her up real quick, but Jennifer Dowden, you've written an amazing book about her, Nobel Prize winner, Chris Brittler, who's just incredible, one of the great scientists in the 21st century. Right. And I'm talking about when Jennifer Dowden was young and she felt really, really out of place. Like you and me, a lot of people, when they fill in that way, they read books, they go into, they curl off with the book. So her father drops a book on her bed called The Double Helix, the book by James Watson on the discovery of the structure of DNA by him in Rosalind Franklin in Francis Crick. And she realizes, oh my God, girls can become scientists. My school guides counselors wrong. So I think books like she read this book and even if it's a comic books like Elon Musk read, books can sometimes inspire you. And every one of my books is about people who are totally innovative, who want just smart because none of us are going to be able to match Einstein and mental processing power. But we can be as curious as he was and creative and think out of the box the way he did or Steve Jobs put it, think different. And so I hope with my books, I'm saying, this isn't a how to guide, but this is somebody you can walk alongside. You can see Einstein growing up Jewish in Germany. You can see Jennifer Daugner growing up or as an outsider, Leonardo da Vinci or Elon Musk, you know, in really violent South Africa with a psychologically difficult father and getting off the train when he goes to any apartheid concert with his brother and there's a man with a knife sticking out of his head and they step into the pool of blood and it's sticking on their souls. This causes scars that last the rest of your life and the question is not how do you avoid getting scarred? How do you deal with it? Einstein too. One of my, it's hard to pick my favorite of your biographies, but Einstein, I mean, you really paint a picture of another, I don't want to call them a misfit, but a person who doesn't necessarily have a standard trajectory through life of success. That's extremely inspiring. I don't know exactly a question to ask. There's a million. Well, I'll talk about the misfit for a second because we talked about Leonardo being that way. You know, Einstein's Jewish in Germany at a time when it starts getting difficult. He's slow in learning how to talk and he's a visual thinker so he's always daydreaming and imagining things. The first time he applies to the Zurich Polytech because he runs away from the German education system because it's too much learning by route, he gets rejected by the Zurich Polytech. Now it's the second best school in Zurich and they were rejecting Einstein. I tried to find, but couldn't the name of the admissions counselor at the Zurich Polytech. Like you rejected Einstein. And then he doesn't finish in the top half of his class and once he does and he goes to graduate school, they don't accept his dissertation so he can't get a job. He's not teaching it. He even tries about 14 different high schools at gymnasium to get a job and they won't take him. So he's a third class examiner in the Swiss patent office in 1905. Third class because they've rejected his doctoral dissertation and so he can't be second class or first class because he doesn't have a doctoral degree. And yet he's sitting there in the stool in the patent office in 1905 and writes three papers that totally transform science. And if you're thinking about being misunderstood or I don't appreciate it, in 1906 he's still a third class patent, in 1907 he's still a, it takes until 1909 before people realize that this notion of the theory of relativity might be correct and it might upend all of Newtonian physics. How is it possible for three of the greatest papers in the history of science to be written in one year by this one person? Is there some insights, wisdoms you draw? Plus he had a day job as a patent examiner and there's really three papers but there's also an addendum because once you figure out quantum theory and then you figure out relativity and your understanding max Hall's equations and the speed of light, he does a little addendum that's the most famous equation in all of physics which is E equals MC squared. So it's a pretty good year. It partly starts because he's a visual thinker and I think it was helpful that he was at the patent office rather than being the acolyte of some professor at the academy where he was supposed to follow the rules. And so the patent office said doing devices to synchronize clocks because the Swiss have just gone on standard time zones and Swiss people as you note tend to be rather Swiss they care if it strikes the hour in bozzle it should do the same and burn if the exact answer. So you have to send a light signal between two distant clocks and he's visualizing what's it look like to ride alongside a light beam? He says well if you catch up with it if you go almost as fast it'll look stationary but Maxwell's equations don't allow for that and he said he's making my palm sweat that I was so worried and so he finally figures out because he's looking at these devices to synchronize clocks that if you're traveling really really fast what's looks synchronous to you or synchronize to you is different than for somebody traveling really fast in the other direction and he makes them mentally that time that the speed of light is always constant but time is relative depending on your state of motion. So it was that type of out of the box thinking those leaps that made 1905 his miracle year likewise with musk I mean after general motors and Ford everybody gives up on electric vehicles to just say I know how we're going to have a path to change the entire trajectory of the world into the era of electric vehicles and then when he comes back from Russia where he tried to buy a little rocket ship so he could send a experimental greenhouse to Mars and they were poking fun of them and actually spit on them at one point in a drunken lunch this is very fortuitous because on the ride back home on the plane on the you know Delta Airlines flight he's like doing the calculations of how much materials how much metal how much fuel how much would it really cost and so he's visualizing things that other people would just would just say is impossible it's what Steve Jobs's friends called the reality distortion field and it drove people crazy it drove them mad but it also drove them to do things they didn't think they would be able to do you said visual thinking I wonder if you've seen parallels of the different styles and kinds of thinking that that operate the minds of these people so is there parallels you see between Elon Steve Jobs Einstein Da Vinci specifically in how they think I think they were all visual thinkers perhaps coming from slight handicaps as children meaning you know Leonardo was left handed a little bit dyslectic I think and certainly Einstein had a call he would repeat things he was slow in learning to talk so I think visualizing helps a lot and with Musk I see it all the time when I'm walking the factory lines with him or in product development where he'll look at say the heat shield under the raptor engine of a starship booster and he'll say why does it have to be this way couldn't we trim it this way or make it or even get rid of this part of it and he can visualize the material science isn't small anecdotes in my book but at one point he's on the Tesla line and they're trying to get 5,000 cars a week in 2018 it's a life or death situation and he's looking at the machines that are bolting something to the chassis and he insists that Drew Bagley not Drew that Lars Moravie one of his great lieutenants come and they have to summon him and he says why are there six bolts here and Lars and others explain well for the crash tests or anything else the pressure would be in this way so you have to and they were blah blah blah blah and he said no if you visualize it you'll see if as a crash it would the force would go this way and that way and it could be done with four bolts now that sounds risky and they go test it in the engineer but turns out to be right I know that seems minor but I could give you 500 of those where in any given day he's visualizing the physics of an engineering or manufacturing problem that sounds pretty mundane but for me if you say what makes him special there's a mission driven thing I give you a lot of reasons but one of the reasons is he cares not just about the design of the product but visualizing the manufacturing and of the product the machine that makes the machine and that's what we failed to do in America for the past 40 years we outsource so much manufacturing I don't think you can be a good innovator if you don't know how to make this stuff you're designing and that's why Musk puts his designers desk right next to the assembly lines and the factories so that they have to visualize what they drew as it becomes the physical object so understanding everything from the physics all the way up to the to the software so like end to end well having an end to end control is important certainly with Steve Jobs I'm looking my iPhone here it's a big deal that hardware only works with Apple software and for a while the iTunes store and only what works you know so he has an end to end that makes it like a zen garden in Kyoto very carefully curated but a thing of beauty for Musk when he first was at Tesla and before he was the CEO when he was just the executive chairman and basically the finance person person funding it they were outsourcing everything they're making the batteries in Japan and the battery pack would be at some barbecue shop in Thailand and that sent to the Lotus factory in England to be put into a Lotus Elise chassis and then that was a nightmare you did not have end to end control of the manufacturing process so he goes to the other extreme he gets a factory in Fremont from Toyota and he wants to do everything in house the software in house the painting in house you know the the battery he makes his own batteries and I think that end to end control is part of his personality I mean there's a but it also would allow Tesla to be innovative yeah I got to see and understand in detail one example of that which is the development of the brain of the car in autopilot going from mobile eye to in house building the autopilot system to basically getting rid of all sensors that are not rich in data to make it AI friendly sort of saying that we can do it all with vision and like you said removing some of the bolts so sometimes it's small things but sometimes it's really big things are getting rid of radar well vision only getting rid of radar is huge and everybody's against everybody and still fighting it up there still trying to do in next generation some form of radar but it gets back to the first principles we talk about visualizing well he starts with the first principles and the first principles of physics involve things like well humans drive with only visual input they don't have a radar they don't have a radar they don't have sonar and so there is no reason in the laws of physics that make it so that vision only won't be successful in creating self-driving now that becomes an article of faith to him and he gets a lot of pushback but now and he's by the way not been that successful in meeting his deadlines of getting self-driving he's way too optimistic but it was that first principles of get rid of unnecessary things now you would think lidar why not use it like why not use a cross it's like yeah we can do things vision only but when I look at the stars at night I'll use a telescope too well you could use lidar but you can't do millions of cars that way at scale at a certain point you have to make it not only a good product but a product that goes to scale and you can't make it based on maps like google maps because it'll never be able to you know then drive from New Orleans to slide Dell where I want to go when it's too hot in New Orleans take for example full self-drive he has been obsessed with what he calls the robo taxi we're going to build the next generation car without a steering wheel without pedals because it's going to be full self-driving just summon it you won't need to drive it well over and over again all these people I've told you about you know Lars Marv and Drew Bagley and all and others this thing okay fine that sounds really good but you know it ain't happened yet we need to build a $25,000 mass market global car that's just normal with a steering wheel and yeah he finally turned around a few months ago and said let's do it and then he starts focusing on how's the assembly line gonna work how are we gonna do it and make it the same platform for robo taxi so you can have the same assembly like wise for full self-drive they were doing it by coding hundreds of thousands of lines of code that would say things like if you see a red light stop if there's a blinking light if that two yellow lines do this there's a bike lane do this if there's a crosswalk do that well that's really hard to do now he's doing it through artificial intelligence and machine learning only fsd 12 will be based on the billion or so frames from tesla each week of tesla drivers and saying what happened when a human was in this situation what did the human do and let's only pick the best humans the five star drivers the overdrivers as Elon says and so that's him changing his mind and going to first principles but saying all right I'm even gonna change full self-driving so there's not rules based it becomes AI based just like chat gpt doesn't try to answer your question who are the five best popes or something by study chat gpt does it by having ingested billions of of pieces of writing that people have done this will be AI but real world done by ingesting video sometimes it feels like he and others they're building things in the swirl successfully are basically confidently exploring a dark room with a very confident ambitious vision of what that room actually looks like like like they're just walking straight into the darkness there's no painful toys or legos on the ground I'm just going to walk I know exactly how far the wall is and then very quickly willing to adjust they run into they step on the Lego and their their body is filled with a lot of pain what I mean by that is there's this kind of evolution that seems to happen where you discover really good ideas along the way they'll allow you to pivot like to me since you know since a few years ago when you could see with Andre Carpati the software 2.0 evolution of autopilot it became obvious to me that this is not about the car this is about optimists throwbot this this is like if we look back a hundred years from now the car will be remembered as a cool car nice transportation but the the autopilot won't be the thing that controls the car it will be the thing that allows embodied AI systems to understand the world so broadly and so that kind of approach and so and you kind of stumble into it will test to be a a car company will be an AI company will be a robotics company will be a home robotics company will be an energy company and you kind of slowly discover this as you confidently like push forward with a vision that's interesting to watch that kind of evolution as long as it's backed by this confidence there are a couple of things that are required for that one is being adventurous one doesn't enter a dark room without a flashlight in a map unless you're a risk-taker unless you're adventurous the second is to have iterative brain cycles where you can process information and do a feedback loop and make it work the third and this is what we failed to do a lot in the United States and perhaps around the world is when you take risks you have to realize you can blow things up you know first three rockets that the Falcon rockets that must does they blow up even starship three and a half minutes but then it blows up the first time so I think Boeing and NASA and others have become unwilling to enter your dark room without knowing exactly where the exit is and the lighted path to the exit and the people who created America whenever they came over you know whether the Mayflower is refugees from the Nazis they took a lot of risks to get here and now I think we have more referees than we have risk-takers more lawyers and regulators and others saying you can't do that that's too risky than people willing to innovate and you need both I think you're also right on 50-100 years from now what must will be most remembered for beside space travel is real world AI not just Optimus robot but Optimus robot and the self-driving car they're they're pretty much the same they're using you know GPU clusters or dojo chips or whatever it may be to process real world data we all got and you did on your podcast quite excited about large language model you know generative predictive text AI let's find especially if you want to chat with your chat bot but the holy grail is artificial general intelligence and the tough part of that is real world AI and that's where Optimus robot or full self-drive or I think far ahead of anybody else well I like how you said chitchat I would say for for one of the greatest writers ever it's funny that you spoke about language and the mastery of languages as merely chitchat you know people have fallen in love over some words people have gone to wars over some words I think wars have a lot of power it's actually an interesting question where the wisdom of the world the wisdom of humanity is in words or is it in visual in visual is it in the physical I don't really it didn't mathematics it might maybe it all boils down to math and in the end this kind of discussion about real world AI versus languages all the same maybe I've gotten a chance to hang out quite a bit in the metaverse with mr. Mark Zuckerberg recently and boy is the realism in there the new like the the thing that's coming up in the future is incredible I got scanned in Pittsburgh for 10 hours into the metaverse and there's like a virtual version of me and I got to hang out with that virtual version do you like yourself well I I never like myself but it was easier to like that other guy that was interesting I was like you he didn't seem to care much actually lack of the empathy but that was you know it made me start to question even more than before like well how important is this physical reality because I got to see you know myself and other people in that metaverse like the details of the face the like all the all the things that you think maybe if you look yourself in the mirror imperfections all this kind of stuff when I was looking at myself and others all those things are beautiful and it was like it was real and it was intense and it it was scary because you're like well are you allowed to murder people in the metaverse because like are you allowed to because what are you allowed to do because you can replicate a lot of those things and it's you start to question what are the fundamental things that make life worth living here as we know as humans have you talked to Elon about his views of we're living in a simulation maybe and how you would figure out if that's true yes there's a constant lighthearted but also a serious sense that this is all a bit of a game one of my theories on Elon a minor theory is that he read hitch hikers guide to the galaxy once too often no and as you know there's a scene in there that says that there's a theory about the universe that if anybody ever discovers the secrets of meanings of the universe it will be replaced by an even more complex universe and then the next line Douglas Adams writes is there's another theory that this has already happened yeah so I'm gonna try to get my head around that but I know that Elon must tries to well there there's a humor to that this an enormous humor to hitch hikers guide now really think that helped must get out of the darkest of his periods to have sort of the sense of fun of figuring out what life is all about I wonder if it's a small aside we could say just having gotten to know Elon very well because the the silliness the willingness to engage in the absurdity of it all and have fun what is that what is that uh is that just a quirk of personality or is that a fundamental aspect of a human who's running six plus companies well it's a relief valve just like video games in polytopia and elder ring a release valves for him um and he does have an explosive sense of humor as you know and the weird thing is when he makes the abrupt transition from dark demon mode and you're in the conference room and he has really become upset about something and not only their dark vibes but there's dark words emanating and he's saying your resignation will be accepted if you don't you know etc and then something pops and he pulls out his phone and pulls up a body python's get you know like the school of silly walks or whichever giant cleanser and he starts laughing again and things break so it's it's almost as if he has different modes the emulation of human mode the engineering mode the dark and demon mode and certainly there is the silly and giddy mode yeah you've actually opened the Elon book with the quotes from Elon and from Steve Jobs so Elon's quote is to anyone ever offended I just want to say this on s&l I just want to say I reinvented electric cars and I'm sending people to Mars on a rocket ship did you also think I was going to be a chill normal dude and then the quote from Steve Jobs of course the people who are crazy enough to think they can change the world are the ones who do so what do you think is the role of the old madness ingenious what do you think the role of crazy in this well first of all let's both stipulate that Musk is crazy at times I mean and then let's figure out and I try to do it through storytelling not through highfalutin preaching where that craziness works you know give me a story tell me an anecdote tell me where he's crazy and you know the almost final example AI but him shooting off starship of the first time in between an aborted countdown in the shootoff he goes to Miami to an ad sales conference and meets Linda Jacarino for the first time makes her the CEO I mean there's a very impulsiveness to him then he flies back they launch starship and you realize that there's a drive and they're demons and there's also craziness and you sometimes want to pull those out you want to take away his phone so he doesn't tweet at 3 a.m. you want to say quit being so crazy but then you realize there's a wonderful line of Shakespeare and measure for measure at the very end he says even the best are molded out of faults and so you take the faults of Musk for example which includes a craziness that can be endearing but also craziness it's just like effing crazy as well as this drive and demon mode I don't know that you can take that strand out of the fabric in the fabric remains whole I wonder sometimes it saddens me that we live in a society that doesn't celebrate even the darker aspects of crazy in acknowledging that it all comes in one package it's the man and their universe is the critic and the man and their universe is a regulator and to make it more prosaic well let me ask about not just the crazy but the cruelty so in you've written when reporting us Steve Jobs was told you that the big question to ask was did he have to be so mean so rough and cruel so drama addicted what is this answer for Steve Jobs that he have to be so cruel for for jobs I asked was at the end of my reporting because that's what he asked said at the beginning we're doing the launch of I think the iPad 2 it may have been Steve is emaciated because you know he's been sick and so I say to was what's the answer to your question and he said well if I had been running apple I would have been nicer to everybody everybody got stuck after we've been like a family and then I I don't know if you know was we like a teddy bear he paused he smiled and he said but if I had been running apple I don't think we would have done the Macintosh or the iPhone so yeah you have to sometimes be rough and Jobs said the same thing that must said to me which is he said people like you love wearing velvet gloves no I don't know that I've worn velvet gloves often but you like people to like you you like to sweet talk things you should recode things he says I'm just a working class kid and I don't have that luxury if something sucks I got to tell people it's socks or I got a team of be players well musk is that way as well and it gets back to what I said earlier which is yeah I probably would wear velvet gloves if I could find them at my Haberdasha and I do try to sugarcoat things but when I was running CNN it needed to be reshaped it needed to be broken it needed to have a certain things blown up and I didn't do it you know so bad on me but it made me realize okay I'll just write about the people who can do it well that thing of saying I think probably both of them but Elon certainly saying things like that is the stupidest thing I've ever heard. By the way I've heard Jeff Bezos say that I've heard Bill Gates say that I've heard Steve Jobs say it I've heard Steve Jobs say it about a smoothie they were making it a whole food something people they use the word stupid really off it and you know who else used it? Errol Mosque he kept baking you know I'd stand in front of him and saying that's the stupidest saying you're the stupidest person you'll never amount to anything. I don't know you know as John McNeil the president of Tesla said do you have to be that way? Probably not there are a lot of successful people who are much kinder but it's sometimes necessary to be much more brutal and honest brutally honest I would say than people like who are when boss of the year trophies. Well as you said this kind of idea did also send a signal this idea of Steve Jobs of eight players it did send a signal to everybody it was the kind of encouragement to the people that are all in. Right and that happened to Twitter when we went to Twitter headquarters the day before the takeover he was having Andrew and James as to young cousins and other people from the autopilot team going over lines of code and must himself set there with a laptop on the second floor of the building looking at the lines of code that had been written by Twitter engineers and they decided they were going to fire 85 percent of them because they had to be all in and this notion of psychological safety and mental days off and working remotely he said either and then it came up actually one of his I think it was one of the cousins or maybe Ross Nordin came up with the idea of let's not be so rough and just fire all these people let's ask them do you really want to be all in because this is going to be hardcore it's going to be intense you get to choose but by midnight tonight we want you to check the box I'm hardcore all in I'll be there in person I'll work you know as much or that's not for me I've got a family I got work balance and you got different type of people that way and different stages of their life I was a little bit more hardcore and all in when I was in my 20s and when I was you know in my 50s and you write about this it's really nice idea actually that there's two camps and you find out I don't I want to help through this is it rings true you can just ask people which camp are you in are you the kind of person that prize themselves and enjoy staying up to 2 a.m. programming or whatever or do you see the value of chronicles you know about life work life balance all this kind of stuff and it's interesting I mean like you could people probably divide themselves in different stages in life and you just ask them and it makes sense for certain companies in certain stages of their development to be like we all our teams it doesn't even have to be a whole company and you're right goes back to what I was saying about rule the first secret is sort of know thyself obviously comes from play dough and everything comes from play dough and socrates but um and decide on this stage in my life am I do I want to be a hackathon all in all night and change the world or do I want to bring wisdom and stability but also have balance I think it's good to have different companies with different styles the problem was twitter was at almost one extreme with yoga studios and mental health days off and uh in training psychological safety as one of the mantras that people should never feel psychologically threatened and he a member of the bitter laugh he unleashed when he kept hearing that word he said no I like the words hard hard core I like intensity I like a intense sense of urgency as our operating principle well yeah the people that way as well and so know who you are and know what type of team you want to build versus psychological safety and too many birds everywhere oh yeah a lot of times musk did things and I go what the hell the modern them was changing the name twitter and getting rid of the birds I say hey man it's a lot invested in that brand but when I watched him he thought okay these sweet little chirpy birds tweeting away in the name twitter it's not hard core it's not intense and so for better and for worse I think he's taking acts into the hard core realm with people who post hard things with people with hard core views it's not a polite play pin for the blue checked anointed elite and I thought okay this is going to be bad the whole thing is going to fall apart well it has had problems but the hard core intensity of it is also met that there's new things happening there so it's very Elon Musk to not like this sweetness of birds chirping and tweeting and saying I want something more hard core as you've written in referring to the the previous twitter CEO Elon said the twitter needs a fire breathing dragon I think this is a good opportunity to maybe go through some of the memorable moments of the twitter saga as you've written about extensively in your book from the early days of considering the acquisition to how it went through to the details like you mentioned the engineering teams well at the beginning of 2022 he was riding high but as we say he's a dramatic he doesn't like to coast and you know tazelets hold a million vehicles I think thirty three boosters of you know a balcony nine to been shot up and landed safely in the past few months and he was a richest person on earth and times person of the year and yet he said you know I'm still want to put all my chips back on the table I want to keep taking rest I don't want to save her things he had sold all of his houses so he started secretly buying shares of twitter January February March becomes public at a certain point he has to declare it and we were here in Austin at gigafactory on the mezzanine and he was trying to figure out where do I go from here and at that time this early April they were going to offer him a board seat and he was going to do a standstill agreement and stop at ten percent or something now remember you know we were standing around it was luke nozik whom you know well can howlry some of his friends on that mezzanine here and all afternoon and then late into the evening at dinner is like should we do this and I didn't say anything I'm just the observer but everybody else is saying excuse me why do you want to own twitter and griffin his son joined it and may for some reason was in town and like everybody says no we don't use twitter why would you do that and may said why use twitter and it's almost like okay the demographics are people my age or may say and so it looked like he wasn't going to pursue it they offered him a board seat and then he went off to Hawaii to larielisons house which he sometimes uses he was meeting a friend angel of bassit an actress and instead of enjoying three days of vacation he just became supercharged and started firing off text messages including the fire breathing dragon one you know he used that phrase a few times that parod wasn't the person who was going to take twitter to a new level and then by the time he gets the van koover where grimes meets him they stay up all night playing elden ring he was doing a TED talk and then at five thirty he finishes playing elden ring and sends out that I've made an offer even when he comes back people are trying to intervene and say excuse me why are you doing it and so it was a rocky period between late april and october when the deal closes and people ask me all the time what did he want to get out of the deal I said what you want are you talking about at what time of day because there'll be times in the morning when he'd say oh the Delaware courts gonna force me to do it it's horrible talk to his lawyers you can win this case get me out of it he met here in austin with three or four investment bankers the Blair Efron at center view bob steel at parella wine bar and they offered him options do you want to get out do you want to stay in do you want to reduce the price and I think is he was me a curial there were times he would text me or say to me this is going to be great it's going to be the accelerant to do x dot com the way we thought about twenty years ago and so it's not until they finally tell them at the beginning of october right when optimist the robot is being unveiled in california actually that the lawyer saying you're not going to probably win this case better go through with the deal and by then he's not only made his peace with it he's kind of happy with it at time eventually the deal is going to close on uh I think a Friday morning I have it in the book and where they're on thursday and he's wandering around looking at the state woke t-shirts and psychological safety lingo they're all using and he and his lawyers and bankers hatched a plan to do a flash close and the reason for that was if they closed the deal after the markets had closed for the day and he could send a letter to paragon two others firing them quote for cause and this will be something the courts will have to figure out uh then he could save 200 million or so and it was both the money but for him a matter I won't say of principle but of hey they misled me about the numbers I got forced into doing it so I'm gonna I'm gonna try this jiu jitsu maneuver and be able to get some money out of them then when he takes over it's kind of a wild scene um him trying to decide in three different rounds how to get the staff down to 15 percent of what it was him deciding on christmas eve after he'd been in a meeting where they told him we can't get rid of that sacramento server farm because it's need of a redundancy and he says no it's not and he's flying here to austin and young james says why don't we just do it ourselves he turns the plane around they land in sacramento and he pulls them out himself so it was a manic period we should also say that underneath of that there was a running desire to or a consideration to perhaps start a new uh company to build the social media company from scratch well kimbal wanted to do that and kimbal here at a wonderful restaurant in austin launches like hey why you buying twitter but start one from scratch and do it on the blockchain yes now it took him a while and you can argue it one way the other to come to the conclusion that the blockchain was not fast enough in responsive time enough to be able to handle a billion tweets you know in a day or so he gets mad when they keep trying to get him to talk to sam bankman free to try and say i'll invest but we have to do it on the blockchain kimbal is still in favor of starting a new one and doing it on blockchain based in retrospect i think starting a new media company would have been better he wouldn't have had the baggage or the legacy that he's breaking now in breaking the way twitter had been but it's hard have millions and millions hundreds of millions of true true users not just trolls and start from scratch as others have found as massard on in blue sky and threads and not any threads even had a base so it would have been hard yeah and uh to do that in the way he did requires uh another part that you write about with the three musketeers and the whole engineering the firing and the bringing in the engineers to try to sort of go hardcore so there's a lot interesting sort of questions to ask there but the high level can you just comment about that part of the saga which is bringing in the engineers and seeing like what can we do here right a body in the engineers and figured that the amount of people doing tesla full self-driving autopilot and all the software there was about one tenth of what was doing software for twitter and he said this can't be the case and he fired 85% in three different rounds the first was just firing people because they looked at the coding and they had a team of people from tesla's autopilot team grading the codes of of all that was written in the past year so then he fired people you know who didn't seem to be totally all in or loyal and then another round of layoffs so uh at each step of the way almost everybody said that's enough it's going to destroy things yeah uh from Alex Spiro his lawyer to Jared Bertrand is like whoa whoa whoa you know and even Andrew and James the young cousins who are tasked with making a list and figuring out who's good about say we've done enough we're going to be in real trouble and they were partly right to be there was degradation of the service sum but not as much as half the services I use half the time you know and I wake up each morning and hit the app and okay still there we think was that too much I think that he has an algorithm that we mentioned earlier that begins with question every requirement but sub two is delete delete delete delete every party and then a corollary to that is if you don't end up adding back 20% of what you deleted then you didn't delete enough in the first round because you were too timid well so you asked me did he overdo it he probably over did it by 20% which is his formula and they're probably trying to hire people now to keep things going but it sends a strong signal to people that are hired back or the people that are still there the the APL idea and what Steve Jobs and many other great leaders felt and certainly veys us and certainly in the early days of Microsoft Bill Gates it was hardcore only a players so how much of Elon's success would you say Elon's Steve Jobs's success is the hiring and managing of great teams when I asked Steve Jobs at one point what was the best product you ever created I thought he'd say maybe the Macintosh or maybe the iPhone he said no those products are hard the best thing I ever created was the team that made those products and that's the hard part is creating a team and he did you know from Johnny Ived at Tim Cook and Eddie Q and Phil Schiller Elon has done a good job bringing in people when shot well obviously Linda Jacarino she's you know can navigate through the current crises certainly stellar people at SpaceX like Martin Kosa and then at Tesla like Drew Bagelino and Lars Maraville Tom Zhu and many others he's not as much of a team collaborator as say Benjamin Franklin who by the way that's the best team ever created which is the founders and you had to have really smart people like Jefferson and Madison and really passionate people like John Adams and his cousin Samuel and really a guy of high rectitude like Washington but you also needed a Ben Franklin who could bring everybody together and forge a team out of them and make them compromise with each other Musk is a magnet for awesome talent magnet interesting but there's the there's like the priorities of hiring of based on excellence trustworthiness and drive these are things you've described throughout the book I mean there's a pretty concrete and rigorous set of ideas based on which the hiring is done oh yeah and he has a very good spider-y intuitive sense just looking at people who could I mean not looking at them but studying them who could be good one of his ways of operating is what he calls the skip level meeting and let's take a very specific thing like the Raptor engine which is powering the Starship and it wasn't going well it looked like a spaghetti bush and it was going to be hard to manufacture and he got rid of the people who were in charge of that team and I remember that he spent a couple of months doing what he calls skip level which means instead of meeting with his direct reports on the Raptor team he would meet with the people one level below them and so he would skip a level and meet with them and he said this is and I just ask him what they're doing and I drill them with questions and he said this is how I figure out who's going to emerge he said it was particularly difficult I was sitting in those meetings because people were wearing masks it was during the height of COVID and he said I made it a little bit harder for him because he has to get the input but I watched as a young kid dreadlocks named Jacob McKenzie he's in the book is sitting there and he's a bit like you engineering mindset speaks in a bit of a monotone musk would ask a question and he would give an answer and the answer would be very straightforward and he didn't you know get rattled he was like this and must said one day called him up at three yet well and say three and but after midnight said you still run and you know Jake said yeah I'm still at work and he said okay I'm going to make you in charge of the team building Raptor and that was like a big surprise but Jacob McKenzie has now gotten a version of Raptor and where they're building him at least one a week and they're pretty awesome and that's where his talent must talent for finding the right person and promoting them that's where it is and promoting it in a way where it's like here's the ball here catch yeah yeah and you run with it and I have I've interacted with quite a few folks from even just the Model X the all throughout where people you know on paper don't seem like they would be able to run the thing and they run it extremely successfully and he does it wrong sometimes he's had a horrible track record with the solar roof division wonderful guy named Brian Dow I really liked him and when they were doing the battery factory surge in Nevada Muscat ready two or three people and there's Brian Dow Kendo Kendo Kendo stays all night and he gets promoted and runs it and so finally goes Musk goes through two or three people running the solar roof division finally calls up Brian Dow was sitting in Mus house in Boca Chica that little tiny two bedroom he has any offers Brian Dow the job of running solar roof and you know Brian there okay can do can do and two or three times Musk insisted that they put and install a solar roof in one of those houses in Boca Chica this is this tiny village at the south end of Texas and late at night I mean I just have to climb up to the top of the roof on these ladders and stand on this peach roof as Musk is there saying why do we need four screws to put in the single leg and and Brian was just sweating and doing everything but then after a couple of months it wasn't going well and boom must just fired him so I always try to learn what is it that makes those who stay thrive what's the lesson that what do you think well I think it's self-knowledge like an Andy Krabs or others they say I am hardcore I really want to get a rocket to Mars and that's more important than anything else one of the people I think it's I think it's Tim Zaman I hope when he hears this I'm getting him the right person who you know took time it was working for Tesla autopilot and it was just so intense he took some time off and then went to another company he said I was burned out at Tesla but then I was bored at the next place so I called I think it was a shock it tells me can I come back he said sure he said I learned about myself I'd rather be burned out than bored that's a good line what can you just linger on one of the three that's he's interesting to you in terms of excellence trustworthiness and drive which one do you think is the most important and the hardest to get at the trustworthiness is an interesting one like are you right or die kind of thing yeah I think that especially when it came to taking over Twitter he thought half the people there were disloyal and he was wrong about two-thirds were disloyal not just that and it was how do we weed out those and he did something and made the firing squad I call it or the musketeers I think is my nickname for them which is you know the young cousins and two or three other people he made them look at the slack messages these people had posted everybody at Twitter had posted and they went through hundreds of slack messages so if anybody posted on the internal slack you know that jerky lawn musk is going to take over and I'm afraid that he's a maniac or something they would be on the list because they want all in loyal they did not look at private slack messages and I guess people who are posting on a corporate slackboard should be aware that your company can look at them but that's more than I would have done or most people would have done and so that was to figure out who's deeply committed loyal I think that was mainly the case at Twitter he doesn't sit around at SpaceX saying who's loyal to at other places it's excellence but that's pretty well a given everybody is like a market in Koso just whipsmart it's all your hardcore and all in especially if you got to move to this bit of a town in the south tip of Texas called Bokachika you know you got to be all in yeah and that's the drive the the last piece so you in terms of collaborating one of the great teams of all time I'm like that I thought it was the Beatles but Beng Frank is oh no no no I'm sorry yeah sorry to offend you so read the constitution and read Abbey Road look at Abbey Road they're both good but they're at a different league yeah differently okay so one of the many things that comes to mind with Beng Frank and his incredible time management is there something you could say about Ben Franklin and about Steve Jobs I think interesting with Elon is that he as you write run six companies seven company depends how you count Starlink because it's own thing I don't know um what can you say about these people in terms of time management well Musk is in a league of his own and the way he does it first of all you know Steve Jobs had to run Pixar in Apple for a while but Musk every couple of hours is switching his mindset from how to implant the neural link trip and what will the robot that implants it in the brain look like and how fast can we make it move and then the heat shield on the Raptor or switching to human imitation machine learning full self drive on the night that the Twitter board uh agreed to the deal this is huge around the world I'm sure you remember like Musk buys Twitter it wouldn't win the deal close it was when the Twitter accepted his offer and I thought okay but then he went to Boca Chica to South Texas and spent time fixating on if I remember correctly a valve in the Raptor engine that had a methane leak issue and what were the possible ways to fix it and all the engineers in that room I assume or thinking about this guy just bought Twitter should we say something and he's like and then he goes with Kimball to a roadside joint uh in Brownville and just sits in the front and listens to music with nobody noticing really him being there one of the things that one of his strengths and sort of weaknesses in a way is in a given day he'll focus seriously sequentially on many different things he will worry about uh uploading video on to x.com or the payment system and then immediately switch over to some issue with the FAA giving a permit for star ship or with how to deal with starlink and the CIA and when he focused on any of these things you cannot distract him is that like he's also thinking about dealing with starlink but I've got to also worry about the Tesla decision on the new $25,000 car now he'll in between these sessions process information lend light off steam and for better or worse he lets off steam by he's a playing a friend in polytopia or fire off some tweets which is often not a healthy thing but it's a release for him and he doesn't I once said he was a great multitasker and that was a mistake people corrected me he's a serial tasker which means focus is intensely on a task for an hour almost has a what are they call it at restaurants where they give you a pallet cleanser yeah he does some pallet cleanser with polytopia and then focus it on the next task I mean there's some wisdom about time management the can draw from that there's some things that these people do and you say okay I can be that way I can be more curious I can question every rule in regulation I just don't think anybody to try to emulate musk time management style because it takes a certain set of teams you know how to deal with everything else other than the thing he's focusing on and a certain mind that can shift just like his moods can shift you and I go through transitions and also if I'm thinking about what I'm gonna say on this podcast I'm also thinking about the email my daughter just sent about the house that she's looking and all and I'm I'm multitasking he doesn't actually do that he singled tasks sequentially with a focus that's hard
