 The following is a conversation with Susan Cain, author of Quiet, The Power of Introverts in the World that can't stop talking, and her most recent book, Bittersweet, How Sorrow and Longing Make Us Whole. And now a quick few second mention of each sponsor. Check them out in the description. It's the best way to support this podcast. We got Brave, For Browsing, Skiff, For Email, Mis in a Main, For Style, Athletic Greens for Performance and Insight Tracker for Longevity. Choose wise them, my friends. And now onto the full ad reads. As always, no ads in the middle. I find those really, really, really annoying. I tried to make this interesting, but if you skipped them, please click check out our sponsors. I enjoy their stuff. Maybe you will too. This show is brought to you by Brave. A fast, privacy-preserving browser that feels like Google Chrome. But without ads or the various kinds of tracking that ads can do. I love using it more than any other browser, including Chrome. I still use Firefox, Edge, Chrome, all of those. But I use them like 1% of my time. My main driver in terms of web browsing is Brave. It's fast. It's just snappier. I guess it's the right tone to use snappier than any other browser I use. It's also exciting to me. I feel like I'm supporting innovation in this space. It's exciting to see that given all the web browser wars of the past, there are still new innovators that come up and dominate and come up with good ideas that really push everybody else to do better. So, I'm a huge supporter and fan of Brave browser. By the way, have their own search engine called Brave Search Engine. You should use that too. I use it. I love it. Get it at Brave.com slash Lex. It might become your favorite browser too. This show is also brought to you by Skip, a private end to end encrypted email. Also they do collaboration, but emails are the latest thing that they want to focus on. I love it both for document collaboration and for email. What does end to end encryption mean? It means that nobody, nobody, no big dead company, not skiff themselves, have access to your email. That means you can email whoever the heck you want and the world can't know about it. It's just between you and the person you're emailing. As our world becomes more and more digital, this is the battleground for privacy. Skip puts emphasis on the privacy and the security. And on top of that, makes the thing look sexy, easy to use. Like the interface of an email client obviously is essential. It can make a breaker client and Skiff does it extremely well. You can get 10 gigabytes of free storage and it works on mobile and desktop, all that kind of stuff. It's easy to migrate from other email services. You can sign up at skiff.com slash Lex. This show is brought to you by Miz and Amain, the maker of comfortable stylish dress shirts and other amends wear. I'm wearing one of their shirts right now in this very hot Austin summer because it feels cool and refreshing. It feels great against the body. It's just I'm trying to use words to describe what I'm wearing. It's just hard to do. Anyway, it just feels good. I like how it fits the body. I think however the science of cloth and all that kind of stuff works, it just it feels good. It looks good. I love it. Now they have all kinds of styles, colorful and so on. But as you can imagine, I go for the black dress shirt. That's what I love. That's why I feel good in. It's lightweight, breathable and moisture wicking. Lord knows I need that in this Austin summer. Right now you can get a special discount as a listener. If you go to Miz and Amain.com and use promo code Lex. Again, I highly recommend their black dress shirt. This show is also brought to you by Athletic Greens and the A.G. One Drink, which is an all in one daily drink to support better health and peak performance. It replaced the multivitamin for me. And when far beyond that was 75 vitamins and minerals. It's the first thing I drink every day. I drink it twice a day. It gives me a nutritional basis for all the crazy diet, physical and mental endeavors I undertake. Sometimes I fast for 24 hours, sometimes even longer, sometimes because I want to, sometimes because I just lose my mind in a particular task I'm doing enough to get to eat, which is a beautiful, beautiful thing. But if you do that beautiful thing, you should make sure your body doesn't run out of sort of the essential vitamins and minerals it needs. That's what I come on Athletic Greens to do. Plus, it's delicious. It's freaking delicious. It'll give you one month supply of fish oil when you sign up at Athletic Greens.com slash lex. This show is also brought to you by Inside Tracker, a service I use to track biological data. They have a bunch of plans, most include blood tests, why do you need blood tests? You ask, well, that's because the blood contains a lot of data about your body and they use machine learning algorithms to analyze that data. The blood data, DNA data, fitness tracker data, all to provide you with customized, personalized, advice for diet and lifestyle changes. This is the future. Decisions about your body, I think, should be based on data from your body, not on generic population data. Let's go to John Mayer and say that your body is a wonderland. Let's go over that. It's a unique wonderland. And so lifestyle changes should be based on data from that unique wonderland that is your body. Go to insidetracker.com and for a limited time, you get special savings for being a listener of this very podcast. This is the Lex Rebend podcast. Support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Susan Kane. You've written on your website that quote, I prefer listening to talking, reading to socializing, and cozy chats to group settings. So I think this conversation on the podcast is going to be fun. What's a good definition of an introvert? Is something like those three things a good start? It is a good start in terms of how introverts experience day to day life. I think a good definition is one that some of your listeners will have heard many times before. You know, the idea of where do you get your energy? And for some people, they get their energy more from quieter settings and for other people, they get it more from being out there. So a good rule of thumb is to imagine that you're at a party that you're really enjoying and you've been there for about two hours or so. And it's with people you really like and it's in your favorite place. It's all good. An extrovert in a setting like that is going to feel charged up and they're going to be looking for the after party. And an introvert, no matter how good a time they're having and how socially skilled they are, there's this moment where you just wish that you could teleport and be back at home. And at the time before the start of the party, the time of that moment happens is different for different people. So like the shorter that is, the more of an inch where you are, is that that kind of thing? The shorter the moment until you get to the place where you got to teleport home. Yeah. Yeah. And then for extroverts, it's the opposite, right? Like they're going to feel, you know, maybe they're working on, I don't know, like focused on producing a memo that's really intensely interesting to them. But if they're in that state of like solitary, the solitary mode of really focusing, they might get stir crazy a lot faster than an introvert would. And so it doesn't have so much to do with what you're good at as how you get your energy. And so for an introvert, the source of energy is what? Silence, solitude. And for an extrovert, it's interaction with other people. What I'd really say is that, and this is neurobiological as well, is that it has to do with how your nervous system reacts to stimulation. So for an introvert, you're feeling in a great state of equilibrium when there are fewer inputs coming at you. So they could be social inputs, but that's why an introvert in general would rather like hang out with one close friend at a time as opposed to, you know, big party full of strangers because that's just too many inputs for the nervous system. And for an extrovert, the nervous system needs more stimulants. So if they're not getting enough, they get that list list and sluggish feeling. So if you're just walking through the world, like people listening to this, but in general, how do you know if you're an introvert? Like how do you empirically start to determine if you are in large part in introvert? Well, I would start by just asking that question of what happens to you, you know, at around the two hour mark, where you're having a good time. Yeah, like I mean, imagine, but I also find I'm curious a few of a different experience from this, but from all the years that I've been out there talking about this topic, I found that most people really seem to know once they're being honest with themselves. And maybe that's the question to ask is like, if you imagine that you have a Saturday or a whole weekend where you can spend your time exactly the way you want to with no professional obligations and no social obligations, who would you spend it with? How many people? What would you be doing? And what is that picture that you're painting start to look like? Yeah. So there's nuance to this though, because I'm sure for extroverts to get energized by stimulation, whether it has stimulation with other people, like it depends what that stimulation is, right? Like maybe you're not surrounded by the kind of people that you enjoy being around. So maybe that has to do less with whether some characteristics as your personality, more has to do with the fact of what like what your environment is like. That's always kind of the question, do you want to be alone because everybody around you is an asshole or do you want to be alone because you get energized from being? Well, I would hold the variables constant, I guess, I would say. You know, people's assholes constant and see. And then there's the other thing you kind of observed that there's a lot of people that will say they get energized from being alone, like people are exhausting to them or something like that. But at the same time, when you see them at a party, they seem like the life of the party. I know. And I hear from those people all the time, there are so many people like that. What would you classify them as exactly? Is it ultimately is the source of energy? Is it the most important thing? Like how the heck are they the life of the party? It's a bunch of different things. You know, so first of all, just to say like a big caveat to all of this is humans are just amazingly complex. So you can't like explain every individual human through these parameters, even though I think the parameters are really valuable. But that person at the party, it could be that they're more of an ambivert. So they kind of are more in the middle of the spectrum. It basically means someone who's not extremely introverted or extremely extroverted, they're kind of in the middle. So maybe at a party, their more extroverted side comes out. Or it could be an introvert who's gotten really good at the skills of acting more like a pseudo extrovert. And they pull that up at the moments that they need it. So that learn how to fake it? Yeah. Oh, there's a lot of people like that. And I know this because like I think out of all the people on this planet, you could be talking to you. I've heard from the most number of those people. Like they all come and tell me about their experience out in the world, presenting a face that's different from what they feel. So one of the things you talk about is at least in the West, we've constructed a picture of success. And that picture is usually one of an extrovert. Like when you imagine somebody who's a leader, who's a successful person, that person has some of the qualities you would associate with an extrovert. And so there's a lot of incentive for faking it. Yeah, exactly. If you want to be successful, you got to be able to fake it, to sort of hang with the rest of the team, you have to be able to be outgoing and all those kinds of things and not be drained by the interaction. Yeah, but I mean, there are also a lot of introverts who figure out ways to draw on their own strengths and they're incredibly connecting and successful and they're great leaders and they're not actually faking it. They're more just figuring out ways to do it their own way. You see a lot of people like that. Is there advice? Is there a lesson you can draw from that from just observing how you can be an introvert and be in a leadership position? Yeah, it's kind of like a mantra of figuring out what your own strengths are and how to draw on them. I think of a guy I know Doug Cohnant who had been the CEO of Campbell Soup for many years. He's very introverted. He's quite shy also by his own description and he really cares about people. And so when he started at Campbell, the employee engagement ratings of the company were all the way at the bottom of the Fortune 500 and by the time he stepped down 10 years later, they were all the way at the top and he was, it wasn't that he was going out there and smoothing people, but he really did care. So he would find out who were the people who had really been contributing and he would write to them personal letters of thanks and people and these letters meant so much to people. They would like carry them around with them. During his time, the 10 years there, he wrote 30,000 of those letters. So like that was his way of doing it. That was his way of drawing on his own strengths. And you know, like he did that together with, of course, you sometimes have to go outside your comfort zone no matter who you are. So he was doing plenty of that too. Yeah. It's kind of combination. Yeah, that the writing process and focusing on the one-on-one interaction, I can definitely relate. So it's a really deeply draining, which concerns me about like Zoom meetings because it's some weird brain manipulation. It's the more? Well, because you're not really engaged, but it wears on you the same way that it does a party. It feels like you're emptying that bucket for the introverts, even though they're not participating at all in the meeting. I mean, I suppose that's through physical meetings too, but with Zoom meetings, remote meetings, it's so much easier to invite a larger number of people into the meeting. So you're draining more and more of the introvert energy. And I'm probably expert too, but the introvert definitely, there's, I mean, it's interesting. I would love to understand that more because there's more and more push towards remote work without, I think, a deep understanding of why these meetings are so draining on people. I just anecdotally have heard from that. But maybe that's because the managers, the people who arrange the meetings are just not sufficiently yet aware of the draining nature of them. So that they pull into many people, they schedule them too regularly. So they need to adjust that kind of thing probably. I think people are starting to realize, but I would say one reason that Zoom is so draining is because you can see your own self-presentation the whole time if you choose to. And when you go into in person, you can't. So you're kind of free to thinking about that. Oh, that's pretty good. And then you can actually have a extra cognitive load that you're bearing the whole time. Oh, yeah. That's brilliant. And like you might want to, you know, turn off the cameras so you can't see yourself, but then you feel like, well, I have the ability to. So I probably should be doing it. And then that alone is the decision that you're making. Yeah, there's probably studies on this now happening, either half-happen or are happening of the effect of seeing your own face on camera. Because it's reminding that you're supposed to be acting a certain way. And that's a special, a stressful thing. Yeah, you can't be in the moment as much. But I mean, for you, you make the decision to do all your podcast interviews in person, right? And so. And that's even when it's very costly. If there's any kind of chemistry that contributes at all to the conversation, which I think most conversations have come, even the boring work meetings, there's something there. Because yes, you're trying to solve a particular problem at this particular time. But underneath it, there's a team building that's happening. And honestly, people also have told me about this, why they enjoyed the Zoom meetings during the pandemic. It's like they're lonely. Yeah, yeah. Like they, you know, it's annoying to have to sit and listen to folks talk about nothing and so on. And they tune in anyway, because it's kind of lonely to sit there by yourself. And that, I mean, there's a deep connection there when you're with other people. And that is especially true when they're there in person, which is a huge concern for me for like more and more offices from a capitalist perspective, realizing, hey, why are we, why do we have these large office spaces? Why do we have to get people together? But I think in some, in some deep sense, we do. But then you also talk about that once we do, we want to protect the introverts. Like you don't want the open space, which office space, which was a big fad for a while. I don't know where people stand on that at this point. Yeah, I think people are figuring it out in a post-pandemic context. But I mean, I know what you mean. So before I became a writer, I was a corporate lawyer for like seven years. And literally the only thing I miss from those years is hanging out with people at the office. Like, I don't know, just some of the funniest moments I've had in my life came from being at the office until midnight with the other people I was working with. So I know exactly what you're talking about. So I will say the office is there at that firm. And at most firms in those days, everybody had their own office. So it was like a dorm room, you know, where it was like a long hallway with everybody in their own little dorm room. So you had tons of privacy, but you would also come out and hang out with people. And I think that's a room, whatever you want. Yeah, yeah. And whenever you're home, that means you're kind of open. You're looking for trouble. Yeah, and the extent to which you would keep your door open, you know, was it wide open or was it half a jar or just a little bit, those were all signals. So is there, because you said reenergize, is there, do you like to think, and again, the human mind is complicated, but do you like to think of it as like a bucket that gets refilled for introverts in terms of energy of social interaction that that they're able to handle? Is it, do you think of it like that as a bucket that gets empty and needs to be refilled? I think of it. Yeah, more or less, because I use the metaphor of a battery that gets recharged or not. It's basically the same thing, different metaphor. But yeah, but just to add on that, that there is a layer of complexity to that, because you could be somebody who doesn't want the kind of social life, let's say, where you have to be like on and presenting and interacting with tons of people all the time, but you'd get really lonely if you were just by yourself. You know, so what you want is to maybe be in the company of a couple of people you know really well. Like for me, the pandemic was not actually that hard for me personally. I mean, I lost family, but I mean, from the point of view of what we're talking about, it wasn't that hard because I live with my husband and my kids. So I knew it was hard on the kids and I felt badly for them. But for me, I was like, you know what? I kind of, I have a lot of social life right here in the house. That's why you know you're focused on doing my work. Yeah. That's the cool thing about the pandemic. I think it helped people figure out almost their family. That's true. And and a while you give your chance to really reconnect with kids with your kids, like really spend time with them. It's just fascinating to watch. Like people actually, it did strengthen the family unit in a often beautiful way, which is sucks to admit a to have to leave behind at this point. Yeah. And I think that's part of what people are not going to want to go back to that we need to solve for to the extent that work becomes non-remote again. Yeah. I think people have just realized how precious those aspects of their lives are. And you know, for somebody who's in a conventional office job where you're going home and seeing your kids for an hour before bedtime and that's your interaction with them, that's that's kind of a ridiculous way to set things up. Yeah, it's cool that you can get, I think a lot of places give you the option now, which is interesting. You get to optimize that element of your life. You take the commute and the office work and the social interaction there. Do you focus on the work at home? It's also lonely at home, but then you get to see your kids. If you have kids, that's part of the optimization is like, I have some options now. And I'm going to try to optimize solitude, loneliness, happiness, productivity, seeing family, seeing coworkers, the chemistry with the team building with the coworkers versus just the raw exchange of information with the coworkers. It's fascinating to see how that kind of evolves. Yeah. And then there's the big, the third space idea of, you know, the spaces where you're in a co-working space or a cafe or something like that. So you've got other people around you, but you're not exactly interacting with them, but they're very much there. And that's huge too. I don't think we think about that enough. Yeah, that energy is there. Yeah. Yeah. I lived in Manhattan for 17 years before we had kids. And I absolutely loved it. Like I loved it, the feeling of all that energy all around you, but you could be anonymous within it. To me, it was perfect. Yeah. It's beautiful. Like I worked this morning for a few hours programed for a few hours at a Starbucks. And first of all, like wearing wearing suits like Manhattan is the one place you can kind of fit into because everyone's wearing suits. You can suit every day. Well, these days, unfortunately, because I get recognized, I wear usually not suits when I just on my own life. But yeah, I love it. I love the way it feels. I don't know. And the way I think about the world when I wear a suit, I take it seriously as if my life is going to end today. Like this is what I would want to wear, not for not physical appearance, but just for some reason it makes me feel like focused. I don't know. So even if you're not going to see anyone, you would still put the suit on when you're doing your work, especially then, especially then. Yeah. Yeah. I really, I really love doing that. So it like tells you seriousness of purpose, something like that. Yeah. Yeah. Like everything is now. I don't know what it is. I don't know what I imagined exactly, but it's some kind of platonic form of like a mixture of James Bond and like, I don't know who else. I wish you're fine, man. I'm going to think about when I think about a suit. You know, I think of Leonard Cohen, but he was always wearing suits too. But you know, Leonard Cohen is definitely one of my, as a tragic human, as a beautiful human being through his words, through his own private life. Yes, I definitely would think about, uh, uh, Leonard Cohen. So small talk, that's another thing. Um, is that part of the equation of introvert versus extrovert? Well, how much people enjoy small talk? I kind of went into this whole thing thinking that it was, but from what I've seen most people, uh, studies that most people don't like small talk. I think that's why people like your podcasts, because you're like, well, I get the small talk. I'm going deep into it from the very beginning. Yeah. So it's actually the picture you're painting is like the way you started, like with your, um, with the book quiet. And the way you are today is you realize the picture may be more complicated. Yeah. Everything's more complicated. Um, I will say with the small, talk thing that I'm curious if you have this experience, but I find it fantastic to have a career where I'm known for anti small talk kinds of topics because it means that anywhere I go, like if I show up at a conference or something like that, no one does small talk with me. They're like telling me about the deep truth of their lives from the first hello. And I love that. And in normal life, you have to like, wade through a lot before you know if people are ready to go there. Yeah. Do you have that experience to you? No, definitely, definitely with people that know me for sure. But you forget how many people feel like they know you because of your podcasts. Well, that's what, no, that counts. Yeah. I'm a huge fan of podcasts. And I feel it, like before I ever became friends with Joe Rogan, I felt like I was friends with him because I was a fan of his podcast. So like it was, I don't, I feel like it's a friendship. I know it's the one way friendship with all the people I listened to in podcasts. And even people who are no longer with us, like writers, I feel like I have a relationship with them. Maybe I'm insane. No, I totally feel that way. That's the whole reason I became a writer. Like I'm friends with Leonard Cohen. Yeah. And he's not aware of it. No, I come, but I think that's the whole reason for writing or making music or whatever people do. It's to be able to have those kinds of connections that don't require having to be in a room together because there's only so many people you can be in a room with in your lifetime. The hard thing is, is unfortunately, because I value human connections so much. And I only have just like you mentioned, sort of a small circle of people I'm really close with by design. It always hurts me a lot to say goodbye to people. Like you meet people and you can tell they're beautiful people. They're amazing. There's something so fascinating about them. They're, they've had a complicated life. Like you could see in their eyes in the way they tell their story in just a few sentences. They've gone through some shit, but they also found some elements of beauty. And then you get to realize, okay, well, there's a fascinating human here. And all you get to say is a few words here and there. It was like a funny little joke, maybe a dark joke here and there. And then you just say goodbye, maybe hug it out and you go on your way. So like that's a hello and a goodbye and your past will never cross again. That makes me like a sad walk away. But I guess I wouldn't have it any other way, I suppose, as the reality is. And you book you talk about that sorrow. That sadness not being such a bad thing. Yeah. And when you just said that, I just thought of this one moment in my life that I haven't thought of for 20, 30 years or something. But it was when I was in law school and a classmate of mine had his friend come to visit for the weekend and the three of us hung out a lot and we just had, you know, like an amazing time. And then this other guy who wasn't going to be coming back anytime soon, if at all. Sent a postcard to me. And the only thing written on the postcard was this quote from Oscar Wilde. And I don't remember the exact words, but it basically said that there's no pain as intense as the sorrow of parting from someone to whom you've just been introduced. Yeah. And there's something so intense about that. And so true. I think partly also because when you've just been a introduced to somebody, you don't yet know their difficulties. So you're seeing, you're seeing the most sparkling version of them. You're seeing like a platonic version of love and friendship. And you imagine as you're fills in the rest and some, some beautiful way that matches perfectly the kind of thing you're interested in. That's how I feel about one scoop, like one spoonful of ice cream. And that's why you always finish the whole tub and you regret all of it. You do, you do say, what did you write this? I think this is on your website that one of the best things in the world is that's a blind moment when a writer, artist or musician manages to express something you've always felt, but never articulated or at least never quite so beautifully. So that's the Oscar Wilde line is one line like that, but just a line from a song or maybe a piece of art that just grabs you. Is there something that jumps out into memory like that for you? I don't know if I have an exact line though. I mean, that feeling that you just quoted happens to me all the time. I'm just bad at recalling exact instances, but on the spot. But the writer Ellen De Boetong regularly makes me feel that way. He's just this beautiful essayist and like observer of human nature. And he's just constantly expressing things in this gorgeous way that you've experienced yourself. And you feel like, I don't know, it's just this grand act of generosity. You know, you feel less lonely, you feel like this deep sense of communion. It's such an elevating experience. Even when it's like a melancholy line. Maybe especially when it is. Yeah, what is that? There's um, so the Jack Kerak on the road definitely makes me feel that way. Like every other line in there, four Lauren Rags of Growing Old. Do you know I never read that book? So what was it about that book that made you feel that way? Well, okay. Well, since you asked, I'm going to look at, I'm going to linger on this. So this is stories. He's kind of the book, the kind of defining book of the of the beats, the beat generation. And it's basically a story of a writer who takes a road trip across the United States a couple of times. And experiences a few close friends and a few strangers along the way. And there's a lot of just those melancholy goodbyes along the way. You meet all these people with interesting lives. Some of them are defined by struggles. Some of them are defined by drugs, drinking, women, all that kind of stuff. And still he just kind of dances around all of that. And it's defined by the goodbyes and the passing of time. So a lot of the really powerful lines are basically like, there's one on there again, I don't remember exactly, but he meets a beautiful girl at a rest stop. And the girl is getting her or a woman is getting on a different bus than he's getting on. And so it's that feeling of falling in love for like a second and realizing that like fate is just ripping that out. We're just similar to this idea of it sucks to say goodbye just when you met, but it's especially true when you fall in love just a little bit with that stranger, with all the possibilities that could lay there. So there's a few lines of written down. I just couldn't, I went down this whole rabbit hole of thinking, one of the lines that grabbed me a couple of lines from on the road. So one is, what is that feeling when you're driving away from people and they recede on the plane until you see their respects dispersing? It's a two huge world vaulting us and it's goodbye. But we'll lean forward to the next crazy venture beneath the skies. So this is him talking about leaving a particular city. The spoiler alert towards the end of the book, rather the end of the book. Line never turned too often. It's more poetry, but it's a feeling that captures the book, I would say. The evening star must be drooping and shedding her sparkler dims on the prairie, which is just before the coming of complete night that blesses the earth, darkens all the rivers, cups the peaks and folds the final shorn, and nobody, nobody knows what's going to happen to anybody besides the four lorn rags of growing old. And it just captures this kind of, in the moment, appreciation of the beauty of the world. And the sadness over the fact that time passes and you leave the people you love behind, you leave the places you love behind, or at least the way they were at the time that you really enjoyed. I mean, you just leave that all that. Just the sadness you feel when you realize something about it, like look at her picture, look at your kids grow up, looking at all the friends getting old, something makes you realize that time passes. And somewhere deep in there, it is probably a realization of your mortality. It just makes you somehow foresaid that everything comes to an end. And then that's immediately followed by an appreciation of the moment, like a gratitude that you get to experience this moment. Yeah, I know it exactly. I mean, that's the whole reason that I wrote Bitter Sweet. It's all about that. So I know intensely what you're talking about. And by the way, my husband loves the book, A Moveable Feast by Ernest Hemingway, which I also haven't read, but it talks about that same thing. You know, groups of people traveling around together and the group coalesces into some magical formation. And then one person leaves the group and it's never going to be the same again. And then they move on to the next one. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, I think that's the deepest essence of human nature, the feeling of longing for some kind of state of perfect completeness, completion, perfect love, the Garden of Eden, all of it, and the feeling that you're never going to quite attain it, but you get glimpses of it here and there, and that those glimpses are some of the best things that ever happened to us. And they're suffused with sadness because they're not the real thing or they're not the full thing. They're just a glimpse. It's a glimpse of what we long for. So the sadness that we might feel is always connected to the ways in which we fall short from the perfect thing that were like there's always the thing you're longing for. And the sadness has to do with the getting glimps of it, but not quite getting a hold of it. Yeah, yeah. So it's always losing. It's always losing, but it's also always that, but it's not, that sounds really depressing, but it's not, you know, it's not depressing because you experience this all the time. It's also those are the most beautiful moments I think life offers. I mean, it's intense, intense beauty in those moments because it's getting closer to the real thing that we long for. So what about my loss, losing love? Is that also a beautiful thing? Well, the moment you're talking about, I think it's easier to appreciate the beauty of it all in the moment because you're experiencing the loss and the love all at the same time. Whereas if you're talking about straight up loss, like a betrayal or a bereavement or whatever it is, that's, it's different. It's quite overwhelming. So losing loved one kind of thing? Losing a loved one. I mean, I will say that the truth that I think that we can come to after a lot of time on this earth is the idea that love exists not only in its particular forms, so not only in the form of the one person, you know, that one person we love or that other person we love, but love itself is a state that we have access to. And so over time, the loss of person A can heal and you can tap into a kind of bigger river of love. Yeah, I mean, I had this, it comes from Louis, Louis K, at a show. Damn, I love that line. I mean, there's a, he's toxic and older gentleman. And Louis is all like sad about losing a loved one or like getting rejected essentially, like a breakup. And then the older gentleman gives him advice saying like, basically criticizes Louis for saying, why are you moping around? Because this is the most, this is the best part. Like losing love is the best part because that's the real loss is when you forget. Like feeling shitty about having gone through a breakup, is when you most intensely appreciate what that person meant to you. Like you most intensely feel love in some strange way by realizing that you've lost it, by missing it, wishing at this moment, I wish I had that. Like that feeling, that that's when you feel that love the most, the absence of it. And so the older gentleman gives advice that that's the best part. And if you're good with it, it can last for the longest. It could be the most sort of prolonged experience of deep appreciation and emotion and so on. So that's kind of a, that's a nice way to look at loss, which is a reminder of how much somebody meant to us. Yeah, I mean, I think there's a lot of truth in that. Because yeah, you wouldn't care so much if it weren't something that mattered to you. So it's always a signpost to the direction you really want to go to. That's always what it is. Yeah, and it's interesting to see the way the mystical versions of many of the great religions all point in this direction. You know, whether you were looking at Sufism or the Kabbalah or in Christian mysticism, you see this idea that the longing for what you lack is the very thing that gives you what you're longing for. So the longing is the cure. I mean, that's the way the Sufi poet Rumi puts it. The longing is the cure. You know, and he says be thirsty, like be as thirsty as you possibly can. That's what you want to be. The good stuff is the wanting, not the having. Yeah, yeah, of course, tell it to a person that just broke up and it'll be like, shut up, asshole. When I'm trying to advise the sucks, I wish I had her him back. Yeah, no, absolutely. Those are the kinds of life lessons that only work when you kind of step away for a while. They don't work in the moment in the moment of excruciation. There is something about the fact of knowing that all humans are in that experience together, that is also incredibly uplifting. Well, that takes time for people to realize, like heartbreak in your early teenage years or something like that could feel like this is completely the most novel. Yes. In the most dramatic pain that any human has ever felt, right? Or maybe even when you're younger. Then one of the things you realize is that everybody goes through this. That can be an awakening to the fact that we're all in this together. This human condition is not just a personal experience, it's an experience we all share. That's a kind of love, the unity of it. You can get to experience that. That's a really deep kind of love. I feel like we're we are prevented from perceiving that love as it's actually the most obvious kind of love and it's right there. It happens all the time, but we're prevented from perceiving it because we're not really supposed to talk about things like that. There's something unseemly about it. Well, it's also in the West, it's of an individualist society. There's a pressure to see the individual as a distinct sovereign entity that experiences things. The unity between people is not obviously communicated or talked about as part of the culture. It's not part of the culture. You see it in our behaviors because we're humans. Why do people listen to sad music? One reason is they're hearing expressed for them. The musician is basically saying to them this thing that you have experienced. I've experienced it too, so have lots of other people. But they're saying it all without words and it's transformed into something beautiful. And there's something about that that's just incredibly elevating. And people don't know it, but like there's one study that I have in in Bittersweet that found that people whose favorite songs are their happy songs, play it on their playlist, about 175 times. The people who love sad music play them about 800 times. And they say that they feel connected to the sublime when they're listening to that music. What do you think that is? So what is that? What is it in music that connects us to the sublime through sadness? I mean, I've been to different theories. The whole reason I started writing this book is because I kept having this reaction reliably to sad music. And I realized that for people who I knew who were religious believers, the way they described their experience of God was what I was experiencing when I would hear that music. Like all the time, it happens over and over again. So you wonder what that is? Yeah, so I started wondering what that is. And lots of people have tried to figure out what that's all about. And there are different theories that it's expressing. It's like a kind of catharsis for our difficult emotions that it's, as we were saying, a sense of being in it together. We don't react in that sort of uplifted way when you just see a slide show of sad faces, which is something researchers have actually tested. No one really cares when they're seeing the slide to the sad faces, but the sad music, they're really reacting. And also, they don't really react when they're hearing music expressing other negative emotions, like martial music or something like that. It's just the sad music that gives people this elevated sense of wonder. So I think it's the combination of the sadness and the beauty. And I think it's just tapping into the essence of the human source code, which is a kind of spiritual longing, whether we're atheists or believers. There's this feeling of longing for a state and a place of perfect love and perfect unity and perfect truth and all of it. And like an acute awareness that we're not there in this world. And you know, in religions, we express that through the longing for Mecca or Eden or Zion. And artistically, we express it with d'arthy longing for somewhere over the rainbow or Harry Potter enters the story at the precise moment that he's become an orphan. So he's now going to spend the rest of his life longing for these parents who he can never remember. And that's there's something about that state that's at our very core. And I think that's why we love it so much. Well, it could be, you know, you can have the Ernest Becker theory of denial of death, where at the core of that, the warm of the core, as Jung said, is the fear of death. So we're the longing for the perfect thing is as to do with sort of becoming immortal as reaching beyond the absurdity, the cruelty of life that all things come to an end for no particularly good reason whatsoever. One we can rationally explain. I know, you know, I wonder about that all the time. Like, I know, obviously, there's that idea from Becker and throughout philosophy and the tale of Gilgamesh about the idea that the thing we're longing for most of all is immortality. But I feel like it's not only that. I think it's more so or also, let's say, um, belonging for the lions to lay down with the lambs finally, you know, for like the the fundamental calculus of the universe to just be different where life doesn't have to eat life in order to survive. And yeah, just a completely different situation. I wonder that immortality would not solve. I wonder that could be a very kind of modern thing because surely so much of human history is defined by violence and glorified violence that doesn't give inklings of this lions and the lambs. So much. I mean, I know all other stuff is in the Bible to you. There's other stuff in the Bible and the Bible is not that particular aspect doesn't necessarily reveal the fundamental motivation of human nature that could be deeper stuff, you know. But yeah, that is a beautiful picture. But is it just about humans or about all of life and you have to think about what is the perfect world look like? It's not just the lions and lambs laying together. It's, you know, how many lions and how many lambs and you know, what having just had a few very technical conversations about Marxian economics versus Kenzie and economics versus neoclassical economics. What is the economic and the government system look like for the lions and lambs that we're longing for? So then you start to build society on top of all those things. But you still you return to this. What is it? What are we longing for? And what's the role of love in that? What's the role of that sad melancholy feeling, the feeling of loneliness? Is the feeling of loneliness fundamental to the human condition? Like, are we always striving sort of channel that feeling of loneliness to connect with others? Like we want that feeling of loneliness. Otherwise, we wouldn't be connecting. Is that fundamental? That feeling like you're alone in this, even when you're with other people, sort of alone together, you're born and lonely, die alone. Maybe loneliness is fundamental. I think the longing for union is fundamental. It's just that it looks so different for different people, you know. Right. Yeah. And coming back to where we were, what we were talking about at the beginning, you know, union looks incredibly social for a lot of people and hardly social at all for others. But everybody needs some version of union. Yeah. People have been telling me recently about polyamory and all those kinds of things. So I'm having probably grown up in a certain part of the world. I'm very, I think I'm very monogamy centric, none the judgmental way just for me. What makes me happy is one person for the whole, for my whole life, basically just dedication. Yeah. Because I've just seen through relationships with people and objects in my life, the longer we stay together, the deeper the tie. So that's just the empirical thing. And yes, that probably is a personalized thing. That's just true for me. It could be very different for others. Maybe it's connected to the introverted thing. Maybe not. Who knows? Before before, because you mentioned songs, sad songs. What what are we talking about? What's a good one? What song do you remember last crying to? Oh gosh. Well, I mean, that's, you know, I don't say tender Swift. I literally dedicated my book to Leonard Cohn. He's played such a huge role in my life. Like I love him. I love him. And I loved him with this crazy love that I've never been able to understand for decades. I think I understand it a little better now. So you're better friends with him than me. So does it make you, is it the musician or the human too? Because the human is a, it's a torsion soul in a way. I'd say it's the musician. It's the musician. I actually was thinking about this the other day. I mean, obviously he's not alive anymore. But I was kind of running the thought experiment. You know, if you were alive still and I had the chance to meet him in person, would I want to do that? And I'm not really sure that I would because he represents for me symbolically everything, well, everything. I'll, I'll, I'll understand this sentence right there. And so, and I think that's okay. You know, I think people can can express something through their art that they might or might not express if you were just like hanging out with them and having a coffee. And I'm happy to know him that way. He can express himself. I'm sure in the way that you know him as over coffee too. Yes, it just requires like a focus of remembering, like a deep focus of connection. That's why like when I interact with folks, it's so draining for me because I'm putting all my whatever weapons I got in terms of like deeply trying to understand the person in front of me. And doing that dance of human interaction, the humor, the intense kind of delving into who they are. So it, which requires like navigating around like small talk type of stuff and and just like compliments and so on in general, like people depending on the culture, depending on the place, they'll sometimes flower stuff with smiling and like compliments like, oh, I love you. This is great. Like this, that's all great. But you want to get to the core of like, what are the demons in the closet? Let's talk about it. You know, and that could be exhausting. That can be really exhausting. So from a Lena co-respective, you get more and more famous. It can be hard sometimes because he probably is also an introvert. Oh, yeah. I know he was an introvert because he actually tweeted about my book when it came out. So that was a precious moment for me. Something about what he said. I'll be listening to the quiet. I can't remember exactly what he said. But yeah, yeah. No, he definitely was. He struggled with depression, which I wonder if that's something that's also connected to introversion. But perhaps not actually, perhaps that they're very disjoint and also connected to sensitivity and many sensitive people are introverts. So it's kind of like a Venn diagram. Well, that's about 80% of highly sensitive people are introverted, but then some are extroverts. And then not all introverts are sensitive. So it's complicated. But he was definitely a sensitive type. Well, there's on top of that, you see like the percent of artists relative to the average that suffer from depression. So creative people is very high. It's crazy. Yeah. And then the number of artists and successful artists who were orphaned when they were young, who lost one parent or both parents, like an astronomical number. I haven't in the book. And remember the percentage, but huge. And he was one of them. He lost his father when he was nine. And his first active poetry was, was he took his father made suits. That's why I thought of him when we were talking about he went through. And, and he took one of his father's bow ties and wrote a poem in his honor and buried the poem and the bow tie in the backyard. And that was like his first creative act. You know that song, Chelsea with all number two. Sure. Where he met, I guess it's about Janice Joplin. Janice Joplin. Yeah. What a fun, intense and cruel person she is. So I guess have you ever seen, I'm sorry to interrupt you, but have you ever seen his son, Adam Cohn and Lana Del Rey perform that song together? Oh, wow. No. It's incredible. I've descended to you. Yeah. So that for people who don't know, I don't, I mean, maybe I don't know. It goes, I remember you well on the Chelsea hotel. You were talking so brave and so sweet, giving me head on the unmade bed while the limousines weighed in the street. There's a good line in there about, about being ugly. Oh, yeah. We are ugly, but we have the music. No, before that, from a guy's perspective, it was, oh, you told me again, you preferred handsome men, but for me, you would make an exception. Yeah. So good. Well, she continued that thread in later, because I think she said that he was lousy in bed. Oh, is that right? Yeah. She publicly said that, which is like, man, did there? Just, okay, for people who don't know, I think this is a true story about them interacting and being together for a very brief time, I don't know, dating, but just connecting, falling in love or in this only, in this very particular way that I think famous musicians, poets can, which is like, it's impossible for that kind of thing to last, but they did for a brief moment. There's like a sadness to it because it's so momentarily, but it's so epic. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. These two past crossings, you just look at that, we know these famous people and it's it's interesting to watch. Yeah. And you don't even have the impression that they're thinking it's going to last. They more know that it's like a blaze of an intersection. Yeah. And the, you know, the limousines already waiting while they're in the moment in the middle of it. And then it's done. But he's talked about how his music, he said something like some people are more inclined to say hello with their music, but I'm rather more valedictory. That's what he said. What is valedictory? Like saying goodbye, like the valedictorian's address. Interesting. You know, so many of his songs really are about some form of parting or goodbye or imperfection or something or like the broken hallelujah. But that's the thing that's so incredible about him is the way that he's taking all of that and pointing it in the direction of transcendence. Like it's not, it's not just pure sadness. It's sadness and beauty. And that's the thing. Yeah. There is a feeling of transcendence in a lot of the songs. It's like sadness and transcendence. You're right. It's a goodbye. But you're moving onto some bigger thing. But in a sort of a theory way, like not like a proud arrogant way. Yeah. So his favorite poet was Garcia Lorca. He actually named his daughter after him. His daughter's name is Lorca. And he talks about how there's some poem that Lorca had written that made him realize that the universe itself was aching, but the ache was okay because that's the way you embrace the sun and the moon. And that's what I think is that's why I think there's this whole rich being in this bittersweet tradition that he embodies. That's like the essence of beauty. You know, it's the way you embrace the sun and the moon. The song hallelujah, I return to that often, have been me to play it. I have now a friend who wants to sing it with me. Is he your singer? Hmm. What is when when somebody says they're a singer, do they have to be good? Because then no. But I would say, yes, I was in a band for a while. I sang for a while. I was always bad, but I enjoy it. I enjoy it. I enjoy lyrics. I enjoy words. Yeah. When song or spoken, they capture something they could get in that moment. Tom Wathes is a huge favorite of mine for that reason. Although he often his lyrics are often not that not that simple. I'd rather have a bottle in front of me than a frontal a bottomy. He's always playing with just like these weird word play that's especially in the English language is trickier to do. I'm fortunate enough to know another language, which is Russian. So I get to understand that certain languages allow for more world word play than others. English for that reason, I don't think has a like a culture of you know what? I mean, to push back on what I'm about to say, but there was no culture of word play until hip hop came along. So like like distorting words in interesting ways for there to be a rhythm rhyme. And at the same time, you're capturing some really powerful message plus humor. All of that mixed in. Actually, hip hop does a really good job with this, but there wasn't a tradition. If you look at poetry in the 20th century, there wasn't really a tradition of that in the United States, but there was in other parts of the world in certain in Russia. Interesting. In power, it also not just by language, by the fact that you go through a world war, where tens of millions of people die. So that about mass death of civilians that inspires great literature and music and art. Yeah, absolutely. Because you start telling the real truth, I think. Yes. There's no more reason for small talk. That's funny. I always have thought that if I could choose any other medium besides writing, it would be singing. But then no, I mean, like I'm really not. I just love the idea of it. But then I also think, you know, fundamentally a shy person. So I think it's much better that my medium is writing instead of singing. So like it all worked out. That said, you're also an exceptionally good public speaker. And you're not supposed to be mathematically speaking. Mathematically speaking. You're not supposed to be a good public speaker. Oh, you mean because of shyness or yeah, because of shyness, because of introversion, because of all those kinds of things. Oh, yeah. But lots of introverts are public speakers actually. Like this is one of I knew this from the studies. But then also when I started going out on the lecture circuit, I realized that all my fellow speakers at all these conferences I was going to, they're all introverts. Because you know, there are people who like spent years figuring out some idea. And now they're out there talking about it. Oh, they're in their head figuring out the idea. Yeah. How do you explain the public speakers? Would you say the good public speakers are usually introverts? No, I think there's just different styles of it. And I think that we just have, when we hear the word public speaker, we have a really limited idea of who that person would be. So for me, like I used to be very phobic about public speaking. And part of the reason for it was because I thought that being the kind of person I was, didn't equal being able to be a good public speaker. Because you're only imagining, you know, like the super kind of out there showman. But I think there's another style of public speaking that's more reflective and thoughtful and conveying ideas and people like that too. Is there advice you can give on how to overcome that? Like if you're a shy person, how do you be a public speaker? I totally give that advice because I used to, before I would give speeches, you know, if I had to do it in law school, if I knew like today was the day when I was going to get called on in a law school class, I literally one time vomited on my way to class. Like that's how nervous I used to be. And yeah, the way to do it is through desensitization. You know, it's like been figured out it's the way to overcome any fear. You have to expose yourself to the thing you fear. But in very small doses. So you can't start by giving the TED Talk. You have to start. I started by going to this class for people with public speaking anxiety. Where on the first day, all we had to do was stand up and say our name and sit down. And like that's the victory. That's fun to watch. All those people with anxiety. Okay, that's the first step in this step. One step at a time. Yeah. And then like with this class, you go back the next week and he would have us come to the front of the room and stand up with other people standing next to us so that you didn't have the feeling of being all alone in the spotlight through others sharing it with you. And you would answer some questions about where do you grow up? You know, where do you go to school? And you declare victory and you're done. And then little by little by little, you keep ratcheting up the exercises until you get to the point where you can do it. And then you start having successes and you realize, oh, you know, actually I can do this. What about like writing versus improvising? Because I knew a few people sort of the colleagues of mine that were working on TED Talks and it feels like you're supposed to like write the thing like way ahead of time and you practice it and they they help you and all that kind of stuff. I don't think I've ever practiced the speech once in my life or lecture or any of that. Like I know it's really good to do, but do you find that relief some of your anxiety preparing well or are you not able to do not preparing well at all? I definitely like to prepare before but the kind of preparation that I've done for my TED Talks is completely different from what I've done for everything else. Because TED Talks are more like a theatrical event where it's like a one-person show. And of course, if you were going to go on Broadway with a monologue, you would know every word. So it's kind of like that. And so I would rehearse it over and over the way you do that. Isn't that more anxiety like going every single word? It's so much anxiety because yeah, you're not even so freaked out about being on stage so much as what if I forget something? Yeah, yeah, absolutely. I mean, they do things like the last TED Talk I gave, I actually did forget something halfway through. Like I just couldn't remember the next line. And so I had to walk over like over there where my notes. Yeah. And so I did that and the audience like very kindly clapped while I did that and then I came back to the spotlight and kept going and they edit that out. Nice. So there's a fan there, Rose. It's a kind of, but still it seems really, it seems really stressful. Like I'm now not sure if I'll ever publish it, but I've been mostly is for personal journey, but I've been working on a series on Weight For It, Hit Learn the Third Reich. Sort of looking at the historical context of everything because of my family was so much affected by that whole part of history. So for me to rigorously I've read a lot about Stalin and Hitler and for me to force myself, one of the best ways to force yourself to really consider material is to have to talk about it. Totally. And so that's that's why I'm doing it. But I'm playing with ideas of some of it, maybe like 20% is written down on paper, but the rest of it is my thoughts in the moment. That's a difficult balance to strike because if you write a lot, you're going to be more precise, you're going to be more accurate, but you're going to miss some of the deep, like honest emotion. The silences won't be correct. Or the silences between the words won't capture the depth of feeling unless if you're somebody like me, if you're like, I guess that's what actors and actresses have to do. Like, basically, even though the script is fully written, you improvise between the words, between the lines. Yeah, that's a skill. Well, it also takes so much time. I mean, I experience that with the TED Talks, it's like you get to a stage, so you're memorizing everything word for word. And at first, in that process, it comes out in a really wooden way, the way you're saying, like the emotion's gone. But once you really know it, so you've internalized the words, then all the emotion comes back and you can say them in a completely different way. You know, and you're really speaking it from the heart, but you have to know it so well before you can do that. I would never recommend it, because it's just like it's so time-consuming. It's an inch. Well, in your case, it works out beautiful. Like when it all comes together, it is a theatrical thing. It's like a musical or whatever. I'm going to, I think I'm going to come out with a one man show on Broadway singing. No, I'm inspired. But for real, where are you going to, where are you going to talk about Hitler and Stalin and everything you're learning? Me too. Have you ever thought of using the medium of just speaking into a microphone, but without the video? I'm curious about this because like I fell in love with podcasts originally before there was ever this whole video component to it. And I realized there's something so primal and magical about having someone's voice in your ear. And my favorite kinds of interviews still, very few people do it this way nowadays, but my favorite kind are when you're just talking into the microphone. So it's not over zoom. It's not in person. It's just you in the microphone and the other person in the microphone and they're in your ear. It's like the ultimate and intimacy. Oh, you made it from the interviewer perspective. That's my favorite. Yeah, but it would be interesting also is with the kind of thing you're talking about of just speaking like just you in the mic. I would love to be in person, but you can't see the person. I wonder what that's like. Maybe me and like they're all there, but behind a curtain or your eyes closed. You just talk and you have your eyes closed or whatever you have. Because I think you still have get the same kind of chemistry because it's not just the visuals. I don't even know that because obviously I have trouble making eye contact. But I don't know if the visual stimulation is the necessary thing. There's something about the way audio travels that captures the intimacy. Where some people actually have headphones on like Joe does this, have headphones on. That's really intimate. Like there's something about that sound going directly into your ear. Yeah, there is something primal there. Yeah, for sure. I've thought about it definitely. As some of my favorite podcasts are like that WTF with Mark Marren. That's audio only. There's a few audio only podcasts that I just love. What is that? I still go on Clubhouse that was a social media platform where it's audio only. It's so interesting that people, the interesting thing about Clubhouse in particular is people from all walks of life can tune in. It's something you need to do some research in terms of introversion on that one because I don't feel any of my introvert triggers happening because nobody can see you as just audio and nobody is offended if you're just sitting there quietly just listening. So you can participate whenever you want or not. Yeah, it's like the ultimate social freedom. You can listen as much as you'd like. You can participate if you want, but you don't have to. It's no big deal. Yeah, if nobody can, if I'm actually a physical party, somebody's going to look at me and be like, why there'll be that pressure to speak, but you don't have to in that kind of audio setting. And there's that intimacy. When it's audio only, it feels like you can reveal a lot more of yourself in some kind of honest way. I don't know what that is. What is that? I don't know, but I assume it's tapping into something really ancient. We used to tell stories around the fire. Like our whole storytelling tradition was oral originally. So maybe that, but we used visual stuff. That's true. You could actually see the person. It seems like the visual element so fundamental to social interaction, but there is something primal about audio. I wonder what that is. And still, that's why I mean, most people listen to podcasts, I think audio only, they have it in their ears while they're doing stuff. Yeah. That's how I do it. And then there's that's how I do it. And that's, well, that's where the friendship like is formed. It's weird. The deep connection with other humans is formed because they're in your ear. And you get to see them grow, you get to see them be bored, experience, excitement and anger and fear and all those kinds of things. It's fascinating. It's fascinating. The world of podcasting is fascinating because we're in this world of essentially radio, even though we all have all this high definition content, all this like TikTok style, fast stuff and still podcasting. I know. And we still choose to do this. It's weird. At the end of the day, I think that's really what people want most is just to talk to each other and to know what people really think. And podcasting of all the media that I've ever seen is the one where people come closest to telling you the truth. And you know, just telling you like the good and the bad and the bitter and the sweet and all of it. Especially long form. There's not enough time. Yeah, exactly. I had to explain this to people like you talk to CEOs and stuff. They don't understand, they understand, they're starting to understand which better. Now I as a hard requirement with like CEOs and stuff, it has to be three hours. I say like this. Wow. Because there's something they're they can't be doing marketing stuff for three hours. They break. They start being human. They start joking. They start relaxing. And if they can't, that also tells the kind of story. But I do that kind of torture for CEOs only. Anyway, yeah. When I was getting my publishing house did media training with me before bitter sweet came out and um and they were preparing me for like the five to seven minute interview that you might have. You know, if you go on some quick TV thing or something like that and God, I hate that. It's like it feels like they're you're basically having to not tell the full truth somehow because you can't you can't tell it in such a short amount of time. Well, the other so to me podcasting is just the best thing that's ever happened. The other downside of the seven minute interview is I think you could do a really good job with that. But the the dance partner has to be very good. It's actually challenging for everybody involved. It's much harder for everybody involved. Because if you can do, you know, I can imagine like a Christopher Hitchens type character who's just super witty. Then that you could do a seven minute thing. You can get to the core of a bittersweet. You can get to the core of the book without asking those generic small talk questions because too many people in that short form interview are just asking very generic questions. They're doing small talk for seven minutes. Yeah. That's like all right. Like you only get seven minutes. You're only get one interesting question. Go ask the weirdest, the deepest question that um that also energizes the other person. It's it's an art form that people don't take seriously. I think the seven minute thing, five minute or even less. And then the commercials, which I yeah. And I've noticed that many of the best podcasters are ones where we're when you're on my side of the table, you feel like it's more of a conversation and less like an interview where you're answering all the same questions you've asked. You've answered a million times before. Yeah. It's really interesting how different the experience is. And you're right. The audio thing, um if you can lose yourself in that, the intimacy of that, and then you don't even remember what stupid stuff you said. Because people I've seen that I mean people don't give them enough credit as um you might you might not be aware or might not be a fan. But Joe Rogan is a incredible conversationalist and that he makes you forget that anything's being recorded. That you're talking at all. He makes you forget time and you just enjoy yourself and that's whatever that is. Um and that plugs then you plug into that primal connection to other humans. What's your favorite Lena Cohen song? Famous Blue Raincoat. Do you know that one? Yeah. I maybe I'll play it. Yeah. For people who don't know what word Cohen and this is your first introduction to him. It's going to sound so gloomy, but it's so good. He's got this deep rich voice Tori-Hemos covering Famous Blue Raincoat. Yeah. No. We want we want the original. Just like how Lua Jeff Buckley covered Lena Cohen. That was a really good one. That was a really good one. Yeah. And I also really like Rufus Wainwrights cover. Um but Famous Blue Raincoat for people who don't know it. It's basically about a love triangle and it's told from the perspective of a man whose wife has just been with another guy who is also his friend and he's writing a letter to that other guy and um and he's reflecting on the way that all the relationships have changed in in the wake of this this event. So there's still friends. So there's still well he he refers to him as my brother, my killer, which is such a Leonard Cohen thing to do because it's always like you know it's light and it's dark all at once. Nothing is ever all one thing. Yeah. I love this song. Yeah right. I mean he's just speaks of it. And the fact that it's four in the morning and it's the end of December like those are transitional moments you know it's cold night going into day and it's December going into the new year. The music. It's not an accident. There is something about December this whatever there's certain scenes you can paint in your mind. There's a poem by Charles Bacusca called Nirvana and it's a young man traveling through the middle of nowhere in the snow. There's something about the snow either the rain or the snow can put you in a certain kind of mood they just uh what is a James Joyce the dead the snow is falling and Dublin uh yeah it can put you in a place. I mean David Jaden who's uh he's a researcher in psychedelics and consciousness at Johns Hopkins he's a great guy and um he's done research that has found that when people are in their transitional moments of life you know and it could be a career change it could be a divorce it could be that they're nearing the end of their life that they very often will say those are their most meaningful moments and their most spiritual moments and and so I feel like that's what Leonard Cohen knows how to tap into instinctively. The year after he died his son Adam Cohen made a memorial concert for him where all these famous musicians came to Montreal where where they had lived um and performed his music and my husband who's not a Leonard Cohen fan and he's not a bittersweet type at all but he knows how I feel about him he's like you know you should really go to that concert um and I felt so ridiculous the whole family like went all the way to Montreal on a Monday um on a Monday on a Monday it was just like a random Monday and we got on the plane like so like everyone's out of school just so I can go to this concert and um and I got there and at the beginning I was feeling like this was all a terrible mistake because it's all these other musicians playing this music and I don't actually really want to hear them like I'd rather listen to him on YouTube. Yes and then and then a musician named Damien Rice came and played famous Blu-rayncoat and he sang it and he did the most amazing thing at the end the whole thing was amazing but then at the end he sang this musical riff that was like all I could say is it was like a musical lamentation of the ages and the whole audience just rose silently to its feet and it was one of the greatest moments that I've ever had. There are sometimes certain artists in a cover can capture in some kind of deeper way like carrying the thread of the power of the song so been listening a lot to Johnny Cashhart which is a 90's nails. Trent Resner's song. Oh you talked about it on your podcast with Rick Rubian. Yeah which is when I reached out to you because I like I love that interview and I love that song also. Yeah yeah yeah so there's there's that there's the Kennedy Center Honors where they they celebrated certain artists that did that for Led Zeppelin and I forgot what her name is but the least thing of heart performs there with heaven and it's like if you're like all right you take one of the great sort of rock songs of all time what do you do in front oh the cool thing is you get to perform this in front of the artist while there's still there you know there's still alive so you get to watch you sort perform in that case the president president Obama is there and she's just knocked it out of the park but at the same time without outdoing the original somehow right you're just making it your own you're making your own but not the part completely not departing from the spirit of the original it's tough because the original hallue by Leonard Cohen it's just not it's it's so powerful but it's just not as good as some of these covers well I think I think it's the words and the melody and then the covers take it to a different place the thing that Leonard Cohen seems to do well he I don't think he did on on hallelujah because he was almost being playful on hallelujah like I don't know as opposed to that deep melancholy like painful longing thing that Jeff Buckley did and others do too I wonder if it's because in a way he I mean that he overedited it but he apparently worked on that song for years and went to gazillions of verses and checked most of them out yeah so I wonder if we're hearing his version after he's like a little tired with that process yeah well that's the other thing is like maybe from a book tour you know it's like you get tired of saying the same thing over and over and over and over you forget you forget the you forgot like the initial look the heart of it yeah but I actually I got a chance to hang out with Dan Reynolds who's the leasinger of Imagine Dragons this incredible band Superpop yeah the most played band on like Spotify or something is that right it's like a huge Imagine Dragons phase so we were listening to their music a lot it was so surreal to be hanging out with them and he's such a down to such a good like very few people I met in my life are just as good of a human being and that has to do with the fact that he's struggling struggles he's still I think struggles but he struggled for a long time with depression and so out of that pain you see born this really good human being this really good relationship with his wife like that like when times are good they lean on each other for like they they're deeply grateful for those precious moments so it's beautiful to watch but the he said that it's really important to feel the song every time otherwise people know people are really good at detecting your bullshit you can't fake it yeah you really have to feel it every time you have to feel the emotion of it whatever the emotion is of the original time you wrote it yeah it's just interesting because it put I thought you could maybe fake it but he's he believes person he's like because he played in front of the gigantic crowds and over and over and over and over and over and over he's like no every time you have to have to be there but there's gotta be times when he's about to go out and he's not feeling it and he has to figure out some way of getting himself into that heart-based well that's what he's saying you have to otherwise you're just that's the job right don't take the job then um and he loves it he says the biggest struggle in fact is the come down from that which is like you have this such a beautiful experience of connected with this large number of people sharing a song that you love and then it's such a rush of connection and then you have to you know when you get off stage you're now back to normal life and that's why a lot of musicians get into heavy drugs and all that kind of stuff because you're you're looking for that rush again it's very tough to like they go into this speaking of intro because he probably isn't an intro where as is like you have to find that calmness and how do you find the calmness when you were just playing in front of tens of thousands of people or hundreds of thousands whatever that number is that rush of connect and everybody there's love in the air and you still have to find that like inner peace and calm that's interesting because I so I don't know if this is the introvert in me talking and the writer in me talking but um I don't know like I I love most the moments where let's say I'll get a letter from a reader who will tell me what something I wrote meant to them and and they'll talk about having had that kind of moment of you know the communion between the writer and the reader and obviously I wasn't there physically when it happened so I wasn't getting that kind of rush that a musician would get in a concert but just the knowledge of that having happened out there in the world do you do something that I added to it yeah it's the most amazing thing but see imagine yeah imagine reading like thousands of those letters and then it's such a strong rush that never thing else doesn't it could be overwhelming I guess this is but like anything else you have to come down and find a calm place like for example the danger with getting letters like that you start taking yourself too seriously you think like you are a special person somehow but that's you really want to avoid that feeling too yeah I don't I don't actually experiencing as that much different from when I'm on the other side of it like if I'm the reader and some other writer has made me feel that way to me it's the same thing yeah me too yeah it's a it's a cool it's like it's a virtual hug I think it's like I was just listening to something about the different Russian writers I was mentioning him to you this academic his name is Gary Salmorson and he studies Russian literature and he was talking about I don't know if I'll be able to get this right but basically that the people misunderstand a work like Anna Karenina and that we think of it as telling us that you're supposed to live you know you're supposed to have like these grand tempestuous romances that might end in death or despair or whatever it is but you know you should be in it for the intensity of the emotion and he's saying actually that's not that it's exactly not what Tolstoy was saying that actually it was the opposite that he was really making he was really advocating for everyday life he was saying it scenes from every day like he was juxtaposing Anna Karenina with all these other couples who were just living happily and quietly day by day and that was what he believed was the ideal so as opposed to the ground rush and as opposed to the intensity I wonder if he is there a depth to the is there a romance of just the day to day so you see there is a romance to the day to day and don't get don't get distracted by the dopamine roll-close variety of the the grant romantic notions yeah and enjoy it while it's happening because those are life experiences also but not to mistake those for being everything where's he from he's a professor at Northwestern at Northwestern and apparently his lectures are like the most popular on campus well people love him Gary Saul Morrison is an American literary critic at Sloblist he's particularly nervous scholarly work on the great Russian novel lists Leo Tolstoy and Fierro Dostoyevsky Morrison is Lawrence deep professor in arts and humanities in Northwestern University yeah wow and there's a lot of incredible work and then I'm sure looking through the lens of Russian literature and the romance of all that he's looking at modern at the modern world yeah I think you should have them on your podcast and quiet flows the vodka or when Pushkin comes to shove the Carmudge in's guide to Russian literature and culture this is like one of the silly books he has on the list okay cool um what are you saying I'm sorry oh no I was just saying yeah like I find that when I take photos on my phone I hardly ever take photos at the moment you're supposed to like everybody's gathered for some event I'll forget to take the photo but I take a lot of like scenes from everyday life because that's what I actually want to remember in the end yeah yeah I'm the same the same it's actually concerning because it's bad for productivity because I love everyday life so much then why why do any ambitious big thing your productivity is pretty good I don't know that you have to worry about it I do so I want to launch a business you know I have a dream outside this is like a fun side thing that you know I want to that there's been a lifelong passion anyway that's I like building I like building stuff and I haven't been doing that as much as I would like that's because largely because I like sitting in silence and enjoying the beauty that is just nature and life and when there's people there's people I love people I love everything and so when you love everything why go through hell to build a company yeah it's a valid question I mean I think you have to have a really good reason for wanting to do it but then your heart calls you for the certain sometimes you look out into the mountains and you say for some reason I long to go there even if it means leaving the tribe and putting yourself in danger and doing stupid shit that's a human imperative for exploration yeah absolutely like when we were talking about you know this idea of longing being like the source code of humanity I think that's also the source code of our creativity it's the same longing for Eden it's like you're always reaching for something that you want to get to or that you want to build yeah it's the best of us what do you think you've read about creativity and sadness you practically speaking how should we leverage sadness for creativity is that sort of in the artist domain in the writers domain in the engineering domains and so on it's definitely in those domains but it's in all domains um you know we're all gonna face pain in this life at some point and we all have the ability to to weather it and withstand it and live with it for a bit and then try to transform it into something that we find beautiful um you know and it's very easy to to notice the grandeur of like the you know the the painting hanging on the gallery wall or the new company that's just been created but it takes a thousand different forms right you know you could bake a cake or like in the wake of the pandemic we've had more people applying to medical school and nursing school and after 9-11 you had people applying for jobs as firefighters and teachers so there's something in the human spirit that takes pain and turns it into meaning when we're at our best and when we're not at our best we deny the pain and then take it out on ourselves and on other people so there's a kind of fork in the road what to do with it but we know I mean there's all these studies that I go through in the book there was one where the researchers had people watch different movies like happy movies sad movies bitter sweet movies and they found when people watched Father of the Bride which is like the ultimate bitter sweet you know you're walking your daughter down the aisle kind of feeling that was they would give them creativity tasks after watching these different movies and the people who had been primed for bitter sweetness were the most creative they were like primed to remember finale you know like love and finality basically love and impermanence there's something about that that's that gets us to our most beautiful state I wonder if it is I mean there's studies like that there's I don't know if you looked into the terror management theory yeah that's really interesting stuff so they especially intensely have you focused on not just sad but traumatic like death primal death and see how that changes your mind like both like I don't I don't know if this creativity studies but they have interesting I think a little bit tainted by political bias but maybe not I mean psychology is a complicated field but they they study like who you're likely to vote for right if you're primed by existential like by thinking about like a fear of mortality fear mortality I forget what the conclusions are but I think they find that people become more tribalistic yeah you know like there's one study where they found that after they primed people that way that um that they would get then give them the chance to put hot sauce on a meal that their political opponents were going to be eating and they put way too much hot sauce on after they've been primed to worry about death I think it's the core we're simple creatures so I actually like in the book I I spent a bunch of time with people who are working on radical life extension you know the the quest to live forever and people ask them a lot questions like you know the kinds of questions you were talking about earlier well like how are you going to feed everybody and how is there going to be space for everybody if everyone really could live forever and and what about conflict when we have an intensified conflict and their answer to that is they point to terror management theory you know when they say because it's the fear of death they're basically saying it's the fear of death that are causing our conflicts in the first place and that if we remove the fear of death we'd have less conflict content with and that I don't really buy that it's possible that that's true but are you also how does the expression go throwing out the baby with the bath water I you also going to remove basically any source of meaning and um happiness in the human condition I guess very possible the death is fundamental to the human condition the fun finality yeah and that's the great philosophical question and I went to a conference of of people who are working on this and I thought that they were going to be talking about those questions all through the conference but the mo is much more like we're so happy that we're here with people who have gotten past all those quibbles um yeah you know we just know there's going to be meaning no matter what the basic assumption is let's try to extend life indefinitely and then we'll figure out if that's a good decision or more like we're sure it's a good decision or at least that was that that was what I felt it's it's either it's either we're sure it's a good decision or we're sure that it's good to believe that it's a good decision meaning like there's no downside uh to to that even if we find out it's wrong but yes there's a kind of certainty obviously you want to extend human life that's the kind of assumption that always um now it could be true but just like the people who over focus on colonizing other planets it feels like you neglect the beauty and the the struggle of our life here on earth I've sort of the same kind of criticism whether it's thinking about Valhalla or any other afterlife is you can have if you're not careful forget to uh to make this life a great one whatever happens afterwards so yeah definitely but from an engineering from a biology from a chemistry perspective it's very interesting to think how do we extend this thing because it does seem that nature the way designed living organisms it really wants us to die because that's part of the selection mechanism in this part this seems to be fundamental to evolution it uh gets because people young they need protection once they once they're young brain they get to explore a lot get to figure out the world they come up their own novel ideas how to uh adapt and how to respond to that world and then is get older and older older they get like stubborn and stuck in their ways and so we need them to die so we make room for new life that's able to adapt to the changing environment if the old doesn't die then you're not you're going to get stale and not be adaptable to the changing environment but maybe it doesn't have to happen so soon yeah maybe it doesn't sick pressing listen I'm a big fan of pressing snooze uh in the alarm clock I'm in the same way um I do I'm one of the people that believe it's or I don't definitely believe of course um I don't know but I think death is a is a fundamental part of life uh but yeah if I'm out of my death but I'll share us how press snooze as many times as possible yeah I know and it's interesting because in some ways I really I share your instinct um there is one scientist who I spoke to at that conference he's one of the leading advocates and he said you know that's a story that we've invented for ourselves because we have no choice and if you really believe that you have no choice then you're then it's it's adaptive to tell that story that death gives meaning to life good point but if you really think you don't if you really think you could try him for it would you still be telling that same story and I've been thinking about that question ever since yeah yeah no they've got to go point they got to go point no matter what as an engineering and the scientific pursuit it's a beautiful one in your own personal life if you can go there sure what's have been some dark places you've gone in your own mind grief loss sad moments moments of sadness that have made you a better writer a better creator a better human being well I mean I've been through a lot of bereavement just in these last couple years with COVID but even before that I mean there's there's all kinds of stuff I I write about it in the book and in some ways I feel like I can write about thing those kinds of things better than I can speak them but I had a really complicated relationship with my mother growing up where we had a kind of garden of Eden during my childhood like we were intensely intensely close and and my mother because of some vulnerabilities that she had reacted with a lot of trouble to my adolescence and to you know growing independent from her and starting to have different religious views and different political views and all kinds of things and and we had a pretty intense break that I described in the book and and it was so intense that even though after that we still would get together for holidays and talk to each other on the phone and all that there was a sense in which like it was over at that point the relationship was over the garden of Eden was no more yeah yeah it was like a feeling of like yeah like I know what Eden was like and and it's not there anymore um and I think it was all the more confusing because like if you lose someone to actual bereavement you go through a morning process and people have thought for thousands of years about how to do that but with something like this there's no process because you're not even admitting to yourself especially when you're like in your teens and 20s that you're mourning something so um but but it was the case that for decades for decades I could not answer even the simplest question about my mother like where did she grow up without tears in my eyes or more than tears in my eyes like embarrassing tears so I would just try to steer the subject in another place um but I will say you know two things happened one is that I've spent the last six seven years writing this book about joy and sorrow and loss and love and all of it and I've really come to terms with all of it and then the second thing that happened is my mother now has Alzheimer's and in her Alzheimer's she's still actually the same person like she's forgotten most things but she still has these conversational lanes that you can travel down that are like the way she always was and the way that she was when I was a kid which was like so incredibly loving and so connected and so warm and sweet and funny and all of it all the things I remembered like it's all come back and for all these decades I had been wondering whether that garden of Eden I remembered had actually happened or whether you know that was just like the fantasy of a child and you know maybe it was always difficult and I had not seen it but I'm seeing her now and I realized that it was all true everything I remember it was all true it all happened because it's happening again and you return to the garden of Eden for a time yeah and to childhood it's always a question of whether you can return to that place well I don't know I don't even know if I'd say I've returned because I'm a different person now and I don't need her in the day yeah you see different than the 10-year-old okay no I mean I'm the same person in terms of my need for love and love of love and all of that but I don't look I'm not dependent on my mother for it the way I was then and that makes the experience really different yeah they're younger she's a she's a god figure what what is that the roots the parents such a funny civilization will live and there's a depth of connection to parents that's that's probably more powerful than anything else in terms of its formative effect on who you are I think it's the most powerful and in fact when this started happening I got to college and I took a class in creative writing and I tried to write a story a fictional story a fictionalized version of what was happening and I called it the most passionate love because of what you just said yeah and the teacher actually said to me she's like you know you should put this story in a drawer and not take it out again for 30 years because you're way too close to it yeah so I've now finally written it like 30 years later yeah yeah you probably still too close to it though I don't know though I mean I do think like I think everybody goes through experiences in this life where you're experiencing like a fundamental pain of separation and desire for a union and it takes so many different forms and this was my primal form of it but you know for someone else it's a betrayal or a bereavement or an exile from a country of their birth or whatever it is but and then you get to solve that puzzle for for the rest of your life yeah the fact of like I really do believe that you know that the original love that we long for like that one of the great things that you learn as you grow older is that the love exists in some plane that's more general than the particularized form in which you first knew it yeah I mean that's why despite all the cleaping interpretations with why even though segment 4 it is probably wrong in the details it was the first one to sort of suggest that our experiences I mean he said that that was really controversial at the time when young people they start having sexual thoughts like at age 2 or something whatever the hell he said so you develop this kind of connection to the opposite sex or whatever to your mother to your parents and I think while a lot of that is shown to be probably not true what is like a deeper truth there is your first early experiences of love or depth of connection or probably somehow strongly formative of your conception of love and your definition of the perfect thing you're reaching for for the rest of your life yeah I think that's right and you can really see it when you become a parent too you know you can just see like there's don't screw it up you know I have to say like I mean not gonna would I actually feel like like we're doing pretty well like my kids are teenagers now and I really had thought that I wasn't gonna repeat the issues that I had been through with my mom and I can say I really am not um yeah like my mom for various reasons just had a lot of trouble with my independence and I just don't feel that at all so yeah there might there might be other um things you're totally blind too there I guess that's possible is not the way of parenting is you you saw the problems of the past but there's another new one you did find out in under 20 years but like so far so good what wisdom about parenting can you can you can you give from your own experience if from your writing yeah well oh my god there's a lot to say so on the bitter sweet side of things the wisdom that I would give is that especially for kids who are growing up in relative comfort with everything going pretty well um they get the idea that real life is when things are going well and when things don't go well it's like a detour from the main road as opposed to understanding that it's all the main road um and I tell the story in the book of this time that we went on this family vacation where we rented a house in the countryside and the house was next to this field where we lived to donkeys that our kids fell in love with and they were like really little at the time two boys and they're spending all this time feeding carrots to the donkeys and it's all beautiful and then comes the day where they realize that we're leaving in like two days and they're never going to see these donkeys again and they start crying themselves to sleep and the usual things that parents might say at a moment like that of like you know maybe we'll come back or another family will feed them will feed these donkeys none of that made any difference but when we said to them you know goodbye is part of life and this feeling you're having everybody has it you've had it before you're going to have it again you'll feel better in a couple days um but this is the way it's supposed to be this is natural that's when they stopped crying because i think that's when they stopped resisting yeah like it's one thing to feel the pain of goodbye and it's another thing to be feeling like this isn't supposed to be happening it's the resistance part of this isn't supposed to be happening that makes life really difficult yeah this is a more clear-eyed view of what it really is this isn't these supposed to be happening there's a show called yellowstone that's recently started watching yeah no i've heard of it we we actually started watching it but only a few minutes and didn't get into it so there's just a quick it's not a spoil there very kind but there's a father taking out the sun for the first time to go hunting and you know to shoot their first buck and the sun is really sad because he pulls the trigger and he took a life and the father says that everybody gets killed in this life that's the way of nature that's the way each one of us is going to get killed and it's interesting because i didn't really think of it that way because you think you die but he really framed it as killed because he's like there's no such thing as dying of old age let's medically let's discuss that a bit but basically there's something whether it's a truck or a bacteria something's going to kill you in the end and that was an interesting way to look at it because we tend to think of humans aren't aren't supposed to be killed we think of murder as one of the sins sort of one of the things that you don't do in society but you know what we do that's a more technical discussion whether we ultimately get killed by something in the end but into some degree that's true at least for most of us that there's something against us whether it's cancer or those kinds of things it's interesting but yeah that reframing of it's not it's supposed to be this is the way of the world yeah so it's funny i mean you know at the same time that i just wrote a whole book about the fact that this is the way it is like i really do believe this is the way it is and and with this reality there's an intense beauty that comes along with it so we have to accept the reality to get to the beauty i believe that and at the same time there's a part of me that's just like yeah but give me the magic wand to make the world different yeah yeah yeah i don't know i don't know how much of this is a female thing too like i was watching with my son my 12 year old the other day we were watching this show about the battle of thermopoly and yeah and it was like all about you know valor and glory on the battlefield and um and i said to him something like gosh don't you just wish we lived in a world where you didn't have to do all this in order for everyone just to live their lives i just looked at me completely puzzled like no you know like to him it all just seemed self-evident that the world would be structured that way you know and he had like the the 12 year old like admiration for the valor at all but you you wonder if that's um if that's nature or nurture i wonder what that world looks like um we do live in a world where murder is seen as bad but you look at a lot of the human history i don't know if they had the same kind of conception of that in terms of you you have to ask what kind of murder uh you know for what purpose you know war was a way of life um it's interesting it's interesting if we can imagine properly a future that is different than ours in terms of operating under different moral systems i'd like saying with living um indefinitely or living in a society with no war like how fundamentalist war how fundamentalist death i mean i think it's so fundamental to our source code i just wish that our source code were different basically well i can't get people working on that wish there's there's brain computer interfaces that try to merge so greater and greater with smartphones were already kind of cyborgs but greater and greater merger of computational power so literally adding source code to our original source code just a different there's the mushy biology that runs source code and then there's more cold electrical uh systems and then they integrate together and potentially one day we offload the magic that is human consciousness also into the machine and then we'll get to see maybe maybe they'll be a little bit less as whole issue about the whole war thing that be more but there is i think even when i think about engineering human intelligence or superhuman intelligence systems i feel like they also need to have the yang yang of life they have to be able to be afraid and to um to be sad and all those kinds of things but maybe it's because um a product in this particular environment maybe sadness is a human useful human invention but not a universal one this is what i don't know because this is where i come back to the as i told you like the original reason that i wrote my whole book was the feeling that somehow in the expression of sad music is what other people see when they talk about god like there's something so there's like an ultimate beauty there yeah that i don't know if we have access to without that but maybe we do but i can't say in this world that's a great way to get access to that state is it within the reach of science to deeply understand this you think to understand that why if you're sad when you're listening to a song or why you feel some to love when you're listening to a sad song to a sad song right yeah why why the sad why the sad song opens up some kind of deep connection to something you can call divine or something whatever the heck that is yeah i do think i mean we have like really early signs of it from the research and i'm i'm sure we're just at the yeah scratching the surface stage but i mean like we know for example that you know the vagus nerve which is so fundamental that it governs our breathing and our digestion that our vagus nerve also activates when we see another being in distress there's like an instinctive impulse to want to make it stop and and the theory is that that's an evolutionary design because we had to be able to respond to the cries of our infants you know and from that ability grows the the greater ability to respond to other people's cries too so that's probably just you know like the very first step in being able to understand what all that is we've already given plenty of advice but broadly what advice would you give to young folks today about career about life whether they want to be writers lawyers scientists musicians and artists whatever the heck they want to be how can they live a life they can be proud of okay here's what i think um you should absolutely do that thing that you're dying to do but you should always have a plan B and it like a backup plan and a way of earning a living no matter what happens because i feel like people we we have this narrative in our culture of like with the glamorous thing is to you know figure out the thing you love and then risk everything to achieve that but first of all a lot of people aren't comfortable with that level of risk and second when you're living with that level of risk that's a cognitive load too and so you don't have the full emotion and heart to be able of focus on the thing that you actually really love because you're like stressed out about it so i'd say like get the backup plan in place and then do the thing my advice would be the opposite okay i'm moving the romantic well i think the best the the truth is be aware of the cost not having a plan B has so do it deliberately if you don't but i you know i'm with bikowski and find what you love and let it kill you i think not you have to actually know your personality i know if i have a plan B i will not try as hard on plan A and i would likely take plan B because if if plan A is the risky thing i just work way much better when in the state of desperation so with my back against the wall and you have to know that about yourself i think that has to do so i think we can refine it to say you actually have to really know yourself and how you respond to different kinds of risk like i i would not do well in that kind of situation i'd be like up at two in the morning worrying about it yeah where is if i have some like it doesn't have to be paying the rent in some grand way but i've if there's some basic way of paying the rent then my heart's free to do the thing i really love that's hilarious i for me the only way i'm free is um when i don't know how i'm going to pay the rent huh yeah because that's because otherwise i'll find a way to pay the rent that's not at all a source of deep fulfillment for me so i say so it's like if you don't have like the what's the expression i don't know something like the dog at your back you know deadlines then you won't actually do it i create real or artificial deadlines anxiety and so on so yeah you have to yeah so really the advice does know your triggers but but but we're still saying the the same basic thing of like do the thing you really love but just set up the strategy as the rest of your life personality exactly exactly what do you think is the meaning of life the meaning of this whole thing um probably has something to do with whatever we feel when we listen to a sad song yeah i because two things come simultaneously to my mind when you ask that question and i've been asking it since i was four i remember the first time i did um the question is more important than the answer probably yeah keep asking i don't know the first one is beauty and i don't know beauty so important but i just know that it is and impossible to define perhaps is it is it definable um other than you know it when you see it i don't know i mean just has to do with that line yeah you feel something when you just see it do you hear it yeah you just see it and it's like like some it's whatever can deliver you to that mode of transcendence where you're no longer purely in your own self and you're in something higher and when you're in those states of mind you know it because you have the temporary sensation that that you could die at that moment that the people you love could die and it will all be okay because there's something else so that's my first answer and the second answer is um the need to relieve psychic pain like other people psychic pain i don't know why that's just that's just like an impulse that i have psychic pain is more like like suffering of any form what it would yeah but i mean what is there a particular yeah just making the world better and less pain what less pain to go around in general um hence here the sort of optimistic desire and longing for a world without sort of destruction without malevolent destruction yeah world where that wouldn't be necessary yeah exactly exactly but yeah like i so i had this moment it wasn't so long ago i was doing some interview and somebody asked me like what are you longing for right now and my answer at that moment was like you know what i'm actually at this moment in life where i'm not longing for anything i'm at this particular way station where everything is the way i wanted to be and of course the minute you say something like that you know you're gonna be proven wrong because like an hour later i get a letter from a reader who i've been in touch with over the years and he was telling me about like a psychic struggle that he's going through and and i just feel like oh my gosh if there were anything i could do to make it that his life wouldn't have been such that he would be in this position in the first place like his struggles had to do with a long life history so i don't know why i feel that it's funny but i do those moments when you are just at peace there's nothing else you want feel like that's like a temporary repose like it's a pause like exactly you bet your ass a desire follows that at some point but you get to enjoy those little moments yeah i do know when i said even when he asked me and i answered that way i said this is a way station like i knew it was temporary but i didn't realize it would be disrupted like an hour later and uh sort of to give you push back to your to your statement about the possibility of uh quick you could say a beauty and basically alleviating suffering there's a quote of the like from hunter estomps that pushes back against that which is for every moment of triumph for every instance of beauty many souls must be trampled but that's a very hunter estomps and and you know how he ended up he's not the greatest philosopher all the vultimes but he's certainly a a beautiful a chaotic human being well that's true and i will tell you that my nickname for my husband is gonzo kind of because of him you know he invented that form of gonzo journalism where like the the writer is totally in the story and my husband like that's his personality he's like in everything that he does he's really in it he's really present he just lives that way so well done so his name is chem but i call him gonzo like 90% of the time well then that's a beautiful way to end this season this is thank you for your work thank you for being who you are thanking you for initially at least making me feel okay about being an introvert and educating and making the rest of us feel great about being introverts it's like half the world or whatever that could is it's a lot of people thank you for being you thank you for talking today it was awesome this is fun thank you so much it was so great to talk to you and i think it was the what i said to you when we first got connected is thank you for your way of being in the world i really really love it thanks for listening to this conversation with Susan Kane the support this podcast please check out our sponsors in the description and now let me leave you with some words from Susan Kane herself the highly sensitive introvert tends to be philosophical or spiritual in their orientation rather than materialistic or hedonistic it dislikes small talk they often describe themselves as creative or intuitive they dream vividly and can often recall their dreams the next day they love music nature art and physical beauty they feel exceptionally strong emotions sometimes acute bouts of joy but also so sorrow melancholy and fear highly sensitive people also process information about their environments both physical and emotional unusually deeply they tend to notice solidities that others miss another person's shift to mood or a light bulb burning a touch too brightly thank you for listening and hope to see you next time