 The following is a conversation with Levi Rosman, also known as Gotham Chess. He's a professional chess player and educator. I highly recommend he check out his YouTube channel called Gotham Chess. And now a quick few second mention of each sponsor. Check them out in the description is the best way to support this podcast. We got Notion for Team Collaboration. I thought of Greens for daily multivitamins, ExpressVPN for Internet security and Inside Tracker for Bio Monitoring. Choose wisely my friends. And now onto the full ad reads. As always, no ads in the middle. I try to make them interesting, but if you must skip, please still check out the sponsors. I enjoy their stuff maybe you will too. This show is brought to you by Notion, a note taking and team collaboration tool. I think it's most popularly known for the note taking capabilities. All the cool kids go to the productivity forums and subreddits and stack exchange. Notion comes up time and time again as like the stellar, the top tool to use for note taking. I use it for note taking on the individual basis. But the thing that you may not know that Notion is also incredibly good at is the collaboration aspect of it. And not just any kind of collaboration, but collaboration for any kind of task. So we could even start up for businesses for, I don't know, homework assignments, all of it. They provide a kind of full on operating system for running every aspect of a company or a team. You can learn more and get started for free at Notion.com. This show is also brought to you by Athletic Greens and it's AG1 Drink, which is an all-in-one day drink to support daily health and people performance. Where was it? Somebody sent me a Reddit in a days. I remember seeing a kind of meme saying like this is like the Lex Friedman podcast in a nutshell or maybe the Lex Friedman experience in a nutshell. I don't know. There was some kind of crappy robot that has in Athletic Greens container and is doing the shaking and mixing and all that kind of stuff. I mean, yes, but probably I would do a better job engineering the system and probably would not use it for that particular task. Like why introduce a machine into a task that's deeply human, my friends. So yes, somehow if this was the true Lex Friedman experience, you probably want to add a little bit of love into the whole thing, which chemically and nutritionally speaking is already built in. That's why I love Athletic Greens. Not just because it's green and delicious, but because it's really good for you provides it with a nutritional basis for your mental and physical excellence. So you can be a beautiful version of you that you already are. They'll give you one month supply of fish oil when you sign up at Athletic Greens.com slash flex. This show is also brought to you by ExpressVPN. I use them and I have used them for many, many years to protect my privacy on the internet. ISPs, collect your data. Even if you're using Chrome and Cognito to go to the shady websites that you go to and I'm not judging, I'm not judging. I'm giving you all the respect and props you deserve, sir or madam for all of the darkest, the shadiest places you go on the internet, but you should protect yourself when you do that. And a good VPN is a must. That's like the first and the most powerful layer of protection. ExpressVPN is my favorite. It's the one I've always used. So it's the one I really want to recommend. You can do all kinds of other stuff. It doesn't matter. What matters is it works fast. It works on any device, including yes, on Linux, Android, anything, anything. You can go to ExpressVPN.com slash Lex pod to get an extra three months free. This show is also brought to you by Inside Tracker, a service I use to track biological data. They have a bunch of plans, most of which includes blood tests that give you information based on which machine learning algorithms will give you advice after analyzing your blood data, DNA data, fitness tracker data, all that kind of stuff that will give you advice based on what's going on inside you. You should do your life. Maybe sort of diet and lifestyle changes, not like career changes. Although that'd be pretty cool. Where your DNA data could tell you, hey, maybe that career that you wanted as a chocolate here. Is that the right way to say chocolate here? Like a person who makes chocolate, right? I'm not even going to check. I can look it up online, but I'm just going to go with it. Then you can clip the solid to embarrass me as the internet seems to do with all the stupid things I say. I say so many stupid things. They accumulate over time. All I can do is just laugh at myself and appreciate you, sir or madam, for laughing along with me. Anyway, inside track is incredible because the best health advice, medical advice, all kinds of advice, I think she'd be grounded based on the data that comes from you. Get special savings for limited time when you go to inside tracker.com slash Lex. This is Alex Friedman podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description and now dear friends, here's Levy Rosman. You're known for being able to guess people's e-lo rating. So what do you think? Just by looking at my face, deep into my eyes, what's my e-lo rating? Here, I'll help you. I'll do e4 for the listener. I actually read that stock fish prefers e4. Does it really? I actually didn't know that because it maximizes the number of tactical options. So that makes sense. The writing answer is 3,400, which is a belief stock fish. You guessed people's e-lo chest rating. What's that take? How hard is it to do that? Like, what are telltale signs of red flags about a person at different ratings? Is there something you look for? Yeah, I think you can separate it. Something like the very first, the zero to about 800 for simplicity sake, I'm going to use the chest.com rating system because Leaches is slightly different. It tends to go to 300 points higher than chest.com, sometimes even 400, 500 points higher. But then it catches up. They catch up around 22, 2300 I would say. What's chest.com? What's Leaches? Can you like? Yeah. So explain what the differences and what they are. There are two chest websites. Good starting point. Yes, chest.com is, it has obviously the free option where you can play games, you get some sort of puzzles every single day, you get some sort of lessons every single day, but then they have tiered memberships where you can be annually or per month that you can unlock all the other features. And like what? Like for training for like puzzles and all that kind of stuff. Yeah, they have unlimited puzzles, but they also have their biggest selling point for sure is like a dedicated game review that it's like very flashy and sophisticated and the coach will literally tell you what you did wrong. Every single moment the computer evaluated a mistake, but the most important thing that they have is they offer international masters, grandmasters, the opportunity to make video lesson libraries, which hundreds of hours of anything. I can even learn some stuff on there probably. I have anal beads that are communicating with stock fish, the Bluetooth. We'll get to that. Yes, we'll get to that. It's epic. It's actually scary how many people think that's a real thing, by the way, which is the danger of the internet, but we will get into that. But I tend to believe that people believing a thing that's hilarious at scale will make that thing a reality. I'm with you all on this. I think people manifest the meme. The meme becomes real. But that's in all walks of life. I think there is something about humor sort of being... Why did I... What was I was going to say is I feel like humor becomes a lubricant for the trajectory of human civilization. And I don't know why the word lubricant went into my head, which beads... I understand. But it's very Freudian. Anyway, so to 0 to 900, if you're a 1300 player, you're saying... If you're not good at end games, you don't understand how to convert positions that have seven or eight pieces left on the board. You don't know when you're supposed to activate your king. You don't know how a bishop outplays a knight with just several pawns on the board. Those are all very important things because it's not just about knowing the theoretical end games. Some positions in chess are literally solved. If I showed you a position, I asked what's the evaluation and how do you win it. There's a technique you're supposed to know that technique. And the coach is on chess.com can help or no. Yeah, so these lesson libraries, it's not like a live lesson. It's pre-recorded training position, walk you through it, and then there's a dynamic factor as well where you can practice. You can practice the theoretical and you can practice a practical game where there's no set format to do something. It's just based on your previous experience. Really LeChes is their entire thing. It's an open source website that tries to be as free as possible and operates totally on donations. They don't have any advertisements. They don't have, which is weird because normally in big competitive settings, it's all capitalistic. You have one big entity and another big entity and they're both for profit. But in this case, the big argument is, well, they offer a lot of things for free. You can analyze your games free. You can go into LeChes' lessons library and do things for free. The comparison that I always make is chess.com is basically like having a good personal trainer and having someone to help you at the gym. LeChes is you have to do all the stuff yourself. So you can combine YouTube with LeChes. No one's going to really point you in the right direction. You've got to go fully explore on your own if you want to do it. You can. I also like to say, can I make a controversial joke? Yes. Art and LeChes supporters are like very angry, you know, only vegetarian or vegan folks because they will tear you apart and try to convert you as much as possible. Did you just point a large number of haters onto this very podcast? Is this what just happened? No. Is there like several people that were very upset at you right now in throwing things? Okay. Here's the joke that I've made because if people have chess.com and I love all people but I'm just saying chess.com patrons do not try to actively convert folks on LeChes. Folks on LeChes are like, you know, there's a meme chess.com chess.com started at LeChes. Started somewhere in red, unreaded, energy chess kind of a... Oh, so LeChes is a little bit of an anarchist organization. Would you go as far as to say there are terrorist extremist organizations? Are we going there? For legal reasons that's... I thought LeChes has like really good analysis. Does it have an engine for analysis of like games or is that an open source thing that they both do? They both use stockfish 15. Okay. And then the rest is the interface around stockfish that shows... It's tough. It's the live... So chess has a live server where you and I can play a game against each other. We just both see if we have the same rating. We have the same criteria. Yep. We'll play a game. But there's also reviewing your own games. There's an opening database so you can see what the most popular trends are. So LeChes is great. Like I'm sponsored by chess.com and I will openly say that. But you can't have your deeply biased. Yes. Okay. But I'm also complimenting the competitor. But... Can you play games on LeChes or is it just for analysis? Yeah, you can. Yeah. Exactly. So they're like legitimately competitors. Not exactly the same thing, but they're trying to match for features. But you're saying LeChes is more chaotic and then chess.com is more like a professional. Yeah. I don't know. I don't know if it's chaotic. I just know that it's... You have to... No one's going to hold your hand if you go to LeChes. You absolutely can. You can play games. You can analyze your games. But you have to discover yourself. The whole point of chess.com is to make the journey as simple as possible. But I also firmly believe you can't have any sort of growth in chess without a chess.com or a chess 24. What's chess 24? So chess 24 was another live server with some lesson libraries and so on. But they were, I think, the process was they were bought by Play Magnus. So what's Play Magnus? They Magnus... That's Magnus Carlson's thing. He doesn't own it. He owns some stake in it, I think, 9 or 10%. They owned a bunch of chess companies, including chess 24. But now it seems like they're either merging or basically getting acquired by chess.com. Got it. And then Play Magnus is an app. Also, you can play different levels. There's also the educational stuff. Yes. Okay. The four profit chess companies make the option for grandmasters to make a living to make chess in eSport. Yeah, LeachSus is great. It doesn't put on any events. There's no commentary. So you can have both in theory and probably some controversy is good. Does chess.com sponsor you? They help you out in some way? What's the connection between your videos and streams and so on in chess.com? Are they supporting people in that way or no? My content, they don't necessarily... I just make whatever I want. I don't have... I'm not senseless. They do something stupid. I will call out their leadership. It's not like... I have the logo up in my YouTube videos or... Yeah, that's just that kind of stuff. So anyway, back to... I mean, that was really helpful. I was confused about all that. The guessing people's rating. So the thing you mentioned about the end game, if you don't know what the hell you're doing with the end game, what does that mean about your rating? If you don't know how to finish with just a few pieces on the board, you could be my rating. That's the self-deprecating humor we tuned in for. And games are hard, man. They're tough. Yeah, you can't have... There's a reason Magnus is the best because seven hours into a game when everybody's given up, he's still squeezing juice out of the fruit. So that's the way I would describe it. So that's not good source of information. If you... No, within the first 15 moves, generally, you can tell. Because you can tell how well they played the opening. So how well they knew what they were supposed to memorize, what they were supposed to play, and then how they react to peace interactions. So if they are faced with a move that a more advanced player would deal with very swiftly because there's kind of a natural response, that gives you information. If they move their king when they're in check, when they didn't have to, that's a massive giveaway. Some people just think, oh, I'm in check, so I have to move my king. So it's like how direct the response of your play is to the danger. So if you're more moving multiple pieces at a time, meaning you're moving, the pieces are tied together in interesting ways. Okay. Okay. What about the opening, can you tell also? Because a lot of people can memorize openings, right? Yeah, but it takes two to tango. So you could memorize a bunch of stuff, but if you're 900 and I'm 900, your rating is fluctuating all over the place in this podcast, I feel like 12, 13, 900. You can memorize things. I'm going to play some crap and you can't play the way you memorize them because I have to respond to you in certain ways. So you will either respond the way you think you're supposed to respond and that will probably be incorrect. Or now you have to figure out how to deal with the fresh position. Also the 900 will reflect itself in both cases. Yeah. Yeah. I wonder if actually, so do you know your current rating or no, or your top rating? What was your top? I know both my current elo, like over the board now is 23, 20, my peak was 24, 30. Oh, cool. So can you play like a 900 player? Like can you force yourself? Yeah. So given that you've guessed a lot of elo ratings, can you kind of emulate that? That's kind of an interesting question for me. Yeah, yeah. Of course, before I was doing YouTube and Twitch, I was teaching kids. So I had to. Not only did I have to play at their rating, I also had to play and sometimes even behave and explain things in a way that the kid could understand. So absolutely. Yeah. That's what contributed to the growth of the channel, frankly. I kind of understood how beginners thought about the game. So yeah, you did, you taught people chess, you coached people for many years, I guess in New York. Yeah, New York. What did you learn about the way people learn from that? So like how did people that were successful at getting good at chess quickly? What were some of the commonalities, some of the patterns that you saw? Obsession. Yeah. What does obsession look like? I would say it's obsession and also love of the game. So if you're bored, you don't want to watch a show, you want to boot up chess.com or Lee Chess just for just so I don't get flamed by anyone in the audience. And you just play. So you're saying Lee Chess people are the ones that would attack aggressively. They're the kind of people. Probably the Chess 24 people. Oh, that's another. So there's not I didn't know I thought chess 24 was part of the chess.com. Well, now yes. Uh, cult or tribe or whatever it turns to one of you. No, I'm sure there's even more places to play live. There always have been more places to play live, but Chess like I'm Lee Chess dominate and. Well, Chess 24 is the rough for live interface. Of course, they have good courses and everything, but yeah, I got it. I got it. Some are even good people or whatever. Yes. That quote goes. Okay. Like a obsession. That means the way they look at the board, when they're bored, how quickly do they return to the chess board, that kind of stuff? Just like how many hours a day they want to spend. Yes. They spend and want to spend some kids definitely have a talent. Of course, there's this eternal debate talent versus hard work. I don't necessarily know if it's a talent for Chess specifically, but it's a talent for, I'm sure there's some sort of spatial visualization in your mind, your, you start picking up what squares are controlled by your pieces and opponents pieces faster. Your memory is much stronger. So you don't just learn openings like we discussed. You learn literal patterns such as, oh, I remember this from two tournaments ago. I remember this from a game I played just yesterday and you just keep playing and playing and playing. But I think the one commonality, I think I've seen in all kids, it's a obsession. You have to play a lot. And I've seen kids who are brilliant kids. If you give them a page of tactics, puzzles, they solve faster than anybody. They can pick things up here super fast. They're a pleasure to teach. They go to a tournament, disaster. They can't handle the anxiousness. They can't handle that silent face to face war with another six year old. They can't even handle. There's also trash stock. That's one sentence by a kid can throw off your prize student. And I've seen kids just totally disintegrate. I've seen also my students bully other kids, corn. My student wasn't that strong, but their verbal warfare, which is not allowed, but goes unnoticed. It's not even verbal warfare. It's just going like, literal facial expressions you make at the board. I didn't even think about that. There's pretty creepy, not creepy, that's not the right word. But there's an intensity in that silence over the board. You can probably hear stuff like, it's super quiet. It's like a library. And then there's just a tension that builds. You can hear the breathing. And at the highest level, both sides are involved in a battle that they both foresee 99% of the time. That's the scary part is that you both see the exact same thing. It's very rare. You play a move. I didn't see it. It's that I misvaluated it. I saw the move could be played, but I missed something three or four moves deeper. You play that moving. Suddenly you're excited and I'm nervous. But all of a sudden, you make an inaccuracy and now the tide shifts. He could be on totally different planes throughout the game or we could be on the same plane throughout the game. So it's really fascinating. Yeah. So your thought is when you see a move that you see in subop, then when you start to think, what was that? You start to try to make sense of that. Did you miscalculate or did they miscalculate? Isn't that what Magnus is really good at is taking people away from like making subop to move to take them away from the known openings or is that unfair to say? Yeah. He gets part of his really dominant reputation, I think, from not letting people get into ultra theoretical positions. He just won this tournament, this online tournament and he said he had a young player strategy. He had an anti, sorry, anti young player strategy. What's that mean? It means that by move seven or eight, you go to the database, no games. Okay. Kid is on their own. They have to swim on their own. And they have to deal with the strategic complexities of the position which he just, he gets and he might get from just an enormous database within his brain of historical games that have similar structures or just sheer genius. Like we won't know. It's a mix of the two for sure. The younger you are, you can't remember a game played in 1951 and some bar in the Soviet Union, but he does because he read a book once or a magazine once. He just remembers. He remembers the structure which it's just, it's not fair. It's crazy, right? What do you think makes some, if you can sort of link on it, what do you think makes him so good? I think it's the memory and I think it's, he just seems to get the game better than anybody else. That's the best way I can describe it in sports. You have reaction time. You have strength. You have, but also as he's now evolving, it's stamina. So there have been games that if you put two other 27, 50 rated players or world top 10 players, they would have drawn the game. The game would have ended the game. Nobody would have won it. You put Magnus as one of the aggressors in that game. Not only the chance of victory doubles from 5% to 10%. What's that about? Because what is a game six against Neprolyc? Right. Isn't Stockfish say that it's supposed to be a draw? So 0.00 does mean a draw sometimes, but other times it means it's the joke I always make, it means that Stockfish is out for a smoke break. It just, it can you explain the joke? Yes, it can explain 0.00. Yes. So Stockfish will show an evaluation, which determines whether the position is equal, slightly better for one side, slightly better for the other side or completely winning. You can 0.00.0 minus 0.2. That's all within a balance. You can say, okay, black has a little sprinkle of activity, something white has that. But if it's 0,00, it could be literally a dead draw, meaning theoretically, just impossible to win. And what that means is the smoke break joke is, Stockfish doesn't know. There is so much complexity within the position, the combinations of different moves that are acceptable and okay, it cannot evaluate correctly. Wow. So even the end games are tough for Stockfish. Which is why Magnus won that game because there was practical value remaining. It wasn't a dead draw. He continued to ask questions over the course of six or seven hours. He would sacrifice upon, he would sacrifice another upon to damage the structure. Feltuations stayed the same because a machine could stop him, but not young. And that was one of my favorite, that game ruined my whole day, by the way. Because it's so long. Yeah, I made so many plans that day. It completely ruined my day, but it was a very worthy recap. You were just all in. You watched that whole game. I watched the whole game and the World Championship was a crazy time because I wanted to be first with the recap video, but I also wanted to be best with the recap video. So I spent all the hours of the games watching all the live broadcasts and getting all the information, all the variations and trying to put that into the recap. It was a lot of fun. It was a huge adrenaline that when it was all over. So just for people who don't know, that's the most recent World Championship. So you had a, I mean, that was a draw after draw after draw after draw. Yeah. It was kind of boring in that way. Or maybe our draws, is there like, non-boring parts within the draw to you when you were like just studying it carefully? For me, yes. For the average viewer, no. That's the truth. Especially when the game itself is not that exciting. When Magnus plays a strange move on move 9 or 10 that hasn't ever been played, and then Jan has to try to exploit it and he fails and no attack builds up and they shuffle their pieces for three hours. My favorite thing is when the commentator is like, I don't know why he did that. I wonder why he did that. Like, when the commentator is confused, that's my, as a person who's just a spectator, just like, that's interesting. Because then you, the most interesting part is about listening to the commentators who, I guess themselves might be grandmasters. All. Yeah. They are trying to, I guess, just like NEPO, just like Magnus tried to figure out what's the idea here. What are you thinking? Yeah. That's cool. That's an interesting part of the game. But other than that, it seemed, yeah, I was sure this could just kind of keep being a draw, especially in that situation. So it seems almost remarkable that his Magnus was able to put pull out a win in game 6. And after that, at least Magnus said that that ends it because NEPO was going to have to take more risks and that opens it up to pure chess. And then it's, who was it Steve Prifantane said, like, whenever it's, whenever there's a race is down to like pure guts, then that's when I win it. There was also a conversation about Yann's first half, second half in any tournament. And the first half he's just brilliant on fire. You could even say he was out playing Magnus, but the entire conversation before the match was Yann slows down. And at the first sign of a loss or a setback, the match might fall apart. And that was the worst way to lose. There was literally no worse way. And it just got worse from there and there. I mean, it was one move mistakes. But he's back. He's been, Yann is won the candidates again. He's going to play for the World Championship. So who you got it? Who you got? What is this sling terminology? Can we like somehow edit that into a more sophisticated with the British accent type of phraseology? Okay. Who do you think will win that match? I think it's 55, 45, but I don't know. For real. So it's close. It's very close. Okay. You can make both cases. You could say Ding, you could say, Yann has been here before. You can say to the World Championship stage, he knows what it's like to have a training camp and so on and so forth. His playing style is very, but you can also say Dingley ran as one of the most stable, unemotional chess players. And Ding oftentimes goes from down to up. So in the candidates, he lost to Yann in the very first game. 14 round tournament. He got demolished in the first game. I'm sure he was suffering from jet lag. The flight he came to Spain like two days before the games began, which was crazy to me. And he got second place by the end. His chances of finishing in the top two were like 2%. After that first round, game people wrote him off completely. So he doesn't go from top down. He goes the opposite way. And if he loses, he might come back. But the truth is, I don't know. The truth is it's going to be an interesting match. And it's also disappointing. We're not going to get Magnus in it. Yeah. What do you think about him stepping away from the World Championship? Are you a romantic about the World Championship? No, I'm not a romantic about anything. I don't think. I can't imagine what he's like. That went dark quickly. I don't think I'm sophisticated enough to be a romantic. I think I taught chess and now I make YouTube videos. I'm not qualified on the subject of romanticism. But I... You don't think it's a beautiful game. Chess? No, I think it is a beautiful game. There you go. I got you. Yeah. Is that considered being a romantic? Yeah. I was seeing the beauty in the... You can be like Bach and seeing the math in the music. But you can see the beauty, the magic. I think I see beauty in certain types of chess for sure. Not an all-chess. So I'll partially romantic. Part-time romantic. Yeah. So what do you feel about Magnus stepping away from the World Championships? Disappointing but understandable. Can you steal man's case? What's understandable about it to you? I don't think it's as prestigious as it could be. I don't think the World Championships... Yeah, yeah. Why does Magnus still sign everything as World Champion? That's a good point. He did just put out a statement and he did... He does it everywhere else too. Does he really? Yeah, like World Champion, right? World Champion. I don't know. World Champion, World Chess Champion. Maybe it's just because he wanted but he thinks that the journey to the top once again to maintain the status quo has lost its appeal. You know what the example that I like to make? I'm a big fan of UFC. So we've never really seen with the exception of George St. Pierre walking and Hobi, but Hobi was kind of a different story walking away from a belt at the absolute zenith of their career. But also in the UFC, champions are extremely well taken care of. The champions have some of the best lives. Of course you can all get all champions. You can say some of the lower weight divisions, yes. But what I'm saying is, a lot of them get all the sponsors. They get massive, massive paydays. They're international celebrities. I don't think Chess has that. In fact, the World Championship of Chess price fund has not changed much in like 40 years. So you could probably make more money on YouTube, yes? Playing Randos, not Randos, but other having fun and playing challenging, really challenging games, playing other Super Grandmasters like an ad hoc events or maybe a little bit of organized events, but not the World Championship. Yes. Still have a lot of fun, make a lot of money, get everybody excited, all that kind of stuff. Yeah. So for Magnus specifically, and we're using him because he's the World Champion, if you wins every tournament, he plays in over the course of a year, which is really not even that crazy of an estimate, because that's really how it seems sometimes. Yeah. I don't know how much money that is. I haven't tallied, but if he dedicated an entire year to being managed on social media and doing various things and growing all his brands and getting sponsored deals, I think he would make five times more than being the World Champion, which is crazy. Yeah, but money isn't everything. I know. That's totally fair. Okay, there are a whole life to winning the Olympics. The Olympics is an interesting one too, because I didn't even watch the Olympics as carefully as I usually do. This year, yeah, yeah. It's really strange. I'm not sure why that is. I'm doing COVID. I'm not sure. That was weird. I don't know if it's losing its magic. Part of it is also the people that own the Olympics and the way they distribute it. They make it a little bit more difficult to watch. It should, in my opinion, I sure hope it's just available on YouTube and easily accessible. It's like the difference between like SpaceX and some other, like even NASA, just SpaceX is better at streaming their launches and commentating them. They've made NASA better as well, but just like the ability, it sounds ridiculous, but making it more frictionless for people to watch, get excited, to share all that kind of stuff. Yeah, I'm not exactly sure where the magic, like, balances between the classy traditional world championships and the kind of dramatic, exciting, streamer world. It feels like for the world championships to be relevant, they have to find that balance. Well, this recent one had... It's pretty good commentating, yeah. No, I'm not even necessarily talking about myself, though. There was a lot of... That was the worst part for me. No, there was... Well, you did amazing, yeah. I appreciate that. It was a big arms race. So every major chess platform tried to get one Super Grand Master. There's one of them, Anon, Fabiana Caruana. You name it. They were basically involved. And to go back to that point, yeah, the big question is money, and if Magnus is not motivated by money, if the price went for the next world championship, it was $10 million would he play it? He says, no, then it must be something else. It must just be a matter of something's not worth it. It's not worth it. Yeah, take him in his word. There's too much stress to the low sample play. Yeah. I want to play many more times. Yeah, he wants to play more. He wants to make more. He wants to make more. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, more shorter games. Where you can increase the possibility of pure chess. Whatever the heck that means. But we can't go back to the first carp of Kasparov match, which they had to stop due to health concerns. I mean, the guy went down 5-0 and it was first to 6 wins and draws the encounter. So, draws didn't amass to the total score. There was no best of system. What happened there? The match went something like seven, eight months because Kasparov started making a comeback after being down 5-0. He was 5-3 and they called it off. They called it off. They said both players are in poor health conditions because Kasparov stormed down yellow that this is a farce. But the match was 50 games long. It would even more maybe. I made a video and I don't even remember how many games it was. It was so long. Bobby Fisher wanted something almost as extreme draws the encounter and it's first one to 10 wins. And if it's 9-9, the World Champion retains his title. So you have to beat the World Champion 10-8. That's the only way. You don't like that. What's I? Is this growing? I don't know. Maybe I like it for the YouTube recaps. But do I like it for the players? Do I like it for general public? No. It's 3-4 hours, right? Imagine your favorite tennis match was 6 months long. What are we doing? Yeah. That's still a magic to the World Championship. I wish they could make it some interesting to make it work somehow. But I think Magnus is really challenging. Feed in everybody else to step up and try to figure that out, which is great ultimately. Who would you say is the greatest of all time? Can you make the case? Imagine Kasparov. Can you make the case for Kasparov? Can you make the case for Magnus Carlson? Bobby Fisher, Tall. In my opinion, you can make a case for Magnus Gary and Bobby Fisher. I'm not one of the folks that's like, I mean, a couple of Blanca was brilliant. You can argue Steinitz was brilliant. I think it's probably Kasparov and Magnus has a chance to overtake it. So the longevity is really important to you when you were thinking about this? Yes. I think Magnus is very, very close. It's extremely close. What would be the magic? You got to get that sixth one. Also the... I'm just kidding. So the World Championship's matter. It's kind of like basketball, right? Rings. It's all, all comes down to how many rings did this person weigh? What about, well, basketball doesn't have this. The number of years at number one, right? Like rating. Sorry. Yeah. Like, there's a... Which is what Magnus really likes. It's like, there is a nice system of rating of who is ranked number one. And has to do not with some championships or low-sample tournaments. Has to do with general game after game after game helps estimate more accurately that you love rating. Yeah. He's been World Number One for, I think, 11 years, right? Which is still less than... Yeah. It was World Number One for 20 years. Yeah. Which is quite wild. But still lower rating, I think, than Magnus now, right? Yeah. I think rating in general has sort of... Allegedly. It got inflated. Yeah. Is that true? Is there a true to that? I think so. I can't speak to how exactly it happened, but it also happens online. If you go back just three or four years, I think some of the best Blitz players on... Let's say shows that come with 27, 2800 and now they're 3,200. I think it's just sort of what happens. But I... I don't exactly know. I will mention that there was a very strange change, not exactly sure when the year was in Fidey. So over the board, Jess, where if you were... Under the age of 16 or 18 years old, one of those two, and you were below 2300. Your rating change factor was three to four times higher. So just imagine what that means. Magnus has a rating change factor of, let's say, one. I have a rating change factor, also of one. Anybody over the rating, 2,400, has the same rating change factor. What is the rating change factor? So if you win... Yeah, there's a formula and basically, let's say, at the very base level, five point change. If you're a rating change factor, there's one. You beat somebody you gain five points. Those kids who were under 18 and under 2300, their rating change factor was four. So their ratings were going out four times higher and four times up and down, compared to normal folks. And there was one teenager in the US in particular, who in one month played a bunch of tournaments with his rating change factor and became nearly rated 2,640, which is top 15 in the world. He was just a random teenager from the United States. He became a grandmaster ultimately, but he bled like 90 points down because his rating was so inflated. And this K-40 exists now. I mean, you have many kids who out of nowhere, 2100, 2100, 2400 after, you know, one good month. It's like, what? So that's interesting. That's like similar to like how TikTok inflates your virality early on. Does it? Yeah. I think I, at least the rumor is like they want you to get engaged. And I thought there was even artificial likes and so on that they want you to get that dopamine addiction. So maybe they want to throw you, if you're really passionate about chess, they want you to throw you to the sharks by artificially inflating you and flating your rating. And maybe that gets you into the game much more intensely. Maybe. I wonder how many like backdoor feed-in meetings there are with cigars. And so that was the factors determined by who does the the Elo rating? Who changes this stuff? Yeah. Who knows? It's probably those Lee Chess anarchists. Yeah, exactly. I think they want to, I think they want to, they want to stay away from that stuff. But so there's a guy named Hans Neiman. Yep. And he beat Magnus Carlson recently. Yeah. Has been already, what is August? September 4th, yeah. September. Yeah. So he beat him twice, right recently. Once is the allegations by the internet that Hans Neiman cheated. And then the second time Magnus played a few moves and forfeited and resigned. So there's three. Okay. Sorry. Can we go through the stuff? Yes. So they play a live eSports event in Miami. Miami Beach. Yes. Eden Rock. That's where I actually interviewed Magnus. Yeah. That's where that was? Oh. By weird circumstance, I found myself in Miami unrelated to Chess event. And yeah, it was a very dramatic event for me for various reasons, one of which the camera stopped working halfway through the conversation. So that yeah, I saw that. I also, side note, I really respect how you write comments, pin them at the top. You add timestamps. You're like very true professional. I am the complete opposite on YouTube when I'm off the camera. So I dig in the mud. What does that mean? Digging the mud. And when I started on YouTube in 2020, I in June, like made June 2020, I had no subscribers. So I got to a million in a year. I had a lot of people analyzing my every move, all of my small flaws. And I love getting hate comments because you pin the comment of shame. That's what it was. It's been named over the years by folks. I never called it that. Yeah, it's it's it's pin of shame and it's been tough because now people pretend to write hate comments just to get attention. So like anything, the public ruined the good thing. But it started that way. It started with people just shredding me to bits, calling me spin-offs of this. And I think I'm a human more than I'm a creator, an influencer, an attention seeker, like I'm just a person. So to me, even at the size of 1.6 million subscribers now, September 2022, I don't understand that I've gotten big and that I shouldn't do this stuff and that I should be beyond it or I shouldn't be checking my social media as much as I do and interacting one on one. I'm still very much a human being. And my guilty pleasure, though I weigh of killing time if I'm not laying on the couch and playing some chess, blitz games off stream is just interact with people who say nice things and who say horrible things. And I really like to get into the head of the people who say the terrible things. Sometimes you can, sometimes they are truly trolls, but sometimes people just, they just really hate you. What's the successful interaction with the person that's trolling you? Like at the end of that hero journey that you are part taking in, what's the top of the man look like? Is the troll conquered and broken mentally? Not meant to. I don't want to, I don't want to defeat. I honestly sometimes, somebody writes a very long comment. I'll just, I'll respond with the question mark. Yeah. Oh, so you're, you see each other like a brother and sister, you're going to travel together on this journey of deep meaning, like introspection of what does this mean? Yeah, I've had people write, I can't quote now, but something about my persona, my behavior is this and that. And I just like respond to them and I say, hey, it sounds crazy that a large creator might do something like this, but this kind of goes back to you. You speak to folks on a very respectful way. If you make a mistake, you completely own up to it. So I have this sometimes, these one on one interactions where I say, I think you're reading too much into this. I think you're kind of, you don't understand maybe some of my humor or sarcasm as such. So you form this opinion that I'm this kind of a person, this and that. And now you're sort of anything I do, you're trying to attach to that reasoning and here you are writing this lengthy essay of why nobody should watch my content. Sometimes people go, you know what? I think you have a point. Maybe I should relax a little bit. I would love to sort of interview and understand the lives of the folks that post that kind of stuff. I mean, they're human beings. They have interesting journeys also. Yeah. I think they often don't realize. I think they don't realize their comment will be read by anybody, especially you. They think like, they also don't realize your human being. I feel like that's, you know, it's so interesting to watch it. Like some guy, because I posted on Twitter for like a minute that I'm talking to you and asking for questions, I deleted that tweet because, yeah, like you didn't like 95% of the people were talking about cheating, talking about the cheating. All right, I got it. Thank you. This is not going to be helpful at all. So I was like, all right. But in that time, like there's one comment, which I'm, it's hilarious to me that you found that one comment. The one comment says like this seems like a waste of time or something like why? Lame guest. Lame guest. Lame guest. And then used, like responded something like with a question mark. I got it. Yeah. Yeah. And then he said, let's talk about this. Yeah. Like why am I a lame guest? And he responded. He responded even after you deleted this. That way he said, he said he doesn't know what value I would bring because I just make videos about chess games. Yeah. And that's true. You've had some absolutely brilliant people on. But I also looked at this gentleman's profile and he, his, he was one of the folks that put things about his family and God and his politics in his Twitter bio. And I started thinking, maybe I said something in some video and I made a joke about religion or something, just some offhand five second thing somewhere that someone turns me into just an absolute outcast in the household. They can no longer watch me. And that has happened. Yeah. That has happened. I'll record a 30 minute video and I'll make a joke about something and some phrasing. And that's it. I've lost the viewer forever and they will let me know. They will write me an email. I just don't think people should be that serious. Yeah. There's some of that because I've seen people say that sometimes about me, but I see it more with others. They'll say, you know, I used to be like Joe Rogan guesses. I used to be a huge fan of Joe Rogan until he said this. Right. It's like one. First, I do wonder if you were ever really a big fan. That's one question mark I have. But the other is like, I think we should be more lenient with each other in terms of how much stupid shit we say. And, and, you know, if you actually, I wish people were able to sort of introspect on their own, on the own, on the stupid shit they say themselves, like to, to, to have a little bit of an empathy. Like, I wish there was a way to read all the emails you've ever written. And just to see, or maybe do a search engine for all the stupid shit you've said in emails in the past and like summarize it and to reveal it to yourself that like, you have bad days, you have good days, you have emotional days, you have stoic days, you have sometimes, you have like, you take very different political views than you do in other days. And it's like, it's all over the place. And if you're a creator, if you're putting stuff out all the time, you're going to have those and you're still, you're still full, like complex bag of emotions and thoughts and ideas and contradictions and all of that. Like, you shouldn't judge a person by a single statement. And even when you do, you should try to infer the best possible interpretation of that statement. I feel like that, that's just a healthier way to interact with the world than with other humans. It's like, I wonder what's the best possible interpretation of the thing they just tweeted or they said. Like what, let's imagine that the person saying those words is actually a really good human being. And what do they mean when they said that thing about anal beads? Sorry. I'm so good for so long. Yeah. Right. Or whatever it is, like, you know, they didn't mean to be offensive to the sexuality of a certain group. They're just talking about, they're talking shit about anal beads. Like, they're not, like, sometimes it's humor. Sometimes it's actually genuinely embodying, like, a political viewpoint and like walking with it, thinking through it for a few days. Like, like taking seriously, empathizing not just for a brief moment, but for a time, like walking with an idea and allowing yourself to express it, like playing doubles out. I do that all the time. With yourself or with myself. Yeah. In conversation, I do too. And I find I have to say, I'm playing doubles advocate. Like, you have to be very explicit. But with myself, I'll just do it in my head. Like I have different voices, like, you know, obviously, it just in, I've been getting so much information and so many thoughts in all the complexities of the war in Ukraine, for example, and all the different voices within Ukraine. I just interviewed hundreds of people and they have very different perspectives in nuanced ways about the war. Some are full of hate, some are full of love, like hate for the other love for their own country, love for family and tradition. All of it, it's a beautiful mix and I have to walk, I have to like carry those ideas in my head and empathize with them deeply. And then I have to listen to people that live elsewhere, they live in India. They have a very different perspective. There's a lot of people in India that have a very different perspective than the people in Ukraine. And so I don't know. And some of that will bleed out into the thoughts I express publicly. And like when people judge you harshly for it, it, it, first of all, me as a human being is psychologically difficult. But also it makes me less willing to be fragile. I still try to be strong enough to be fragile in front of the camera. I just say, say things that are on my mind, even if I know it's going to create people that are going to be like ruthlessly negative towards me. So I try to wear my heart on my sleeve and still try to be fragile, but it's harder. You're going to pay a psychological cost. In some sense, I try to be tough, but I can be a softie in that. Certain, certain attacks can get to me. So I'm surprised that they don't get, I mean, does the some negativity get to you? Or is this the way you deal with it by responding? That guy saying, what value does he talk into when he adds to the world? Yeah. No, but that was, I mean, that was so good. I was thinking at various moments, you went to jump in and I was kind of letting you speak. One of the things I wanted to mention was it's significantly simpler to talk about chess than it is to talk about some of the things you talk about. And you have a big responsibility because you have to absorb information like a sponge. But you also then need to present it in a way where you potentially have an opinion while trying to be fair to everybody. And you're talking about things that will literally never please everybody, which is literally what you're going to talk about some issues that are going to get out there into the people are going to watch it. I is right, the years of millions of people and not everybody is going to be satisfied. And these are issues where people are going to be much more likely to speak up in all sorts of ways. Tremendous support or tremendous hatred, vitriol and God knows what else. Yeah, you just one of the reasons I'm blown away to even be sitting here, frankly, because up until a few months ago, you weren't talking to, you know, you, I'm not saying you weren't talking to, but you hadn't spoken to chess players. You were speaking to people who were doing much more substantial things in the world. I have to get the humility there. But chess to me is incredible as a beautiful game. But I think the reason comments hurt is not, I mean, they hurt no matter what to me. Not to me, because I'm in a simpler space. So you have to understand it. Even if so if it's chess based criticism, it doesn't hit as hard. No, if you had a podcast about anal beast, no, I'm just I'm launching this. If you had a podcast, launching a new podcast photography, you got to, you got to realize like it wouldn't, it wouldn't be the same way you talk about potentially existential things. You talk about cyber, you know, things, things in cyber security or, or AI or people who are massive heads of companies that are just inherently going to be a bit more controversial. So that I can't imagine being in your shoes because you have so many complex emotions about situations where you may not necessarily agree with everything that someone has said publicly, but you still invite them for a conversation because they're a human being. It's totally different likes. I don't know. I don't know. I, not the way I experienced it. To me, I think what hurts is it's not even on my, because I'm super self-critical, usually way more than that internet can be. It's that like human beings can be cruel to each other. So like the reason it hurts for some reason is like this almost like the disappointment in people, they don't give each other a chance. So in that sense, the negativity doesn't have to be about Ukraine or geopolitics. It could be about the silliest of things. I see. To me, it's like why, why be mean to each other? In a context where the mean doesn't, like it's out of place. Because like, for example, there is like a gaming culture where they just talk shit to each other and I'll stop. I think it's more acceptable there. It seems to fit. It seems to be funnier there. And like one streamer's talk shit to each other. I've been listening to several streamers recently. And it's like it somehow works a little better even if they're just like cruel to each other. It makes more sense. But I think what people are genuinely trying to educate or to help and so on and you still get the shitty comments, I don't know, makes me sad. No, it doesn't, it doesn't make me, it doesn't make me sad. I think part of that is also the way I was brought up. So I skipped kindergarten so I was always the smallest kid. You picked on? I was picked on and then I did picking. So I had kind of both in my life. I kind of know I went home from summer camp crying and I also made a kid cry once in fourth grade. So I had the balance and I physical or mental abuse or both. Verbal. I didn't beat anybody up. I was tiny. I think the kid in the younger grade was bigger than I was and you still broke him because I was an hour. I was. Yeah. So I had to use my mental warfare. I had to use my words. I had to be and growing up. My parents split when I was super young and I played chess. So all things that make you super self trustworthy. Like you believe your first instinct. You don't listen to what other people tell you. And if people give you advice, say, okay, I'm going to think about that. I'm not going to go and do that. I wasn't impressionable. You couldn't convince me to do something. That stuck to this day. My wife has had to deconstruct some of my stubbornness. I didn't even realize was incredible stubbornness. It's just something that you brought up with. So to me, that stuff doesn't bother me. And it's so the voices of others don't shake you quite. They can't mentally shake your psychological stability. No, they haven't. I think when it got probably at its worst point was in combination with being unable to perform well and over the board play. But that was also self-driven. I wasn't performing poorly because I was getting comments. Because I was performing poorly, the comments got to me more. The cycle was sort of in the opposite direction. And that was probably the most frustrating out. People have said some vile things to me. You know about my whole Indonesia thing. This is good. I'm just going to give the anarchist and Lee Chess some of you. Let's go. What's the Indonesia thing? Just the way you said it. Okay, maybe we don't want to talk about it. No, no, let's talk about it. No, it's totally fine. I. I was going to say I wish, but I'm not even sure I can make a joke like that. So the Indonesia thing was I was streaming Chess on Chess.com I might add. And I got booted up a 10 minute game. Just a random account from Indonesia. That was the flag. Now mind you on these websites. You can pick your flag. It can be from wherever you don't. It's not geo tracing. You can change it. I was like, okay, I count from Indonesia. And as always, I looked at the account because it was a untitled high rated account. And I looked through the games. Win rate was suspiciously high. Average accuracy was suspiciously high. I think this is a cheater. I said that it allowed. It's not the first time I played cheaters on stream. And I said, okay, I'm still going to play. Let's see what happens. The game was not crazy suspicious, but definitely suspicious. A few critical moments where I just clearly thought I had a good position. And then the person or the bot played some move that just killed my hopes. And I lost. I said, okay, I lost. And I wrote to the Chess.com Fair Play team. Like behind the scenes, I wasn't even saying anything publicly on stream. And the guy got banned. It was cheater. So that night, right before I'm going to sleep. Because Indonesia's 12 hours ahead of New York. Go on my Twitter. What the hell is going on? I see hundreds of responses to my recent tweets. Levy, you got to check Facebook, man. You got to check Facebook. Like, so here's a link. So allegedly that account belonged to an older gentleman. And his son made a Facebook post that said, my dad played a big streamer in Chess, Gotham Chess. And Gotham got mad. He lost to my dad. So his community mass reported my dad. And he was banned for cheating. Oh, it went viral. Oh no. Did you know that Indonesia has the fourth largest population in the world? I didn't know. I learned the hard way. Interesting. 10s of thousands of DMs every second. Wow. Instagram DMs. Because I had my DMs open. I was never afraid of that stuff. My YouTube videos went from 99% of the downvote to 50. 50, 50. Oh wow. They swarmed my account. So all negative. Oh wow. All play him again. You, I mean, I don't know how much swearing there is on this podcast. But I mean, it was just all sorts of fucking swearing. They just everything. Rookless, the vicious. They were going to kill me. They were going to rape my family. They were going to, they were contacting people I followed on Instagram. They were contacting them and telling them crazy things. It was, I'm not joking. It was tens of thousands of people every minute. It was unbelievable. And I didn't know what to do because the guy cheated. I was in the right. Yeah. People, how certain were you there? He cheated 100%. Okay. I'm okay. I don't know if you can say 100% but suggest.com also had a suspicion. They have like good, they have like good detection algorithms. Yes. Danny Rensch would be able to, I legitimately know nothing about the behind the scenes because it's only kind of tech people. But one thing I did not realize was that this account, whether it was the sun playing or the father playing, we will not know. We don't know who played. It could have been the sun. It could have been the dad covering for him, whatever. But at some point that account won 27 games in a row at 95% accuracy. I mean, even Magnus can't do that. This took a month. This story took one month from start to finish. First I had to work with a media company to geoblock my content in Indonesia on YouTube. So Indonesians could not see my channel. Oh, so you didn't want to lean into it. Go full Donald Trump. No, no, let's, because you're in the right, you feel like you're in the right. You as far as you know, you're in the right. Yeah. And I needed watching all my work burn to the ground. Oh, you felt it was being... Yeah. And one thing I'm learning about myself is I'm not a good crisis actor. I need someone to like slap me so I don't do something emotional in the moment when crisis is ongoing. What would be the emotional act that's not productive there? Partnering with an MCN that makes you give away a bunch of your revenue and then when you break with them, I was monetized for a week. It was a very big decision to plug in, I think they're called MCNs, but... What are they? Sorry, I don't know. They're like, we, there's, there's specialized agencies that work behind the scenes with YouTube that if you connect your account, they say they can give you certain ad benefits, they can geoblock your content. They, which you can't do normally. They have certain perks that only YouTube allows behind the scenes. You pay them 10% of your monthly ad revenue. But they claim to do a handful of things for you. I just needed them to geoblock my content. I just didn't, I didn't care how much money I was going to give away per month. But what, so why geoblock it? You just didn't like the, the down voting. Yeah, I didn't want, you want a positivity, like you're being educational, you're, I mean, they're like you do a bit of shit talking, but it's more like fun and easygoing. You didn't want this kind of viciousness. Yeah, my comment section was just being completely flooded. Like they were destroying my channel. And to be honest, maybe all of the views and the down votes out of, would have actually been beneficial. Maybe it meant my videos would have actually started getting recommended to more people. Yeah. But I'm a person. This is who goes back to the same thing. Oh, so this got to you. Yeah, this was like, I was just watching it. And I'm like, this is not fair. This is, I don't know what to do. So I'm going to stop this as much as I can. They still got through the VPN. And they were like, you ask whole, you don't think we have VPN and Indonesia? It was this whole, you know, it was this whole thing. This father and son got invited to every major news network. I'm not joking. They got invited to the major podcast. They like to say the Joe Rogan of Indonesia. Yeah, Daddy Corbusier is this mentalist. He's a bald guy, very fun guy. He had them. And that's when the Indonesian chess Federation stepped in. The thing is nobody who was harassing me knows anything about chess. They just saw the story. And long story short, they brought in a sponsor. The guy played a strong, one of the strongest chess players in the country. Who also happens to be a woman I read in Sukandar. She's like 24 hundred international master. She crushed them because his actual playing strength is 1300, 1400, 1400. You something like that. He still got paid because there was a winning prize fund, a losing prize fund. And we never heard from him again. And that was the whole story. That was why I had to shut down all of my social media to DMs and DM requests and even notifications. I don't get notifications unless it's someone I follow. But see stuff like that doesn't often get resolved in this kind of clear way. No, it doesn't. It could have been so you got lucky there that there's a conclusion to this. Yeah, somebody got views, somebody got money. And I never got, I never got many apologies. What did you learn from that experience about yourself, about the internet? I think first and foremost, I learned that every moment you are live or broadcasting can be completely blown out of proportion. You have to be real careful. And I can't actively think about that, unfortunately, even when I'm streaming. I've had other instances where things come back to bite. I've even had these moments live on stream. I feel like I said something too sarcastically to somebody and I don't know, their day is going in my room in their whole day. You know, God knows what? You have these moments of regret where you want your personality to shine through and you want to entertain. At least they're thinking at what cost. If I make a joke to a viewer that suddenly the whole chat is laughing at them, what of that puts them in a deep, dark place. And again, it all comes back to this one on one thing for me because I'm a human. And I would hate to put another person into that situation if I would much rather get a drink with somebody than, but it's all kind of part of this act and you want to make jokes. And I also learned I'm a horrible crisis actor. So I have no patience. But I think that's normal in 2022. Everything is immediate. We can barely sit, think, let time go by. It makes me sad because I think that kind of stuff can destroy good people. That's what makes you sad. Yeah, one of the things we discuss just here before recording, which I'm also, I've talked about this on stream. I'm very open with this type of stuff is over the, I think for me, a lot of that comes down to just a lack of control of the narrative. That phrase is kind of messy. It can be used for political stuff. But I hate when I say things and they get completely misconstrued or they are completely misinterpreted. And I can't imagine being in your shoes because again, I do chess. You cannot really, you can clip me saying something about a chess game out of context and it's hilarious. You know, it's dumb. It's nothing. It's not an attack on me or something that I said. It's not an attack on kind of more similarly to what you were describing. And you don't say, you don't say stuff like that like ridiculous, you don't say ridiculous shit about yourself. Oh, I do. I do. I do. And you don't feel like that could be made. Isn't this the same guy that said X maybe, maybe I either haven't said enough of those things or there's no moments in, I don't have three, four hour open conversations with other humans. And I'm pretty sure if I did, there would be more of that stuff out there. But it's probably what it is. It's just a lack of, it's a lack of being able to kind of control what is actually reality and that is very frustrating. And yeah, you're right. I mean, there is a sense that there's not enough motivation for people to attack you. You're ultimately adding a lot of positive stuff to the world. And when you get into more political topics, there's people that who are hurting, who have a lot of anger in their hearts and they want to direct it towards you. So then they need ammunition. And ammunition comes in the way of like clips from the past. So I'm sure that you, I'm pretty sure you already have clips like that. It's just, there's not people that really have anger to direct towards you. Ultimately, you're adding a lot of good stuff to the world. And so yeah, but it's man, the viciousness of human beings under the veil of anonymity at scale can be really painful. So that, I guess that's the curse, the challenge of being a creator on YouTube and so on, on Twitch. When you talked about retiring, I think you tweeted about retiring from chess. Give me a video, yeah, tweeted. That's my values of the world. The tweet or the video? I'm just the both. I'm retiring from all competitive chess events. My preparation is outmatched. My calculation skills are too flawed. And most importantly, my anxiety is beyond repair. I physically and emotionally cannot do it anymore. What was the hardest thing about competing? Can you elaborate on that? Yeah, I think it's separated into faces of my life. So after being a creator and coming back and playing over the board and making recaps of all my games, I think the constant feeling that I had at the board was a kid who hadn't studied enough for a test, which is a very unique type of anxiety. And during the game, it was just self-hatred. Like good moves did not feel as good as how bad bad moves felt and bad moments. And underneath that you're saying there was a sense that I did not prepare well enough. Oh, one unquestionably. So I'm an international master, but there are international masters now who are 11. I got the title when I was 22, which is late. I might not sound like it's late, but it's really late. And I quit chess multiple times when I was a teenager. If I hadn't, one of my parents was like, sit down. This is the only thing that you're good at. Focus on it. Yeah. Maybe I would have been a grandmaster, but that's life, right? And I would come back to chess at various points in my life when I felt more mature, I felt more ready and I felt more motivated. It was all me. I had one coach when I was maybe about 10. I never listened to the guy. Great guy. He emailed me even recently, just wanting to catch up, which I thought was adorable because I'm like, I don't even know if he knows that YouTube chess exists. He's in his 70s. He's just like a nice older guy. And he would come to my house. We would have dinner. I would make us food and he would tell her that I'm brilliant, but I never work. And I have so much potential. If only I ever worked at all one minute on anything. I just played speed games online and I... Did he speak the truth there? Like, could you have worked more? I could have worked more for sure. Yeah, absolutely. When you listen to Magnus, he seems like he doesn't work either. He works. He might work in different ways, but I think for him, it's also obsession. Again, love. It's everything. He might read a book. He doesn't consider it work. It's work. He's getting information in and he's learning something. It might just be easier for him to learn than for me, for example, or for anybody. Just everybody learns and absorbs things differently. So I would come back to chess and the best run of my life that I had was in 2016, where I basically, while teaching a chess program, it's a classic chess program, I told all the parents, hey, so for these four months, I want to stop doing private lessons and I'm going to go travel and play tournaments because I want to become an international master finally. I'm 20 years old. This is in 2016. Can you help me raise some money? These are all managing directors. These are lawyers. These are seven figure, eight figure households. And they contributed and I kept the blog. And then I worked just six hours, seven hours every day, like studying all the opening trends, all of the new ideas, reading the books, analyzing my own games, playing my own speed games and analyzing them, training every day. And that year I went from 2240 over the board to 2404 with two of the three norms as they call them, which are basically tournament performances. Like you perform at a certain level, not too complicated. So I got almost everything I needed to be an I.M. When I just slipped up at the very end and 2017, I didn't play chess, but in 2018, I came back once again with the vengeance. I started playing in the summer once again and I went up, up, up to my peak. But then something interesting happened. My life mission was accomplished. I never wanted or thought I could be a grandmaster. Yeah. I wanted to be an international master and the adrenaline dump of hitting the I.M. title. I just stopped working completely, just completely stopped working. I couldn't. And the second I started falling, I couldn't stop. And I spent the rest of the summer just tanking and I said, fuck this. I made my mind, my made my I.M. I'm going to I'm going to fuck off some place and whatever. I'll be I.M. It doesn't matter. But when I play games online, I mean, I destroy grandmasters all the time. And dynamically, dynamics and chess are just complex positions with all sorts of calculation, attacking, defending, like very forcing lines. I think it's my best strength. I think I'm easily grandmaster level. So that you have the capacity to be grandmaster? 100%. Like if I if the work was put in, if the work was put in and I was not doing my current career, if I just train full time, I think I could do it. Do you have a desire to be grandmaster? Did you have a desire? You said, I didn't really want like the main goal was international master, which by the way is a really interesting. Just I've talked to Olympic athletes, the crash after the gold medal. It's fascinating. Yeah. I didn't get gold, but for me, that was my goal. That was your goal. I mean, it doesn't matter. It's the goal. It takes a very, very special person to not be destroyed by the gold. And continue the dominance. To continue growing, to continue. I mean, it's hard to that's why they talk about it's hard to be a champion and defend your championships. Or whatever the goal is to achieve the goal and stick to like, yeah, it broke me. It broke you. Yep. So you have the capacity to be grandmaster. Have you ever thought, by the way, is there still possible for you or you're fully dedicated now to the love of creating and analyzing this game? I don't think I'm going to do what I do right now forever. So you're going to die one day just to heads up. Yes. Yes, yes, yes. I once cried when I realized that it was at a funeral. It was very sad. That's another entirely separate rabbit hole to go down. Which is when I wouldn't. When did this happen? Yeah. Just a couple of years ago. Yeah. It was right. We're able to like, like that, they're realization really hate you like fuck this, this ends. Yeah. I'm the kind of person who I have my active thoughts on my brain of things I have to get done and the more of those, the better because my brain will walk me off a cliff, not the physical body, the brain itself will walk off a cliff, spinning in circles. So I try to keep myself as active as possible on tasks I have to do. It's good and I'm busy. It's good. I'm not busy with the scale I am because you can't really rest a whole lot, but yes, that was, I have these moments in my life where I have realizations of past fuck ups or things I have, like I really have to do that I've been like really doing poorly or things like this. Massive existential things that just hit me like a bus. There's so little things tricky about it. So because I meditate on death a lot, like in this conversation, I imagine this is the last thing both you and I do. And we're going to die after this. So you meditate on that. But then you also have to, I think what hits people really hard is the realization that life moves on. Not only does it just end for you, but most people will be like, they'll, you know, in your case, they'll tweet. There's like, oh, he's so great. After they'll be so much more than be outpouring of love and so on for a day and then it moves on. And the, you know, the new trees grow, new bridges are built and then eventually human civilization ends or moves over to Mars and so on. And you'll be forgotten completely. But that, that for most people come right away like you get a cancer diagnosis or something like that. And it's like, doesn't anyone else know that I'm going to die? Does anyone else care? Like nobody gives a shit. I mean, they do. I mean, there's love there, but like not in a dramatic way that you would somehow deep inside hope for that the world would stop because your life is facing this catastrophic event. So, but I think ultimately what you could channel that realization into appreciation of the current moment, just the people you love and sharing love with them as intensely as possible experiencing every moment is intensely as possible because eventually there'll be a last moment and after that there'll be no more moments. That's sort of what I do. Yeah, I try to channel all of that into, sorry, I don't use these fancy microphones in my own, you're uncomfortable. It's not your fault. It's not your fault, I mean. With this microphone? No, with this quiet, with this line of conversation. Oh. I'm playing therapist. I don't know if I'm uncomfortable. I don't know if I have a lot to say. Sometimes I just listen. Yeah. Like sometimes I'm intimidated. Like if you say a lot of good things and I'm like, shit, what am I going to say? Like at the end? Yeah. Yeah. On this subject especially, I'm like, that's sort of what I, there's nothing. What do you think happens after we die? Oh, man. No, that's a rhetorical question. What were we talking about? Grammester. So how hard is it to reach? What are the requirements for grammester, by the way? Because yeah, and what are the requirements for international master? You mentioned a few requirements and so on. Yes. So the first one is you have to know how to use a sure mic and an arm. I'm slowly impressed by the sure microphone by the, for the, for people listening, we're using this SM, sure SM7B, a lot of podcasts is used. I don't know why. And Michael Jackson on Thriller, which Grimes told me. Really? That's what I think it looked a little different, but it's the same. Wow. Underneath it, a few musicians used it in studio. I don't know where it became popular as a podcast and microphone, because I think most broadcasters use condenser mics that look like really fancy. Yeah. This looks a little, and you know, this one's great. It sounds really, really good. And I told you before that I wanted to use it, but it requires an external dashboard of some sort and I'm way too lazy to learn how to do it. And my microphone doesn't sound that bad for YouTube and for, for Twitch, but this is a long term. I still have to figure out how to stream stuff. I haven't figured that out because you want to go down into the world of Twitch. No, I don't. Okay. I don't. You just want to learn how to do it. Uh, no, for, uh, no, no, no. Do you know what we have over there? So first of all, yes, it is, it's like, uh, I feel like the hobbit going into like mortar, like I, I, yeah, Twitch is, uh, is a very intense world. But the, uh, there is useful cases when you should have your microphone work with like the different, the processing chain work in real time. So you can do like interviews and also I play video, I tried to play a video game once a month. So I've done that like three times already. Uh, so stream that kind of stuff for like, like an hour, um, like play Skyrim. I like, I love playing Skyrim. I actually love the idea. I haven't done that yet, but apparently in Skyrim you can turn off the monsters and you can just walk around. So I love the idea of just walking around Skyrim for a couple hours. And just like, because it's beautiful nature. I see. Have you, do you know anything about those, uh, I know, I know, I know a little about Skyrim, uh, but so it's, it's kind of like Chet now. Sure. Yeah, it's, it's just beautiful worlds. So, um, there's games that are able to create this sense of, you know, do we feel when you go hiking, the sense of nature? Yeah. There, it's not that they're ultra realistic, but they capture some majestic aspect of nature. I think some of it is also music, something peaceful. Mm-hmm. Like old-timey, uh, medieval type of music and just the trees, like the wind, like, shh. And then there's, in the, in the distance, there's the mountains and you can like, you have a sense of history that the nature gives you. You have a sense of space like this, you're like this tiny little creature and there's this big world all around you. I don't know how video, that's like an art for a video game to create that. It's not just about the monsters in front of you. Yeah. It's about this world and this feeling of a world so I can just walk around and do it. I get asked this question a lot. Why don't, why don't I stream more video games? Yes. And I didn't know that such video games, first of all, existed. But I thought it was mostly just various sci-fi-ish characters and shooting and objective. Oh, a lot duty. Yeah, yeah. I've played Overwatch on stream. It's the only video game I actually played a lot and got decent at and I couldn't play it on stream anymore because my teammates would use racial slurs in the voice chat. Yeah. So that is one of the, because I've been thinking of talking to a few streamers and they do. They're a little bit, I don't know as far as, that community broadly does use racial slurs and it seems to make them okay. But for the ones I would talk to are a little bit, they're just harsh in general in the intensity of language. And I don't know what to do. Like I don't want to be the guy who says like kids these days with their, with their mean language on the internet. You want to kind of adapt to the different communities. But at the same time, there is lines that you can cross. Right? Like if you make everything at your joke, because that's what they kind of do. Everything ends in L.O.L. Everything is funny. Yeah. And that becomes once again a lubricant that it's like a slippery slope that takes you to a place where you actually make pretty mean ideas, even evil ideas, okay, because it starts a joke. And so I mean you start getting into the territory of, I mean because I've been reading a lot on Hitler and Stalin and so on and you'll see those kinds of topics come up in that community and it's like, they have a very different perspective on that stuff. To them it's just a fun joke, fun time. And I see that the contrast of that would call a duty where you're shooting. And I love shooting and killing things in video games. But there's a slippery slope there too, because then just having visited the front in Ukraine, you get to see the real killing of people. And you see how one can lead to another. It's not obvious, but there's something that happens. It happens in video games where you're like, well, this is not reality. The same kind of thing happens in war. Well, the people on the other side aren't really human. It does become a kind of video game. And that same mechanism, I feel like I want to be cautious about our brain going down that road. So yeah, I do worry about that community. But there are video games that don't have such communities around them. I think Skyrim is an online component of people. Minecraft I think is relatively civil from what I've seen. Interesting. Good community. I think it's a lot of right now it's booming. It's a lot of young creators who are all seemingly quite close. And I think the community then extends to social media. Some of them are intense, but who isn't? And I think they foster a more or less kind of good group of folks. But no, I completely agree. I think a lot of that stuff and combined with the anonymity stuff that we mentioned earlier totally dehumanizes the way people interact with each other. And it's scary. I don't know. Combine that with two years of some people barely going outside. Yeah, it's not. Yeah, it's not a good mix. It's not a good mix at all. I mean, you'd like to think that folks, it's like in their teenage years, kind of go through those and they mature out of it and stuff. So they start to realize the weight of their words. Like that's my hope. But we're all trying to figure that out how the internet has changed youth. Like easy access to porn, easy access to like some dark communities where dark ideas breed. I don't know. But then again, I trust in the goodness and the intelligence of people at the end of the day. And I think kids will, not selling an old man, but it's good for kids to play with different ideas and then they grow out of it, hopefully. But then you have to have parents in good school and like good friends that kind of call them out and they're bullshit. You need that. If you're stuck inside, under anonymity, maybe you don't have some of those signals. Kids these days with their internet. I had to go through this. That's kind of what I, what I mentioned. So I didn't have two divorced, my parents were divorced. I didn't have two households. I had three. So I had the third one. So I went to school most of my childhood in a town where my grandmother lived. And she was kind of like the Switzerland. So I would be with her and my mom would come with me there. Half the week. That would take me to his place for the other half of the school week. And my parents was weekends. My mom's weekends were in New York where she, my stepdad was and that family. So three houses. So grandma, your dad, mom and then, so step siblings. There and there, new people, there and there extended family, there and there. And also at grandma's where I would come anytime I had a conflict. And when I was 12 and 13 and being just a total lunatic emotional manipulator of all folks in my family, I was just teenager, rebelling and also having to deal with three different households. And I mean, I carried a backpack, the same backpack literally that I, not the physical one, but what's inside of it that I carried. Like when I came here to record the episode and have my stuff in the hotel, a backpack with a laptop, a bunch of clothes, a bunch of other things that I need throughout the week. And the other things like that, I mean, of course you start getting that stuff in all, all the houses, but that was the way I lived for some of the most important developmental years of my life. And who knows if I had too much of what we're describing, one sprinkle of this too much, one sprinkle of this too much, if I had someone influence me in a negative way. Luckily I managed to steer clear a lot of it. And yeah, how did you not get into trouble with the internet? Meaning like, how did you? Oh, what was your experience with the internet? So I was having to move a lot, having to have multiple households just psychologically different, difficult upbringing. I, yeah, it was, it was extremely tough. I, it's hard to speak about it now because I'm in a completely different mental state. I don't even remember some of like those moments, but it sounds like a different person. Yeah, exactly. That's exactly how it feels. But I, I remember I had a big video game addiction, just like most teenagers. I want to say teenagers, but probably teenage boys, but I'm not, I don't know, I, I don't know how addicted teenage girls are to, to video games. Yeah, I didn't get on that. I definitely look back on things that I did in certain instances like, well, I was a teenager. That was stupid. Oh, I scam somebody in some video game. Oh, that was, you know, I was, oh, that's hilarious. And just, I was, it's just an idiot teenager. Like, I didn't do anything unforgivable luckily. And for the most part, just kind of went about my life. And I somehow got older and started getting more independent and stop playing video games. And to be honest with you, I, I would love to sit here and say I have some sort of logical explanation of why I am the person I am today. But I think you need elements of the right upbringing and support system. As you said, and you also need luck, you just, I've been in some situations as a teenager where I almost got, I almost got killed by some gang members. That's a very exaggerated story, but I was in a park in New York City and I got into it with a kid whose brother was in a notorious gang of that neighborhood. And he told me he brothers and come and, and kill me basically over a stolen basketball. And I was, I was going to fight this kid because I was 14, you know, he stole my basketball. Of course, I'm going to fight this kid. This kid was like 12, he had a pierced tongue. Yeah. Like, this wasn't a joke. Yeah. This kid was from a totally different way of life. And his brother did show up. But his brother was like, I'm going to go to this kid's like, that was a, I was a little teenager. I wasn't a big, now 14 year olds or six feet tall. Maybe something would happen to me. But I was a little kid and it's like, but looking back at that is crazy because I definitely had some of these moments in New York City more than anywhere else because it's such a big place. But luck, you need some, you need some, yeah, it's kind of funny that there's certain moments in life on which the entire trajectory of your life can turn. Yeah. And then they're all like, in that case, nothing happened. But, you know, I most intensely feel this when I get almost run over by a car kind of thing. How many times have you almost get run over by? I don't know, maybe it happened like twice in my life. Okay. Like when somebody runs a red light, yeah, that happened to me here in Austin. You realize, oh shit, that was like your life flashes before your eyes. And those moments can turn. And then there's more meeting certain people where you meet them and for the positive, they're like, wow, this, just moment of inspiration like, wow, this is possible. Wow, this kind of person can exist. Maybe I can be that kind of person too. So yeah, those things can like change the direction. But maybe not, maybe they just reveal something that was already there and the momentum is always carrying you forward into a thing that you are always going to end up in. Yeah, I wonder about that. Speaking of teens doing stupid things, let's return to the last one. Yes. Han Saga. I know. Yeah. Who is Han's Neeman? Who is Magnus Carlson? How did it start? There's three games. It started in Miami. Yeah, a good background story is Magnus Carlson is the arguable greatest player of all time. Very close, I would say to Gary Kasparov, world number one for now over 10 years. At the top of his game, you think like close to the top of his game right now? After the most recent thing, yes. I think he has the uncanny ability of top athletes to absorb the bullshit and show, oh yeah, dad's home now. Yeah. Run. I was only trying 70% before that. And I think that's what he, I think I really think that's what he's showing. I wasn't aw. I, if Magnus is playing an internment, yes, it's good for views to put him in my YouTube thumbnails and make the video title about him if he does something brilliant, but I was legitimately just blown away. I wasn't even, I wasn't farming him for content. It was, this is unbelievable what he's doing to people. And he has a point to prove. Hans is a, I believe he's 19 years old right now. He's an American. I don't know if prodigy is necessarily the right word. Prodigy's, you know, they're prodigies from very, very young. You don't, in chess, you don't become a prodigy at 18. But he was always a good junior player. He was always a very unique character. I met Hans when he was 11, 12 years old. This little kid just trash talking folks at the Marshall chess club. And he already had a reputation. Literally. Like he had a reputation with, with, with counselors with, like, and the truth is I was similar. I was kicked out of chess camp by one of the best chess grandmasters of all time. Artur Yusupo. I was in a chess camp when I was nine years old. What'd you do? I was just an asshole. Yeah. I was too strong. So I helped other people with other work. I was allowed to let your ego shine. That was a kid. I mean, I wouldn't, well, you know, not every kid let's do your go shine, but some do. Oh, yes. You did. Hans does, like, there's interviews on when he's young. Yeah. Or like, he's kind of, yes, talking shit, but it's entertaining. Yes. What I try to stay away from is just, yes, I let my ego shine, but I don't think I even knew what any of that was when I was every, so it's just sort of, I was just, I was just a loud, boy, stress kid from a household where I wasn't paid attention to because I had three of them. Yeah. So I just was like, years around, I'm going to show up and get my attention. And our three of you soup of, I mean, he's a great, great man. I drove that man crazy. He was like top five in the world at some point in the 80s and 90s. He said, it's either me or this kid. Oh, wow. So you really got to. Yes. He said, I'm not going to come back and teach camps unless it's me. And I remember like going through this. I have very vague, distant memories of this. My dad calling apologizing and make you feel good to you, got to a grab us. No, I feel horrible. I felt guilty. I feel guilty my whole life about it. I very, very feel proud of bad things or I showed them. Even things, it's good. It gets to the point you feel guilty about things you didn't do. That's what that's when your brain really goes crazy. Yeah. I'm with you on that. So okay. So you can relate to the cons. So you yes, to young Hans and he was like in and out of chest. This is what I remember. He was around the rating of 2300. And I remember looking at some of his games in a tournament in Philadelphia. And I was like, there was some game that he played and he didn't know the opening. It was like a London, which is a very popular opening. Some theoretical and I looked at it and like, oh, he didn't know that. Okay. That's crazy. And then I just kind of walk by and I saw him in a tournament a few months later and he did something very rare where in an open tournament, not a tournament of 10 players or everybody plays everybody open tournament. Randomized pairings depending on how many points you have. He played nine grandmasters, which is crazy. That means he was performing so well, so consistently. That was where he got his first. I am norm. It's like, oh, here it is. Here comes that like boom of a young player where he gets mature. He gets back into the game and he gets stronger. I don't follow a whole lot. Pandemic happens. And he started streaming a bit and he's these boisterous. He's kind of like loud. He's talking trash and he's gaining rating constantly. He's just, but so are a lot of people. So you don't think much of it. And then now you can go play over the board again. Life tournaments face to face as opposed to online events. And he's like, I'm going to go to this tournament. I'm going to win it. I'm going to get my last UM norm. Man, he does. And then he's like, all right, my goal is this rating by the end of this year. He gets it. He just demolishes absolutely everybody. And you're like, over the board over the board. Like this guy's for real. There's a lot of people like that. If you look at the top juniors of the world, it's crazy. All they are as a Farooja 2800 Vincent Kymber 2700. A bunch of kids from India 2700. Age or younger. You wonder two years younger, maybe, maybe a little older by a year, but it's just this wave and you're just hype for the guy. Like this is fucking awesome. Like we got we got a young American guy who shit talks every time he's on camera. And he beats everybody. He plays. But then you start hearing sprinkles here and there, maybe in some stream. Oh, I think he doesn't he doesn't get to play on Chuss.com anymore. Like Chuss.com doesn't put that badge there on the account. Sometimes sometimes he just say to the player, listen, we know the players are like, all right, you got me. And that's it. There's no conversation. So there's like these sprinkles, but people cheat online, especially when they're young. It's very, you know, it's very captivating. It's a very nice thing to do just to be clear. I mean, just make explicit that the accusation and I think it's proven, but they're still being shady about it. The degree is done as that he cheated on Chuss.com. And he was 12, 12 and 16 and 16. That's what he said. What he admitted to. But right now Chuss.com put out a statement and now Magnus put out a statement as well, saying, we think it's more than that. And yeah, I've talked to Daniel because he wants to come on the podcast, which I'm actually kind of interested in. I think he's a cool person. And they're also doing some really interesting anti-tidying stuff, which to me, from an algorithmic perspective is interesting, but he is also the man. Like there's always in every field, there's the institution. So you represent the institution because Chuss.com is the institution. It's like in the Olympic, it's the IOC. It's like, I'm, you don't have to be, I have to be careful. And Chuss, Fede is the institution. Fede, okay. Yeah, but just that call they've outgrown way more people actually know Chuss.com way more people know me. Way more people know he car. It's one of the reasons that. And it's interesting where the power lays. Yeah, what's the most power? Interesting. Yeah, Chuss.com has the most power, which probably, I don't know, maybe you and her car would do. No, the steer public opinion, you know, that's a very good question. I have to think with my evil cap now, what would happen if I'd rather you have the evil captain than Hicarro because I feel like he would really, you know, the power absolute, if the two of you ruled the world, it'd be a problem. You mean side by side or the ops, yeah, it'll be like, yeah, as rivals, that would definitely be a war. So one of the reasons I would, I would, I would not Chuss box him. Do you guys, how much do you like each other? I mean, do you admire each other as fellow, how I feel, as though I'm entertaining. Well, we should finish Magnus Hansen. Yes, that's, yes, that's good. Yes. I know it's, I feel like just inside we don't want to talk about it because it feels like it's been talked about so much. I'm going to, I'm trying to get over you. Just remember I've for me, it's even, it's much less. Yeah. And for the, and the listener, the listener zero, yeah. So like a, like a Rogan asked me like, so what was this? I know I heard him even talking. What was this Chess, you know, Joe talked about the Indonesia thing. And he said in some super random, small thing. And that was a very funny moment. I told him about this drama a few weeks ago. And then he's like, yeah, this is interesting. Is the analogue is that possible? Is that good? Yeah, I think it's possible. It's, I don't remember how drunk you were, but this, so even, you know, he's curious. He doesn't really know. But anyway, cheating when he was 12, when he was 16, as he said, he admitted, yes, to cheating online when he was 12 and 16. Yes. But for timeline sake, let's just, let's just do it this way. He has a lot of over the board success, but nobody really talks about the online cheating stuff. It's sort of kind of kept low key, a couple hundred people, maybe a couple thousand people, which sounds like a lot, but it's not because there's millions of viewers know about this. It's generally kept kind of low key because historically, if you cheated online as a teenager, you're not cheating over the board. It's not possible. You will get caught. Nobody has ever attempted it. We've had over the board cheaters, but not at the ultra elite level. And so what happens is they play this tournament in Miami. And the first day Hans loses three nothing. This is important because on the very next day, it's not like Hans was destroying every, every the second day of the tournament. He sits down game one versus Magnus in their best of four and destroys him. Like he destroyed him. Made it look like I was playing in Magnus's shoes, you know, the level difference. It went even like he wasn't close. Of course, we can argue it might be because of the maybe Magnus knew something ahead of time. There's obviously this psychological element, not, not important. Hans leaves, they say interviewer says Hans yesterday, by the way, horrible he phrased interview question. He goes, he goes, Hans yesterday was a terrible for you. And today you start with a masterpiece. What do you have to say? Chest peeks for itself walks away. Argue you can argue. It's cringe. You can argue. I thought it was cool. And then the guy, the guy then keeps asking a question with his arm extended because he's so shocked. He doesn't know what to do. Like he didn't even occur to him. How ridiculous it looked with the Baskin' and then not only does Hans come back and loses the best of four, he loses like two more games or maybe three, he had the next three games. He then proceeds to lose every single best of four match for the rest of the tournament. He ends with zero points and a prize money of zero dollars. They put up the graphic and he put Neem and zero. I think he got some minimum, right? So it's like, wow, this is like insane. This guy comes out with this crazy interview and my recap videos. I was like, the next time Hans has success, he has to stay away from the cameras. Don't let him talk. Don't let him talk. It's going to be bad luck. You know, I'm joking around. Like next time he plays, it's crazy. He's going to, so that was the, that was their kind of first interaction there. They also, there was some photos they were having fun playing on the beach. I don't know where they had a chessboard on the beach. Chess players are such the words. Hans. Yeah. They were still getting along. I guess so. Yeah. It's interesting because I talked to him at that time. Would he have mentioned something? Right. I wonder what he would, what have said if I asked him about Hans because that was coolest. Did anyone care about that? No, nobody. No, no, Hans is not a super known entity, right? He became, yes, much more known. He became probably a top five all-time popular chess player in the last three weeks. Yeah. So it's not, there wasn't, it wouldn't even be a worthy question. No, I'm not, you don't know. Maybe Magnus already kind of knew a lot of the top players. It seems they're coming out now and saying we already were suspicious. Yeah, it seems like Magnus might have known, but maybe not enough to address it. He still might not be willing to address it. Yes. But anyway, so like so, so yeah, so totally horrible tournament performance after, correct. After Hans piece, then the annual tradition of the St. Louis tournament happens, which is a strong field of players first for a fast tournament, rapid and blitz and a classical tournament. The classical tournament is the Singfield Cup. It's the, it's named after Rex Singfield, billionaire chess philanthropist. And it's like St. Louis chess club is a prestigious place. This is whole in the post of a prestigious tournament. Hall of Fame is there for chess. I don't know if it's US Hall of Fame or World Wide Hall of Fame, but yes, it's the other countries play chess. I didn't they do, but you know, we will. I don't know who determines where the Hall of Fame gets to be, which is the Hall of Fame. Okay. One day, some other part of the world is going to be like, actually, it's over here. Yeah. So basically what happens is we have a field set for the Singfield Cup set. It's the top 10 players in the world. Some can't make it. So okay, you get number 11 in there or something. One of them can't come because of something related to coronavirus. It's not, it's not now we're going to get a little asterisk on Spotify, because it was mentioned. Yep. We're in for about COVID-19. So I don't know why he couldn't come, but he couldn't come. Okay, something happens. He can't make it. Hans Neiman is the replacement. Yeah. At the time we didn't know this, but now weeks later, we knew Magnus wanted to not play. This is very important. Back then we didn't know. Apparently some others, how players also didn't want to play. They also were suspicious. They also wanted increased anteceding measures, which by the way, in chess are dog shit. Like you give this little metal wand and you put it on the little ears body. And there's apparently an argument a micro earpiece would not be caught. Something in the armpit vibrating would not be caught. Something in the shoe. They don't make the player stick their shoes off because it's too elitist. You how are you going to make players take their shoes off? That's oh my god. But if these things are out there, or if anything was inside any other orifice. Correct. Yes. I have to bring that out. I mean, that is true. honest. Yes, that is very truthful. So if if nothing else, this podcast is about honesty and truth. So I have to be completely and transparency. So what ends up happening in this thing field cup is Magnus ends up still playing, but the anti cheat measures are not introduced. So the first few games Hans has a very, very impressive first round game against Levant Oronian, one of the best players in the world. K draw. He was pushing draw. Second game, do malicious. Like a like a top player. My mid yard crushes him dominant opening, but not like a perfect game. You understand? Like it was, it was he made some inaccuracies here and there and he ended up winning in a complex game. This game three happens versus versus Magnus. And not only does he beat Magnus with the black pieces, he dominates him from start to finish. So in the opening, Magnus played something with white that he had maybe played once or twice before. There was some big debate about it. I'm not going to get into it. Basically a very niche small thing that just he had never played in maybe a long game before. With some sprinkled in venom that might get Hans off guard. Hans proceeds to play like the first 15, 20 moves absolutely perfectly. And then converts the game into a slightly better end game and squeezes Magnus to death. Basically beats Magnus with black, which nobody had done in years. The same way Magnus would have beaten other players. Then he goes and gives this interview, which where he claims that he had looked at those first 15, 20 moves. Right before the game basically, he got lucky. Didn't he say he looked at something very similar? No, he was either similar or literally that exact variation, which is possible. I've done that before. One of my best ones of my life that morning I went, you know, I'm not prepared. What if my opponent plays this Queen's Gambit accepted variation? And I literally learned the first 12 moves. He didn't know move 12. I killed him. Okay. Like it just happens. Yeah. Unfortunately, when you combine that with other small elements of the interview and now there's body language experts going all on this, it was odd. He gave an interview afterwards. Explaining his, explaining various details of the game, but not really explaining them. That's the thing. The standard chess player interview is you sit down and you go, something about the opening, something about not. Oh, yeah, I looked at this right before the game. And then you explain various symphonies and compositions of variations, things that went through your head, things you were evaluating, but Hans's interviews are different. So everything about him as a chess player already is different and his interviews are extremely strange and also different. Yeah. That's fine. But not when you combine it then with the world champion with drawing right after you beat him and ghosting the entire chess world. Yeah. So there's a, for people who haven't listened to it, there's a kind of sloppiness to the way he analyzes the game. Like he's like, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Like it's very, um, it's very obvious. Like what do you mean? Yeah, just completely winning here. Yeah, I'm completely winning here. And it's like, uh, I, uh, yeah, I just played perfect. I played perfect. Like there's a sense of like, but it also doesn't, for me, again, a very outside spectator. It doesn't raise any red flags. That's just his personality. He seems to really like to talk this way. And plus this could be crazy. But do you have a sense that he's more of an intuitive player versus like he's just not the kind of person that analyzes really well? Or is it, or is that ridiculous notion? Well, let's put it this way to succeed legitimately, because obviously this is a cheating scandal at the end of the day. At the 2750, 82800 level, the operational on of chess, you cannot be an intuitive player. You can be a little bit more intuitive than a calculator and a concrete evaluator of positions, meaning if I give you five seconds to play a move, you're going to choose the best move quickly. Those people are generally better at fast time controls, but you have to be good at everything. And what raised red flags in this interview was the fact that it was different than every other interview. Any human being ever gave at that level of chess, particularly after beating Magnus for the first time as a teenager, which is a very small group of people. And so that's where it got weird and the very next day Magnus was draws from the event. Chasworld lights completely on fire for multiple weeks and he also tweets. Right. That's the resignation. No, resignation. It's sweet was I'm withdrawing from the tournament in St. Louis. I've always enjoyed playing here and I will in the future. And then it's a clip of Jose Morrino. I cannot speak. I choose not to speak. If I speak, I'm in big trouble. I don't want to be in big trouble. Yeah. And that one that's some people nuts that people said it's not even a cheating insinuation, which was one of the theories. Another theory was someone in team Magnus told Hans what Magnus was looking at. And that's why Hans learned those first 15 moves, which is so fucking stupid because Magnus knows like five people. Not in not in his life, but his team is very close. That group. Right. But to the outsider, that sounds like a very legitimate theory. How else can you explain? Hans said he knew before the game, what was going to happen? Magnus senses a mole. He's not no, by the way, just just so I know like if that was forget the cheating aside, if you knew, doesn't matter how the opening your opponent is going to do, they prepared. Is that a significant help to you? If that opening is ultra sharp and requires basically the game to be on a knife's edge. Yeah. Yes. Meaning one mistake can be fatal. Because then you can look up what the engine says and you can know everything. You can know all the possibilities. So even if your opponent goes off that engine path, you will know how to punish it. In this case, what happened basically was Magnus played a line that if completely, optimally punished, would have given Hans a slightly better position. And that's what happened. But then he also demolished him in that later phase of the game. Yes. And then, okay, so Magnus resigns, goes silent. The chess world goes crazy. What else is interesting in that period of time? Hans's fourth round game of that tournament, right after beating Magnus, was also just absolutely genius, just an absolutely brilliant game, which he failed to win. But then after that game, he also gives once again another interview where he's like, this game was absolutely genius. Like this was, I was just killing him from start to finish. And like there was a moment he literally says, oh, yeah, just gave him a piece, like a full piece, which is a substantial advantage to the other side. And he starts explaining why the position is winning, but in words, not. In chess moves, not in specific concrete chess moves, which is the way you're supposed to if you understand the position, right? So now there's this new theory that's being cultivated. If it's the interviews are going to be used as the evidence. And beyond round four, he just played like a good grandmaster. And he lost two or three games, maybe, maybe two games and he drew the rest. So he didn't win again. He beat the first two out of his first three games. He beat my major if he beat Carlson. And he also went on the attack himself. He that was when he publicly admitted to cheating in an interview that he gave to the St. Louis chess club. That's when he said he has never cheated over the board. Then he said, chess that comes as ban me from the global championship, which is what I was invited to to play privately. They ban me then even ban me publicly. And then he said, and he caro is on Twitch every day, you know, saying things about me this and that. And since then, nothing tournament finishes somehow. I don't know how we got to the end of the tournament. I really thought that it was going to get called off. But tournament ends Hans hasn't said anything since then. So has he still said was the last time you said that was the last time the tweet. 30 cents of September 7th said he caro wants to play the victim, something like this. They face each other again recently. What was that? They played in the online event of this meltwater champions chess tour, which is a 16 player tournament where everybody plays everybody first. And after 15 games, the top eight make a knockout bracket. And Magnus played the game. There was obviously a lot of hype prior for what was going to happen in this game. Magnus plays one move and resigns. Actually, I imagine he didn't want to play one move. I imagine he would have resigned the game as it was starting. But I think some websites don't let you resign before you make one move. Because then the game is encountered. So I think he didn't want to play at all, but he played one move. And that made it even more epic, I suppose. And he resigned. And that was that. So you lose that game counts, right? You lose the rating. These online events unfortunately don't count for any sort of rating. But on the tournament, yeah, he played one move. So he resigned. And then how does the tournament still work out? Is it the tournament already over? So he made the eight. Magnus still made the top eight. It was round five. Or like round six or something. So it was halfway through the preliminary stage. Yeah. It affected his standings. But then after resigning that game, Magnus finished first in the bracket in the preliminaries. And then he won the entire event. There was a chance that they were going to meet in the final. But Hans lost in the first round against the Vietnamese strong player, Le Quang Li Em. And then Magnus gave a short interview to the live broadcast. Where he said he would give a statement at the end of the tournament. And then he did. He gave a statement at the end of the tournament. And now here we are. The only other thing missing from this is the very intense scrutinization of all those over the board games that I mentioned earlier that Hans dominated in. So people are now going through all of his games that he played in tournaments. And they're analyzing them with engines and they're saying he played exceptionally well. And the debate is was he cheating or was he way too good already, but underrated? Because he could have had incubated knowledge. So he could have not played for a couple of years was 2700 level, but was playing people who were 24, 2500. Well, well, over the board. I see. So not just over the board with the top level people like Magnus, but over the board in general. Yes. And he got a chance to play in the super tournaments against the best players in the world. He had to go to Europe. He was the most active chess player in 2021. And he was quite dominant. Yes. I think he played more over the board games than any player in 2021 or 2022. I think it's 2021. And yes, I think his rise was steeper than everybody. Maybe with the exception of all the rest of Faruja who got the 2800. So I'd like to believe because he talks about being very, he just became obsessed with chess. I like stories like that. I like stories of the underdog, especially with the scarlet letter of having been a cheater in the past. I like the idea of somebody who is flawed psychologically and ethically. Just just a full fascinating personality and this somehow just becomes obsessed. I mean, similarly to Bobby Fisher is also a tortured soul, also flawed, also just chaotic all over the place. You could see Bobby Fisher being somebody that might cheat when he was 12. Right. I'm not my chess. If it exists, yeah, actually, I think in some podcast like small trust podcast, I don't want to. I like Ben Johnson. So I am apologizing for calling it small, but compared to like, let's say, like Friedman podcast. It's what's what's it? What's his podcast? It's perpetual chess. It's kind of like, oh, I love perpetual chess. Are you joke? Really? There you go. Yeah. Wait. I'll show you. Because it does a lot of it talks. It makes me feel special. Let me see. Where's it perpetual chess? He does like, improve or series? Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He's great. Ben, I don't think I forgot. I'm so horrible named. His name is Ben Johnson. Yeah. Yeah. It is Ben Johnson. That's right. Yeah. The perpetual chess podcast. That's amazing. See, legs. When, even individuals like myself who might have a large audience, when I look at you, you're at a, you're just at a different level. I don't expect you to be listening to chess podcasts during the, just imagine you're doing something to change the world or. Talking to some visionary people. Well, I should say it. You know, I've been running a lot and I listen to podcasts a lot because they're such. I love human beings excited about stuff that really energizes me and I've listened to a bunch of chess podcasts. I'm really energized by your love of chess. I really like, yeah, sorry, I did forgot his name, but Ben Johnson. I love it when he talks to grandmaster. I love when he talks to the regular folks for the Improvers, like to see how they balance life and chess and all that kind of stuff. He's just pretty good at it. He's like super excited and they talk about books. Yeah. And they get excited about different books. Yes. I mean, it also gives me a sense of where the chess world is. And the different perspective is like people studying chess. Like what they get excited about, how difficult it is. Yeah, it's nice to get a sense of the community. The language is just used because I did want to have a bunch of conversations with folks about chess because I think it's a beautiful game. And I think it's a beautiful community. So that's one of the podcasts I listen to. Yeah, anyway, it's great. Anyway, you were saying why why did you bring them up? Yes. Great podcast. Great podcast. The only reason I thought of it and I used the word small no disrespect Ben is because even that episode, which he did with Hans, like it was a small episode, it wasn't seen by mass audience of chess and he did an episode of Hans recently. I know. Some time ago, yeah. And in that episode, Hans very openly is like Bobby Fisher was misunderstood and he was my idol. Oh, well, I've said a couple of things like that and Hans isn't in the Hansen and tons guy. Like I, when I listen to Hans, I get a little anxious. And he just, he brings out some sort of disturbance in my ecosystem. Yeah. Yeah, I can't really pin him down to like what, what's going on there as a person who's trying to read people. Yeah. And it's difficult. Like I can, this is the dark aspect. He could be both the genius of Bobby Fisher and a genius cheater. And you could see like there's something chaotic about him, which makes him very appealing in that way. Yes. So right now, late September 2022, the current environment is such that Hans hasn't said anything in weeks. And people are sort of dissecting every bit of circumstantial evidence that they can. And they're trying to present the case. I don't even know to who, ultimately. I guess it would be the feed-a-cheating anti-cheating commission or whatever. It might be to you, essentially, to people with a platform. It could be to present convincing evidence to where the people, the people are convinced and where the other. Because you're, for people who don't know, and you should definitely follow Gotham Chess, you've been on this. You've covered it a lot. And I'm sure if anything comes out, you'll cover it more. But you've been quite balanced and thoughtful and kind of objective about the whole thing. Yeah. So the reason for that is I understand the power that I wield with anything. And if I say one sentence, the wrong way, I might be sending 10,000 people or more to go do something. Yeah. And I hate that. I want to present the evidence and I want the video to end and people go, OK. I understand. Not, oh my god, fuck some one up. Yeah. Because that's, and I also believe that even if Hans is guilty, this goes all the way back. He's a human being. Yeah. And you can argue that cheaters got to be punished, then you can argue that people who do things wrong, you shouldn't feel any sort of compassion. But I would hate to have the whole world pointing at their fingers at me, the entire world that I've known my entire life. And even if I messed up, there's still a world after chess, there might still even be a world in chess. I don't know. But that stuff, it doesn't make me, it doesn't make me feel good to present all of the circumstantial evidence in my videos and start being like, yeah, it looks, you know. But at the same time, you deeply care about chess and the chess community and there's some sense where, was it you or the Magnus that said that cheating poses an existential threat. It's a magnet. I mean, there is some aspect of truth to that, which is like, you know, the chess is in a state where bots, chess engines are much better than humans. Yeah. And we're living in a world where technology becomes easier and easier to integrate with human beings, whether you put it in some orifice or elsewhere. And that does pose a threat to our ability to trust that a world champion is indeed a world champion that somebody we think is good is indeed good. And so there is some aspect to the ecosystem that should punish cheating and perhaps over punish cheating. And the other thing is in sport, you can take PDs and have bigger muscles, bigger better reaction time, but you still have to perform the action in a successful way. There is still a chance you can lose if you take PDs, maybe in some sports, the gap between non PD and PD user is significantly more noticeable. But in chess, if you cheat, you play God, yeah, you decide when the game is over, you can fake bad moves, you can fake everything. You can even if you're cheating, quote unquote, the right way, you're going to lose plenty of games to avoid getting detected. So you can create bots that are 2,800 like you can also just not listen. If you know all the best moves, but choose to play on your own, I made a mistake, not a big deal. You could, yes, bots are all at a different level. But if you were to cheat, that you, you play God, you can decide when you make your move and when the engine makes its move. And if you know the top 4 lines of the engine, you choose the fourth one. So in hindsight, people will analyze your game and they will go, oh, wasn't perfect. Well, no shit, only the stupid cheaters play the top engine line the whole game. By the way, I'm not saying that this is what's happening here, but there's probably an excitement to play God and get in the way with it. I know people, I know adults, grown adults who are successful in their fields and they cheat, they cheat in lessons, they cheat in, like I don't want to say I've taught any, may or may not have. For some reason, one of them watches this and they know they're guilty and it happens. It happens not just teenagers, not just young adults, but full grown adults will cheat when they play because it, I think it helps them learn. Oh, well, that's correct. We just just justification, but I just meant like I might not be just about winning. It might also just feel good to have that power. Like I beat you as a drug. Oh, yeah. I mean, like with a lot of criminals, with a lot of criminals, I feel like part of like the mass murderers would be serial killers. I feel like a lot of is that can get away with it. The fact that they, like they, like everyone else is a sucker and they figured out how to do this evil thing. And obviously cheating is nowhere close to that, but there's still a feeling of getting away with it. Yeah, I wonder. I mean, you're pretty objective on the whole thing. Where if you were a betting man, what would you say is the probability? Are you changing day by day in your head? What's the probability that Hans cheated over the boarding us Magnus in the in St. Louis? That's a tough one, man. They're even allowed yourself to put a probability on it. No, not on that specific game because I think a lot of that game was affected by Magnus's own psyche. That was one of those worst games ever. So he played poorly to a Magnus plate, which doesn't help his case. Yeah. Hans might have cheated in that game, but we'll never know. I, I think day by day, the evidence is slowly starting to show more and more that he's cheated. It's like like how Magnus said more than he said and more recently. It's undeniable. Like right, a lot of the statistics are there. The problem is you can't prove you're not cheating. Yeah, unless you strip naked, like that site offered him a million bucks to, like, everything about which site, some part of us also headline that said Hans Neiman is over a million bucks. Yeah. And where I struggled to comprehend this, how on earth he could pull it off. And, like, I'm a guilty that my brain goes to guilt first and resentment. Yeah, resentment, remorse, guilt, that kind of that trio. Magnus put out a statement as we speak yesterday saying, dear chess world at the 2022 sinkfield cup. I made the unprecedented professional decision to withdraw from the tournament after my round three game against Hans Neiman. A week later, during the Champions Chess tour, I resigned against Hans Neiman after playing only one move. I know that my actions have frustrated many in the chess community. I'm frustrated. I want to play chess. I want to continue to play chess at the highest level in the best events. I believe that cheating in chess is a big deal and an existential threat to the game. I also believe that chess organizers and all those who care about the sanctity of the game, we love seriously consider increasing security measures and methods of cheat detection for over the board chess. When Neiman was invited last minute to the 2022 sinkfield cup, I strongly considered withdrawing prior to the event. I ultimately chose to play. That's the thing you're referring to is that he can like now we know he was torn about the whole thing. I believe that Neiman has cheated more and more recently than he has publicly admitted. His over the board progress has been unusual and throughout our game in sinkfield cup, I had the impression that he wasn't tense or even fully concentrating on the game in critical positions while outplaying me as black in a way I think only a handful of players can do. This game contributed to changing my perspective. We must do something about cheating and for my part going forward, I don't want to play against people that have cheated repeatedly in the past because I don't know what they're capable of doing in the future. There's more than I would like to say unfortunately at this time I'm limited in what I can say without explicit permission from Neiman to speak openly. So far I have only been able to speak with my actions and those actions have stated clearly that I'm not willing to play chess with Neiman. I hope that the truth in this matter comes out whatever it may be sincerely Magnus Carlson world chess champion. I was just letting off your statements. If I was a world, no, just say whatever Lex Friedman will be the title. Yeah, I don't know. I think I would not even if I was a world champion, I'll just say Lex or make up a title. And I feel like I really fucked up in life if I have to tweet a statement as an image. That's like when you get your politician, you got caught cheating on your wife. Like for many years in a row, then I tweet an image. I'm sorry for all the people I have hurt and the people that believed in me and whatever else. And then I would sign world chess champion. You know, the most like the modern way to give a statement what I thought Magnus was going to do. I thought he was going to write on the recent scandal or my statement on the past few weeks, tweet longer. So you put you are L. Yeah, so that's for tweets, but it's unlimited characters. It's not 100. I didn't know what that is. Can you explain that to me? Yeah, so generally when a celebrity has a giant audience on Twitter, they will make their statement on social media and say what it is in a sentence. Yeah, one line and then there's a link. What does the link take you to what's right called twit longer? Oh, like tweet longer, twit longer. Yeah. And that is where they write their statements. That is what I was expecting. When I said we did this. I haven't seen this before. Oh, this is a second. I don't have one off the top of my head, but it's that Kanye came Kardashian breaking up. They would use that streamers musicians. Yeah, I don't think politicians use it because it's just feeling the party. Use the image. Use my space and Facebook. Yeah. I will probably go see I like. I mean, I'm not just being biased here just because I'm a podcast. I'm a huge fan of podcasts. I feel like I would go on a podcast to talk about it with somebody I trust. So like long form and discuss it. I thought it was going to do that too. In fact, I wanted to write him a message and be like, I can be that guy for you. I have a very strange relationship with Magnus because good, bad. I don't I we've never interacted. I very openly. I don't want to say use him for views because that is a very crude way of saying it. Yeah. But if you wanted to insult my YouTube channel, that is what you would say. So Magnus is in a lot of videos. Thumbnails or videos. Not click baity, but if he's playing in a tournament and he plays a great game, he's going on that fucking thumbnail. Oh, because let's see. He's the number one chess player. Very likely the greatest chess player of all time. Right. Plus he's exciting. And YouTube algorithm loves his name and people click on it. Oh, it was the best. Yeah. But I don't know what the chicken or the egg is. But the reason it loves it, the reason people click on it is because he is an exciting personality. He's an exciting chess player. And he's like, is there's something compelling about him? Yeah. He's also, he knows how to, in a subtle dry, wood, humaway, talk shit. With the silences and all of that. Yes. He knows it. He knows it. He knows the whole game of it. Specifically to Magnus, my relationship with him. We've never interacted. And throughout the last couple of years, he generally has interacted with Hikaru as a competitor. He has done some collabs with the Botezes. He obviously has talked to Ludwig, who's a very, very big streamer. And part of me regrets the fact that when I was smaller as a YouTuber in a, in a Twitch streamer, I'm sure I used to make jokes or some tweets at Magnus. Like when Magnus would tweet something, I would try to respond so I could be the top reply, because that was my social media. I literally think I once responded to Magnus, Sweden saying responding for engagement. Because it was some like, it wasn't some controversial tweet. Yes. It was just something funny. And I went, ha ha, responding for engagement. Because I was just being a little bit of an idiot. And I knew that if it got enough likes, it would be at the top. And people would see me, my brand, and just get to know me. This was the type of... Please don't use the word brand, but yes. Yes. But yeah, no. Any of your worries that he wouldn't take you seriously because of that? It would take me seriously. And if I was one of the best of all time and I saw some dude on YouTube just kind of being a moron and I'm all over his thumbnails, I can imagine he has a very legitimate face. I appreciate your humility and self-curricle nature. But one of the realities with people like him is he, he wouldn't hold a grudge or not treat you seriously. I'm pretty sure he's a fan. He's a big support. He doesn't watch YouTube videos like that kind. I barely watch YouTube videos. I think of chess. Yes. He might watch more fun chess at Jason's stuff, but he just doesn't, it's not for him. So I'm pretty sure he knows of you and likes you and you're commenting on stuff as your effect on his belief. Which is funny that's something you think about. Yeah, you're well respected. Like you're a lot of people mentioned you as a person who is like, okay, this person's legit. Which is an important thing. It's not just an entertainer. It's not just a shit talker and so on. This person does, is a great educator, great fan and student of chess, a great player himself, so all of those components. And so yeah, you're definitely a good person. And on this particular aspect have been very objective. I understand that I'm nowhere near perfect. I'm not a different person on camera off camera. I will say it like it is, maybe on Twitch. You got to dig in the mud there a little bit more, a lot more sarcastic, a lot more brash and whatnot. But you meet me in a taco place and I'll talk with you the same way I might if it was a video just that you may not, you may not consider me just a random guy at a taco place. And that's why I think about the stuff with specific to Magnus and it's one of the reasons I don't reach out to him directly ever. I never have, never DMed him on Instagram hoping for a response never. I've never even reached out to anyone on his team trying to get a conversation very candid with him, which I think it would be. I even barely reached out to guys in the top 10, like top 15. Only recently started pushing myself more to do that. And I even in my intro messages to them, preemptively say something like you might think I'm some idiot, you might not be totally wrong. Yes. But like I think this would be a good conversation and give it a shot. And I've been surprised I've been ignored by a few, but some said, oh, yeah, I've seen your stuff. Generally a fan, like no problem. I was actually really blown away this YouTube channel Levidovches. It's a Russian Chess channel. And I think the last name of the guy is the name of the channel is named after Ilya Levidov, who has some sort of managerial role in the Russian Chess Federation. And this channel has interviewed some of the greatest players of all time. They have interviews with the modern best Russian players and Kasparov, Kramnik. Name these guys from Russian Chess. His history is unbelievable. I just thought this was a channel of just unbelievably well respected chess players and Legion of fans that were longtime chess fans. And I mentioned them very briefly in a YouTube video. And that little clip went into their next community event. And the founder of the channel went on this two minute beautiful description of why he liked me and how he only watched my channel as a beginner and how I have a natural voice and how if I talked about cards, I would have a million, a hundred million subscribers, just all this really kind stuff that in my mind, I thought was either undeserved or I just never fathomed that. Yeah, I mean, you said he certainly should not feel as deserved as he should have. He knew you about that kind of stuff. But I think that is the thing that works over time. It's like reputation spreads, which is like if one person likes you and they tell you to other people and they kind of spreads. And over time, you have one conversation with a top 10, like a super grandmaster and they say nice things about you. And it's just kind of spreads. It's not been very surprised in all walks of life. Like this really gets me, this makes me happy, honestly, because like people ask me like how I gave guests and so on. It just seems honestly just be a good person and like a real person and honest and just kind of spreads the word word of mouth. You know, even coming here, I almost didn't reach out. What do you mean? I had seen you had never talked to a just person and I've watched a lot of, I've watched some of the things start to finish, especially if the guests I'm really interested in like George St. Pierre, I'll watch that guy do whatever. Yeah, exactly. I'll watch him do basically anything. Yeah. I love listening to him. Some of the other things I've listened to as well. And I noticed that neither, well to me, you obviously and Joe are the two biggest podcasters. I don't know if that's like factual. I don't know if some influencer has some podcast, but you guys interview folks that I listen to more often than anybody else. And when Magnus came on, I was like, oh, this is, that's amazing. You know, I, I don't even know how I would reach out to someone like you. Which just seems like a, a lim, like climbing a mountain. And then a couple days later, and I, I even in that episode wanted to write, but I didn't know how. Like, do I make a YouTube comment? I don't want that. I'm like, I'm cloud chasing on the Magnus episode. But then you talk to the Boteses and I said, oh, what's this? I shouldn't overthink it. Yeah. Like, you know, I, so I just said, all right, fuck it. I'll, I'll just write a comment and you're like, yeah, I'd love to have you on. I was shocked. I didn't even, you responded just within a couple hours or something. Yeah. I mean, there was an honor. It's a good way to connect. I also like on live streams. I'll watch, I try to resist commenting, but, you know, I'll watch some, some, even smaller channels, like I'll get super excited by them and connecting that way. There's an intimacy to that. My YouTube is beautiful. I don't know anything about Twitch. Maybe it's similar to know anything. But YouTube has ruined you. There is an intimacy. Like, especially if it's live. I don't know what that is, but if it's live, they're like right there. You can just like reach out and say hello. Yes. Cool. It's like really, I don't know. I'm just happy to live in this time when you can connect with people in that way. There isn't an intimacy. That's why I love podcasts too. I listen to people and I feel like they're my friend. It's cool. It's a cool, it's a cool feeling. It makes you feel less lonely in this world. You can have a lifelong companion, especially like people that do a podcast for many, many years. I'm like, we've been, you've gone through all the ups and downs of life together with a creator, with a, with a podcast or with anything. It's cool. I don't know. It makes it surprisingly intimate one way friendships. Of course, maybe for an intro or I don't know. There's, there's, there's some negatives that people definitely describe. Where they get used to a lot of Paris social, you think you, like the viewer will think that the streamer or the YouTuber knows them or owes them something or has some, they have a bigger connection than they do. Yeah, you know what? Actually, it's time to interrupt. I have to look, maybe you can explain to me. I've heard this term, Paris Social a lot. I'm meaning to look it up. Might as well look it up. Well, in live. Yes, sure, sure. Yes, sure, sure. Paris Social interaction, PSI refers, is this a new term? Because I have just started listening hearing it like the last, yeah, I think it's year. Yeah. Paris Social interaction, PSI refers to a kind of psychological relationship experienced by an audience in their mediated encounters with performance in the mass media, particularly on television and on online platforms. Viewers or listeners come to consider media personalities as friends, despite having no limited interaction with, oh shit, that's a term for the thing I've been referring to. Interesting. The term was coined by Donald Horton and Richard Wall in 1956. Wow. When there was like a very limited media, huh? Well, I guess TV and radio and stuff. Yeah, yeah. Paris Social interaction and exposure to the gamers interest in persona become a Paris Social relationship after repeated exposure to the media. Yeah, okay. What's the downside, bro? What's, what's okay? Oh, well, I can tell you the downside. The downside is people thinking they're in relationships with streamers and stalking them. That's, oh, the stalking part, but the relationship is like, I mean, okay, you mean like actual relationship, like waking up and saying, how are you doing? Like in your head to them? Yeah. No. But that might be an extension. More like, yeah, getting mad, they don't respond to you in any time you're in the stream or that convincing yourself the other person wants you and you need to go to them. So you need to find where they are. Like, this has happened. Some of the biggest female streamers have reported that they get stalked and harassed for months. And that's born out of this. This on a very small scale is you come into a stream every so often and given update about your academic career. That's not so bad. I was going to mention, I've streamed on Twitch for years and I watched people have kids. People will come in over the course of months and say, hey, man, you know, I just finished I just took the bar exam. Yo, man, like I'm having my first kid and that's crazy. That's amazing. Yeah. But if they do it in a healthy way, that's one thing. But there's always going to be downsides. But most of it is beautiful, man. Yes. I have very, I have, I guess, pair social relationships of people that take it a little too far. But it's all love. You also have a fundamental belief and hope in people to be good. Yeah. Yeah. And I haven't gotten in trouble with it yet. That's a good thing. Me too. I've interacted with plenty of people in person and no one's been negative. So it's. And I've even gone to a war zone. There's no, there hasn't been people have been very, I don't know. People have only surprised me in the positive direction, in the depth of the capacity they have for compassion. Do we? Okay. So now we're in this weird place with the cheating. I can ask you a question about how it's possible to cheat. Like if you and I, you know, the conversation you're going to have with Magus, we're going to have, we're going to play chess. If we try to figure out how can you beat them? What are the different ways, do you think? Over the board chess, what are the ways to cheat? Yeah. That's where I lose the thread because I don't know. So that's what I immediately want to. It's like the engineering challenge of cheating. Right. Well, that's because that's how you're good at that. I mean, you're not good at creating cheating in over the word situation. I'm just saying your brain works differently. I just choose to not even, like I can't entertain that. I can come up with some bullshit, but it's not going to be anywhere. Oh, your mind is not like immediately attracted to pulling at that thread of like, how would you fuck with the system? Yeah. My mind stops at, that would have to be a really sophisticated thing. And that's it. It doesn't go any further. My brain every day thinks about the best way to compartmentalize chess into a digestible format and put it out into content. Chess, that's what I think on the board. Chess, not cheating. Yeah. I just think about the YouTube. I just think about that. That's currently where my mind is fully focused. I'm also working on like a book. So that's what you think. Yes. Yes. For me, because I've built chess engines without understanding chess much as like, you know, as anyone does who's interested in AI, you build all kinds of systems that do all kinds of stuff in chess is just an easy game. Like it starts with a fellow, goes up to chess and go. There's just a great benchmark, a great place to explore different AI algorithms from search to machine learning and so on. But to me, cheating is like, it's a similar kind of ideas. Well, if I make it a board instead of eight by eight to 10 by 10, I caught as to change things and we're cheating. It's almost like expanding the engineering challenge of chess out into the real world. To me, okay, so just allow me, I know cheating is horrible and everything. But stock fish, AI engine and human working together in interesting ways, if forget chess, just machine and human working together to expand the capability of the human is really fascinating. And that's like a beautiful thing to me. Of course, purely for the chess game, it ruins the game. But I just like thinking of how AI can interact with the human in ways that it's frictionless. Like, you know, like neural brain computer interfaces dream of directly connecting the human brain to AI system. The problem in this case is I don't think the human and the AI are interacting together. The AI dominates. The human is just the mechanism that makes the moves. I actually played, if I may, I don't maybe I need your advice on this. I thought and I told myself I won't do it. And then a friend of mine said, and a couple of friends and both of them are previous guests in this podcast. I told my definitely need to do it, which is, you know, connect. So I already have for the chess arm that I built this computer vision on the chess board is able to extract from vision the way you do optical character recognition, you extract the board. So I was going to just build that cheating system to demonstrate it with the reason I thought it was interesting. So something we didn't mention is, I don't know who started this rumor, but the rumor started there. It might have been like anal beads that I don't know who started this, but I do know that Elon magnified it. My username was dead center and that thing that he retweeted, which was hilarious to me. You're using what do you mean? He retweeted the clip, but also the copy pasta, like the paragraph that was like describing the whole G anal beads theory and dead center in the middle of that paragraph is as Gotham Chess says, and the worst part about it was I was literally tagged. So it was as user slash Gotham Chess says, so every time that paragraph gets posted on Reddit, I get tagged. It's getting posted a lot. So yes, but yes, he tweeted, and then there's also the funny thing, which I really love. The weirdest, most entertaining thing. Was that part of the same thing where like plot twist, Magnus has been using anal beads this whole time. That's how you got. Yes. Yes. I love that so much. Okay. But anyway, there's a, I quickly realized that there is, I have to admit that I know not much about sex toys. And then I quickly realized that there's a lot of sex toys that Bluetooth capability that you can interact with. So it's very easy to connect stockfish to a sex toys. Actually, actually, yes. So apparently that's a popular thing. Like a lot of sex toys are Bluetooth enabled. So you can communicate with them. So this is actually pretty trivial to do, not trivial, but then, and then in fact, there is a, there's several libraries. One of them is really active called, now this is on GitHub friends. It's in Rust, but I think there's Python, rappers, it's called buttplug. It's the name of the library that communicates with it. It supports a bunch of different devices, a bunch of different like vibrators and all that kind of stuff. But then I looked at the kind of vibrators that supports and they're all like creepy looking. I mean, it doesn't have, I don't know, it felt too dirty. You know, like there's a line, I was like, I know, it's this not going to, because the reason I like that kind of stuff is I like the joke of it that ultimately is somehow educational. Because to me, I really care about AI and this is a cool little project to do. It's super easy to share. Yeah, but I was thinking about doing it. I was thinking about doing it. The first I said, no, it kind of feels dirty. But then the aforementioned friend said, no, you should definitely do it. I like the, who's your test subject? No, we wouldn't test it. You should, I'm, I'm sure that people will sign up, right? I just went on the table, like show the vibration, like, you're basically converting, now it's not, I'm not obviously a grandmaster. So you have to say everything. I feel like, no, you don't, you could say the square, you don't have to say the piece, the human will fill in the gap. No, a good human chess player. I can't. Oh, that's what, that's the point I wanted to make is like, for me, I would like to know the actual move I need to make. Yeah. So I need the full information. Right. So I have to convert the Bishop C5, whatever to, to more, to more code, which is a lot of my patients. I, that yes, exactly. But it still works. It's hilarious and fun. So that's thinking about doing it. But, because it's pretty easy to do, it would be just like a fun exercise. I love a mix of technical, rigor and humor. Well, this is the perfect project for that. Right. Exactly. Yeah, this was more than I think out of a user comment in a Twitch stream. So I thought it was more than reddit this theory, but I think Eric Hansen was streaming. Chaz Bra and someone in his chat made that joke and he read it out loud. That was the first time it was read out loud and then somebody clipped it and it became international news. Like, I don't have you followed how big the traction got on this anal beads thing. It was covered by every major news network late night talk show Trevor Noah, Stephen Colbert, no international news, international news in countries like China, where I would have never thought that they would report about anal beads. Yeah. Did they? What was the tonality of it? Was it a scene as a joke? Or did they say there's a cheating scandal? I think too much. I think it's a mention of it. I think literally anal beads. Like just saying, just recused. Accused. That's great. Denies cheating with anal beads, which he never did. He never denied cheating with anal beads. It was a joke internet theory. If I was him, I would lean into it. Yeah, I can't imagine, man. I don't know what the right thing for him to do is, but it's not touching this one. I've talked about it. I don't say the words anal beads in my YouTube videos. I'll say beads. Yeah, yeah. I'll, the thing is. Do you think I should do the code thing? It's a good tutorial. Sure. Yeah, I think it would be hilarious. If you find a way to do it, yeah, you can show that it is possible to theoretically vibrate via Bluetooth, chest moves, and if someone shoves it up their ass, there was another joke. Okay, they offered you to play naked. They're going to make you spread your cheeks. Yeah, I did. I didn't know why naked saw the problem. I think it doesn't have to be naked. I don't think naked is enough. Yeah. Okay, some questions from Reddit. Ask him, ask Levy if he deep down hates his audience. I saw that. Yeah, I saw that was the problem. I have a, I have a love hate relationship with the chest subreddit. Yeah. So that's why some of those questions were going to be tough. I have a love hate relationship. Do you think that's a tough question or is that come from a place of love? Very, very tough to say. Very tough to say. It's love and hate. Like, they're basically next door neighbors on Reddit. I feel like. Correct. They ask Levy very quickly between each other. Yes. So, Reddit chest specifically, I think is mostly folks who are around before the chest boom. So the chest is the chest subreddit? Sorry, I didn't know. Yeah. So a lot of them have been around for five years, seven years, ten years, even more. And I think the average age on Reddit is lower than the average age on the chest subreddit. I think the chest subreddit is beyond the age of 20, maybe even 25. Like a lot of folks, they're ancient, ancient people. They're basic. 20s. Yeah. I mean, not 15 or 16. Anarchy chest is younger. So anarchy chest is basically chest memes. That's the subreddit? Yes. You got anarchy chest. It's great. A lot of stupid memes on there. Do they like you or no? Or is it love hate? They did until my crypto sponsorship. Which is a separate convo that I'm more than happy to have. But yeah, so my relationship with the Reddit chest subreddit is tough because my content on YouTube stops at a certain point with them. They can't learn from me because I'm tailoring to 95% of my audience, which is about 16, 1700 and below. And I have a lot of content where I jokingly make fun of low rate of players and everyone's in on it. We all have fun and I laugh at myself a ton. The laugh at this. You can even see in this conversation. But just like you mentioned with clips and out of context things, folks have already formed the perception of my personality. There's nothing I can do to win them back. And I think the dominant percentage of the loudest group of folks on the chest subreddit, they just, they have a certain perception of me. It's not going to change. And you add something like cryptocurrency sponsorship, which people on Reddit, just in general, are relatively negative on the subject. It's going to start snowballing more and more. So if you ever look up a thread of should I buy a Gotham course and it's on Reddit chest, just say no. Everyone's calling it a scam over price. Interesting. I got, I heard a lot of really positive stuff. I don't know where. I'm Reddit in general. Of you? Yeah. You might have been looking for it. You might have not been looking for negative things. So I was looking for like best educators online, like that kind of stuff. I don't, I might have not been read to chest. I'll be totally honest with you. If you ever go there and look for something like bests, recaps or bests, educational content for intermediates, I'm not mentioned. I might not be mentioned because I'm already expected to be on the list. So they just kind of want to generally shout out smaller creators, totally fine with that. And I'm not even going on this whole explanation because I want to win folks back. It's just sort of the reality of the situation. A lot of myself is really click baity and I'm playing the YouTube game. Yeah. They don't want that. Do you ever feel like a limit or attention between your creativity and the YouTube album? Like do you feel like it has negative effects on it? Yeah, yeah. I want to cover more in depth stuff in a 30 minute video that I think is super useful to people. It's only going to get 60,000 views. And you feel why is that a bad thing? Is it good? Is it good to mix it up? Yes, it's good to mix it up, but I make a video a day. I make one bad video. The other videos suffer. And then if I make two videos that underperform, the rest of the videos don't get pushed out as much. Your earnings can go down 40% day to day, which doesn't happen in other careers. And if I ever want to supplement, if I ever want to make a very instructional video, I try to do it in a very fun way. So something like eight of Magnus Carlson's best end games. You can still learn a ton, but the concept of the video is going to be different. Like I tried to still teach things, but in more interesting and exciting ways, like the guy who was scam for a million dollars, Alex the sheriff who was basically promised the world championship. If he won his match, he won his match. He didn't get a world championship. So there's still stuff in there you can learn. And my goal is just you click on the video, you learn something and you enjoy yourself. It gets people to click on it by any means necessary. But once they're there, have quality stuff they can learn and be realistic. Yeah, man, I wish, so I have zero those pressures, but I also really, really, like I turn off views and all that kind of stuff. I don't pay attention to any of that. But I wish YouTube would like the algorithm would include how good the video is, like beneficial for people's long-term well-being in the calculation. Yeah. I actually really hate the fact that they turned off this likes. Yeah, I didn't get that at all. Because like I know I don't know the difference between like the tutorials specifically, like I don't know what's a good chess video or not or what's a good review or not. Yeah. I mean, it emphasizes following certain people more than like if you trust the creator, but like, man, I really don't know what's a good video or not essentially. And then you have to trust more the title. And then the click baitiness comes in and it's no good. You have to use your own gut instinct as opposed to data sucks. Yeah, there's videos that have almost no views that are still great. Incredible. Some of the best ones, some people who are just focused on like the quality. Yeah. And don't want to play the game or don't even know how to play it and they don't really want to play the game with the YouTube algorithm. Yeah, it sucks. It sucks, especially given how dominant YouTube is in defining the sort of the creative energy of our whole civilization of the youth. Not just chess. Not just chess. I mean, you're going to chess box against Eric Rosen. This is a question from Reddit chess box. You said your hands are all messed up. Yeah, yeah. Are you training for something or regular like so? I also just remembered we never talked about Hikaru. So I can talk about Rosen and Hikaru in the same chess boxing. Oh, shit. Is this your MacGregor like shit talk segment? No, no, no, no. Eric Rosen is actually a close friend of mine. I probably have five of those and he just so happens to be not just a chess streamer, but we talked about buying homes. We've talked about he stayed at my place. He took my wedding photos. I flew him to New York and paid for all his stuff just so he could hang out with my wife and I, you know, take some six-day-am photos in the sun in the park. So he looks familiar. Yeah. So he's a good friend of mine. Now, in terms of chess boxing, chess boxing is this really fast and easy. It's a fascinating sport where you have boxing, but you also have chess and you have rounds. So you start a chess game with a clock. That segment itself lasts for a couple of minutes. They put the board away and pause the clock, whatever the time situation is, and you box for a minute. And that keeps going on. I don't know how it works in terms of the time expiring, meaning in fighting, there's judges that just tell you how the fight was going, right? Here I don't know who wins and how. Do you win by, you can win by knockout, you can win by checkmate or their clock can run out on the chessboard. But is there a judges? Was there a round limit? Does this just go on and on and on and on? You know what I mean? Yeah, I thought it's like 12 rounds, right? Isn't this the thing in Russia? It's the big thing in the UK. UK? Yeah, UK, I don't know why. And there's a lot of YouTuber events just for boxing. So YouTubers just learn to box and then they just box. No chess. Straight up box each other like Jake Paul, for example, you ever going to get Jake Paul in here? Yeah, I'm sure. OK, I feel like we just so many different guests have been mentioned. Jake, but Jake Paul would be a fun guest, but he's obviously the biggest scorer. He's legitimately boxing people. He's not, yeah. But just players is never going to learn to box to that level and all of us are starting basically from zero. And Ludwig talked to me behind the scenes and say, hey, how would you feel about being in a chess boxing match? I said, OK, yeah, maybe when is it going to be said five months from now? I've always wanted to train combat. I've wait lifted. I've done Cardi, I've played back here. You have CFAN, too. Yeah, but you admire fighting. Yeah, I would enjoy it. I just have a really bad lower back. And that makes a lot of different combat difficult. But I said, you know, it's true this. I'm going to contact a few local gyms. Yeah. And one of them, the guy emailing me back and forth had actually watched my YouTube videos. So he was the first to respond. And he said, yeah, like come in to a couple of classes, like see how you feel. So first I did conditioning, which killed me because fighting conditioning is, you know, it kills you. It's completely different type of conditioning. But I felt good. And I really wanted to come back. And since July, I've been training three, four days a week. Nice. I feel pretty good. I love it. Lower back feels good. Lower everything. The whole body got stronger. So what you're saying is you're going to fuck up a car. Is he training enough? I'm not fighting. So I talked to Eric about it. Yeah. And the truth is we're both concerned about head trauma. I have an actually spard. I light sparring shadow boxing, but I go there. I do personal training. I don't do a group class. I'm not fighting. I'm fighting the bag. I'm doing shadow boxing. My form is improving, but I haven't been punched. I get hit in the stomach, you know, I get hit in the side with kicks. Nobody's punched me in the face yet. So I think we both were adequately concerned about that. And there was not some ridiculous amount of money on the table. So we decided it's just not worth pursuing. How does the car come into the picture? Because he's a possible competitor. People ask me all the time, who would you fight? Would you, people are like, uh, Andrea Boates with kick your ass. That's a tough one. Because I can't, what am I going to say? I'm going to fight a woman who I'm larger than. And so I just have to take the L against any time a woman is mentioned. That's why I'm like, oh, it's no winning that one. Right. Exactly. So I've lost to both Boates as is Anna Rudolph and a cramling. They're all chess creators, like hypothetically. Yeah, I get a hypothetical fight. Yeah, yeah. Um, there's been training. Uh, I think, uh, yeah, Andrea has been training. That's because an event got announced. This, this event that I was hypothetically going to be the main event against Eric Rosen. Yeah. It was announced. Yeah. And then you kind of like thought, like maybe let's not do this. No, I, I knew once I declined to fight Eric that I would not be participating. And I even knew, you know, I knew who was going to be the main event, um, because I was kind of offered both of those guys. So I'm on hand. Is this still going on? The chess boxing event will happen in December in Los Angeles. Yeah. Nice. So who is the main event? It's I'm on Hamilton, who's also Chas Bra. So they have a couple of guys as part of the chess, bro channel and Lauren Strent. Lauren Strent is a international master from England. He's, uh, I think he's done some boxing a little bit. He's a commentator, brash guy. Nice. Controversial guy. Yeah. Uh, it's funny because they started, Lauren's put out some videos and I went, damn, I should have done this. Yeah. I think it, but I mean, you're right. First of all, there's so many things to say, one of which is if you're, if you want to take it seriously, you know, it does pull you in. Like, you know, if you train a lot, it's going to affect the rest of your life. And then, and then there's, it changes you. I think taking combat sports seriously changes you in good and there's negative costs to it, I think because it's a whole nother thing, man. It's like, uh, it's like doing marathon running or something. He really pulls you in. And the other thing is the, is the head trauma. Like, yeah, you have to take that kind of stuff seriously, especially if you're doing sparring and all that kind of stuff. Um, still some of the celebrities, I don't know why, but it's pretty exciting. Right? I don't know why it'd be fun to watch a car. Like, there's something. I always said, if he car in Magnus did a boxing event and I was the combing event against, I don't know who that would be, that would be as Magnus said anything about it. Like a bod doing chess box. Uh, well, first of all, he's going to commentate the Ludwig event. Nice. Which he, which he said, he, he kind of said, oh, there's been people in the past that are my level in chess, not my, his level in chess and have wanted to get physical with him. I think he's talking about he caro. I don't think anybody else is that'd be, that'd be a good one, man. That'd be a good one. I think Magnus. What do you think? What is that one? I think Magnus is in better physical shape. He's also a little bit bigger, I think than he caro. A lot more reach. I think he car was a dog though. I think, I think he'll, I don't think he's going to, he's going to get out of that. Like, I don't think he's going to quit in, in the ring. I would think he car would just go nuts in the beginning and burn some stuff out. So if Magnus can survive that, I feel like he car would just go crazy and then just get exhausted, would not be able to pace himself correctly. Maybe chasing that first round knockout. Yeah. Just swing like crazy. Honestly, I just love to see that, which is like the effect of physical exertion on the, on the game. I think it's, I'm sure they're strong enough to. Yes, but I think we definitely underestimate the effect of being punched, maybe bleeding out of your nose or something like that. It's, it's no joke. I can't, I can't say I'm anticipating the first day, I actually do some sparring and get seriously hit because I know it's not going to feel good. Even now I take a hard jab to the, to the stomach or the ribs and I'm just like, man, this is, this is rough. I mean, I, I had to do three minutes on heavy bag. And when I finished, my, I had, I had been like, like, slacking on my form because my arms were tired and I hit with my fingers instead of my knuckles and my hands are like, you can see the, the red skin, like completely pink, meaty skin under, I didn't realize when I was hitting and only today it's, the pain is unbearable. So I can't imagine head. This must be, no, I mean, it gets, I, it's a different thing. I mean, of course your skin gets tough, everything gets tougher. So you get used to it. The head, the head is a weird one because it's not going to send you those kinds of signals. You're not going to get the, the skin type of signals. The brain is a weird thing because it doesn't hurt. Yeah. It just does the damage and the damage can materialize itself, manifest itself only years later. Yeah, it's a weird one. But then we all die. There's that brave heart speech. Um, I got to ask you about bots because it, it means it's a super interesting and you've played a lot of bots at different levels. Uh, you have a video called the advanced chest bots are terrifying. Uh, so what's the difference between playing humans and bots? Like you mentioned, this Nelson bot, yeah, brings this queen out. I think rated 16 or 14 hundred. Okay. 1240. So like there's a style to those. What, uh, what's the difference between the way bots play and the way humans play? A lot of people prefer playing bots because they have anxiety playing other humans. It's a very legitimate thing. Interesting. A lot of beginners, they, they don't like live chess. They get nervous, elo anxiety. You get close to your highest ever rating, you panic. Happens to me too. Yeah. Happens to me, even now. So they play bots. There's somehow more reliable or something. Yeah, they're, I don't know, but that's, it's a big thing. It's a big thing. And the popularity of that video shows that people enjoy watching. You play chess bots. So, uh, I'm going to demystify this. This might be shocking. Those bots are all the same bot for the most part. You could just program a bot to make mistakes at a certain moment. You could program a bot to spend less time on certain moves. And it's gotten sophisticated enough that you can basically program it to play at whatever. More or less level that a human plays that. You say, I'll play at an 1800 level. So it's programmed to throw in mistakes. The problem is, and this is why it's all beginners to not play bots. Because bots are programmed in the following way. Beginner bots are like literal toddlers. They have no understanding whatsoever. They will literally lose all their pieces, but they won't lose all their pieces and make mistakes that we beginners do. Beginners actually know how to start a game. They just struggle the first eight moves, nine moves. Their mistakes are very different than bot. But place completely outlandish types of mistakes that you cannot pick up in terms of a pattern standpoint. Because no actual humans play like that. They're going to the opposite side of the board for no reason. You can take it. Yeah, it's not even a blunder. It's almost like randomness. It's completely random. And this problem extends further because advanced bots will play an opening completely reasonably. And they just hang a rook. Which, okay, maybe happens, but that's not exactly how you get to 1800 and 1800. That's a very strong level of the game. You know your openings very well. You start navigating the middle game based on already things that you remember. And then basically once I choose as a bad plan and the other side chooses a better plan. One thing leads to another nobody just recreationally hangs all their pieces. Which is the way bots are kind of programmed to play, but some of those bots in that video were. I remember playing them and they were they were not side. They were out calculating me every time I thought I had a trick in two, three second moment of thought. It would just play the best move. And sometimes that also happens. It gets into a dead loop where it just starts bulldozing you and it can't stop. So it made its mistakes already. It's programmed to make only a few. And then it just bulldozes you the rest of the way. Interesting. I mean, that's why I played with stock fish a bunch. So I got. I built up for myself a bunch of different chess experiments recently. I had to do with the chess playing bot. But I also built the infinite chess board where was stock fish was playing like an infinite number of chess games. And one of the parameters that was interesting to play with is how long it gets to think about a move. And how that affects the rating of the thing. I did that a little bit. So that's a tricky one. I'm sure people know how to do that well, but it's not trivial to understand what. There must be a good formula for it. But it's also interesting to think about like a controlled number of blunders. But it's probably better. The control number of blunders is not a good way to build a bot. Yeah, it's yeah for training purposes, at least. The time the time for move is probably better. But the craziest thing is I did that a couple of my of my devs were helping me with the build like a. I'm scaling my courses into a better just learning platform essentially. We've done a lot of different experiments with stock fish, which I'm even happy to get into here. And stock fish making moves in point one millisecond plays better than a human, which is disgusting and disturbing. Frankly, because that's crazy. Like you can't react to a car stopping in front of you anywhere near that fast. Yeah. So the reason I was interested in that is because when you have a very large chess board, you have tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of game going on at the same time. You have to think of the minimum amount of thinking per move that you can allow for. And it does it does. It's damn good. At least to my eye, basically, the lowest possible setting you can give it. So yeah, it's incredible. It's incredible. We're both able to do. And now it's as far as I know as primarily machine learning based stock fish, the stock fish move to machine learning completes not doing search. As far as I know. Yeah, this is where you lose me a bit, but the move discovery and evaluation is what's been changing in the way Slotfish works. So it's discovering of moves. And then the way it looks forward and then evaluate positions, that has changed. But Matthew Sadler, who wrote the book game changer about alpha zero. Alpha zero. Yeah, that he explains that significantly better. But that's the way I think it works. What did that make you feel when you first saw alpha zero play? I was excited. I didn't have any any sort of existential thoughts. I enjoyed watching it completely destroy openings that people thought were good. And it... That experiment though has does have some caveat in the sense that I think alpha zero was playing with a full tank of servers. And I think stock fish wasn't, which I think is what one of the things people point out. They weren't playing since then they were able to demonstrate much less. Yeah. But also alpha zero stopped developing. They stopped developing it. Yes. Which sucks. But again, from their perspective, from deep minus perspective, it's like, all right, well, we took on this really tricky game. There's something else incredible. They won. They won. I mean, well, not just one. I mean, they did it without any humans or provisions. So like without any training on human expert games. So only through self play, which... I mean, that's what learning is about. It's like, it's what you think of as a child, a human child, a toddler learning from, you know, somewhat nothing. And becoming a capable human. That's, that's what we think of when we think about intelligence. So the fact is able to play itself and become the best player in the world that at the game of go. And all kinds of games is just incredible. And obviously that inspired the modern stockfish. Yeah. Now to do the same, all the same kind of self play methods. Somebody I'm ready to ask a pretty interesting question. I don't know if you have an interesting answer to it. What makes it just move, quote unquote, human? As you are someone, oh, this is to me, but it's mentioning you in third person. As you are someone working in AI, this idea of humanness would seem incredibly interesting. Yes, sir, it is, especially since most cheat detection relies on humanness as a way to detect cheaters. I think since children being born right now will have the advantage of engine training their whole life, they will start to see the game the way an engine does. Will the person be considered a cheater if they play like an engine? There also seem to be a discrepancy, especially with levy about who can play what appears to be a non human move. He often says things like, well, if you were a normal player, normally, quotes, if you were a normal player, I would think you were cheating. But since it's madness, I don't doubt Magnus is great, but if humanist is our benchmark, what is the elo rating where your moves can start to look like an engine without critique? There's a bunch of questions in there. They combine two of my quotes into one. So one thing that I like to say is sometimes in a chess game, moves look or an opening looks so ridiculous that if a viewer played it, I would make fun of them or slap them. That's always the job. If I was your chess coach, I smack you, but when Magnus plays it, which is whole wow, you know, it's a very different. So they mix up this quote with another quote, which is, you know, if I, if I'll be explaining something and I'll say, oh, and hear the engine says you should play like this. If one of your opponents plays like this, report them for cheating. So they they fuse two quotes that said, oh, human can't play like that, but because it's an engine move, but because Magnus is playing. So they they mixed kind of two things. So there's interesting levels of humor and insight there on both of those. Yeah. The difference between human move and engine and like what an engine move is, as I think two things. Number one, a computer move is outlandish in its in its concept and its and its idea. So the best example that I can give of that is if you gave a hundred grandmasters a position and told them, you know, what do you think the best move here is for black not in this position, right here. We have nothing, but an overwhelming amount of them would look at the position, evaluate everything they know about the game of chess, which is relatively similar, but obviously slightly imbalanced based on their skill level. And they would come up with a sample size of two or three moves and incomes the computer with a fucking haymaker. And suddenly everybody goes. Oh, everything we know about chess has gone out the window. So they all start looking at that move and they know it's the best moves. Now they start adding the evidence behind the verdict as opposed to getting to the verdict while first looking at the evidence. So the concept of it and the idea of it is so outlandish based on a certain type of position that you can't fully grasp it. You have to continue to beg the engine to tell you what the variation is. A move is only good if its extension is good. That's the way chess works. So it's like a move is good. It's because the computer has seen that the various branches of things going forward are also good. So you bring all that back and no human could have even conceptualized that initial thing. But the second thing about computer moves is they look counterintuitive. So that's a if you might be in a position where it looks like the demands of the position. Are ABC and then the computer is like, nope, it's not because I've seen the future way more than you possibly could have. And I don't have emotions. So like dumb moves and brilliant moves can look similar. Yes. And oftentimes do. And this is actually back to the Hans thing. A lot of people narrowed dissecting these games they're playing. And there are they're basically say like even Fabiano Corona one of the best players in the world was on some on his podcast yesterday basically saying, OK, this is beyond my level thing out of my league. Yeah. What's that? What's out of your league? You played for the world championship. Kind of we get what we can read between the lines. Right. It's possible that Hans is that level of genius. Is there like different. Different kinds of genius like where one you could be out of each other's league kind of thing. Maybe in the case of Magnus, it's understanding of end games. It's just somehow he understands the that last phase of the game and the complexities and the problems he can pose better than anybody else. So you can see Magnus do. Poor looking moves in the end game or like moves that don't fit what seem your gut says is it would be the optimal. Yes, but also. So it's not that you even think the right you just might not even consider them. Yeah. Because of overreliance on your own information or even the computer that was what was going on in game six. Just kept doing things and kept playing and kept finding play and posing those questions that humans and computers could not understand. So he beat the engine basically. He couldn't he wouldn't have beaten the engine because it would have defended. Jan lost that game in the 90s move psychologically he thought the game was over so that contributed. The computer would have defended. So by the time this podcast comes out, which I don't know, would be in a week or something like that. I feel like more will happen. Let's see your predicting engine. How does this Hans drama end? Oh, saga. Like let's look in in three months. By the time we get to the next world championship, let's say what what this what are the options? What are the possible? Let's imagine let's not say like what the probabilities are. What are the options? Chess calm is forced to or agrees to or whatever to come up with a huge amount of evidence of cheating in the past. Or Hans comes out. What are the what can Hans do with this? So I'm uncomfortable with the general mixture. You can maybe update me on this. But there was a little bit of an attack on him. Not a lot of an attack that he's a cheater, right? Without evidence, without clear conclusive evidence, physical evidence, physical evidence. So all of those right. That's the tricky thing. Yeah. So like that stuff we're talking about is beyond my level. That starts being kind of intuitive circumstantial evidence. There's the statistical evidence behind the over the board games that he's played in 2020, 2021, where the games match what's called engine correlation more than Magnus and many other top-ground masters combined. But that can be argued is because he was very strong in playing weaker opposition. So there's always kind of this argument against the statistics, right? There's the fact that the guy who Magnus named dropped, Max seemed Lougey. Lougey is a chess grandmaster and he's even been I think president of the US chess federation. I've played him in some Blitz games. It turns out I wasn't even fully aware of the extent of this. He has been banned from chess.com, per cheating, per cheating. Have they actually have has him in Hans actually worked? Yes. So that was why he named dropped that, right? That's also not good. You see where this is getting? You still don't have the physical proof, but you have smoke. So I don't know how this ends. I don't know if this if he denies it to the death. And he ends up filing some sort of legal action, some sort of ethics complaint or he admits everything. I don't know. But no matter what I hope despite chess or not that he's mentally strong enough for whatever is to come. That's what I keep saying because I can't. I can't. I can't imagine, right? Like I just I really can't imagine. And maybe we just have too much compassion, but I don't think so. I really just feel like at the end of the day, chess is just a game. But it is a game played by millions of people throughout history and nations have basically fought wars over the chess board. So like there's a lot. It's like Olympics Olympics is just a little dude running and so on. The hockey is just the thing with the puck and but you know, it's it's also much more than that. It's also it's also nations. Sort of figuring out their conflict in a way that doesn't involve violence. Yeah, it's a serious thing and it's the thing that inspires millions of people. And it's a testing ground for intelligent systems that eventually take over human civilization. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, the bots are really interesting. I don't know if there's other lessons like you you play to clone of yourself. Now you watch stockfish versus stockfish. Your video. People should check it out. You have a lot of awesome videos. Your video title stockfish versus stockfish. And that was the experiment. I made them play each other. So I made them. What did you learn from the experiment? I enjoy it. First of all, they will always make a draw. So engines don't get to play each other from a beginning position because they will always draw, especially if they're the same engine. So stockfish 15 stockfish 15. I don't think one side will ever beat the other basically. But if you program them to play a certain opening position, according to chess theory, you get to see interesting ways into how they evaluate one of the things, one of the ways that it played against the London opening was absurd. Like it just, it was completely ridiculous. Black sacrifice two pawns as early as move six, which is a borderline completely lost position. And then both sides for saw that the only way white was going to be able to use that material advantage was to give it back and stabilize their own position. Like black just got a crazy attack. Jesus Christ. That's crazy. But they drew them and they ended up drawing. So I'm also going to make them play against each other in either bad openings or like some of the most popular gambits. Looking at something like that. And the way I'm going to do this is basically say, which chess gambits are the best and the way I'm going to do that is theoretically, the engine should be able to beat the gambit because a gambit is very rarely blessed by the computer. So if the computer cannot beat that gambit, that means it's good. That means it's not losing. If it's a completely lost gambit, it will beat it. But if it draws, despite getting that early disadvantage, then that means the gambit is very reliable and you can play it. So that's a good way to evaluate opening games. Yeah. What's the best? What's your favorite opening? Or what what openings do you like? There was an opening that got me back into chess when I was 15. I quit for like three years and I went to my friends house and he had a book by Lars Schender, a Danish Grandmaster called the Karl Kahn defense, which is C6. Do you want white? Do you want black? Do you want to show them the opening? This is the opening. The Karl Kahn defense. So you play E4, I play C6. I have to play black. That's it. Yeah. And we developed from here. I put my deep thoughts. But what counts as opening? Okay. But the development, does the development matter? Yeah. So from here, the development goes into the variations of the Karl Kahn. So this is the Karl Kahn. Like you can be in a city, but then you can be in neighborhoods. So that's a very non dramatic. Okay. Yeah. Two ponds in the center. So that's called the briar variation. So which, what's a good thing for me? Two, two squares. Yeah. If you can put two ponds in the center, yeah, you should. And then that's a good thing. Yes. And then I will go here. And now you have to decide what you're going to do with your center point. You can push, take or defend it. And push, take or defend. Right. Yeah. Uh, what would you suggest? Take us to the worst take is just stable. So we just trade, but pushing is considered the best advancing and taking my space away from me. So I think alpha zero or stockfish would probably always push, push. And now there's something called like the main line or the sideline. Mainline is what's the most popular. We played at all levels, which is moving the bishop here. I've played this a lot. But for beginners, this is an intermediate players. Uh, this is why I love this opening so much. On move three, black already has a plus score, which is. Crazy. It's not supposed to happen. And there's this very tricky second, most popular move, which is undermining your center, trying to get you to take my free pond, but destabilize and leave both of them kind of hanging. And, uh, is that why the, uh, the plus core is because you're susceptible to the destabilize destabilization? Yes. Because people at 99% of the rating ladder do not understand how to deal with what's coming basically. They don't know how to deal with a structural attack. So would, uh, was stockfish try to defend the pond here and keep it? No, it would take the pond and tell you to go fuck yourself. Oh, because I am 3,400. Right. That would take the pond and be like, I win it back. And even if you did, you would suffer. It would make you win it back in the most annoying way. It would make you tie your shoes together and block it. So I, uh, like as stockfish, I would taste. That's the best move. That's the best move. But not at 99% of the rating ladder, which is funny. Interesting. Um, both you like to play this. I play this against GM's. I play both. I move my bishop. I push it. And what are the different ways it evolves? Like then the rest doesn't matter. So this is just like a pond structure thing. Uh, yeah. And I mean, it, again, deep are most openings. So it's anywhere from like two moves to like 10 moves kind of thing. Yeah. You can be out of theory very, very quickly to move to move three. Like basically on your own, you have a general idea, but you don't remember games. I mean, I, I know karaoke on games from start to finish because I've played it since 2011. So you know all the different branches that goes that down. Yeah. I, I think I know every opening in chess, basically. I think most, most title players know every opening, but we don't know. We can't play it competitively because we would be, but what is some of the weirder openings that like slightly suboptimal, but might be explored. Like magnets might play them just to fuck with the opponent. He played something recently actually against this German prodigy Vincent Kimer, which was a specific move order in a very popular opening. So it was basically a position that had been reached thousands of times. But the move order Magnus chose with white was played maybe point 0 5% of the time, which is crazy. Thousands of games and it's supposed to be not good, meaning it allows black to equalize because that's what black is going for. Not winning the game, but equalizing because you go second. Magnus says, I don't care about equalizing. I just want a position. I don't want my opponent to know the answers to the test. And that's so interesting to do to cause also a foxys psychologically. It throws you off and just always keep you on your toes. He's in a weird position, but he also has the advantage of being able to intimidate. I wonder how many people, um, how much is that a role of it? Like being scared of the other person? It's huge rule. I think I think some of the top guys would deny it, but you know when you're in the seventh hour and you're playing Magnus. It's a very different feeling than some of the other. When Magnus is messing around in the opening, it's very different. And another person messing around in the opening, you just kind of like expects to for something to be there. We'll see if it translates to poker for him, but I think he got he gets a little bit maybe less respect in the poker world in the chess world. He sort of gets a lot of respect. I just talked to Daniel and the ground and he gets gets the only person that doesn't respect Magnus Carlson. Honestly, either in chess or poker is Magnus Carlson. I wasn't going to say Hansen even. That's true. But like Magnus is hilarious. I mean, when he talks about his rating is like, it was pretty good. When he talks about how good he's this poker, I suck. But you know, I think that self-critical view that he, I think he honestly believes to a degree is probably part of the engine that fuels him to get better and better and better and better. Yeah. Well, what I'm saying is if you, if you're face to face with Magnus at a chess board, it's not the same as being a nine handed poker table with him. You kind of keep an eye on him, maybe in a, he's a mysterious guy, but just different because you're like, this is the man. Yeah, there's very few people. Yeah. So in, in poker, they talk about Phil Ivy that way. Yeah. Yeah. It's like this super intimidating. I think that's, that's. It's probably harder to intimidate in poker. I actually, I don't know. I don't know. There's something intimidating about like excellence and a deterministic game. That's just terrifying. Like your, I mean, it's like, playing stockfish like you're a fucked. This thing will suffocate you. And especially when you do, it makes moves that you don't understand this. I, to me, the most beautiful thing honestly is the sacrifices that the, the engines do just the, it's such a fuck you. Yeah. Like I could sacrifice pieces and I'll get them back and I'll get them back more. And I can look at them. I don't even, I don't even have to get them back. Your position is so bad. And I give you full material and there's nothing you can do about it. Yeah. That's terrifying. Yeah. That's terrifying. This like, and that transfers to AI systems in general like, like a system that plays weak. Just to, to fool you. For people who are trying to get better at chess beginners or at any stage of their development, what advice would you give about getting better? Except watch your, of course, watch my videos. Check out Chesley.com. Let's, we're going to scale the courses too. But no, on a serious note, you have to be prepared to lose way more than win. My mom gave me advice when I was maybe 13 or 14. And I just discovered that I, I liked girls. She said, you're going to get a lot more nose and life than yeses. That even happened with, with my wife actually, our whole journey is, is quite, quite fascinating. Is paved with rejection. Could paved with yes, various ghostings over the course of years, but we got married and we love each other very much. So it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a wonderful tale. But it's the, it's the same in chess. You're going to lose a lot and you have to be for adults and noticed. Kids and adults learn chess very differently. Kids yell out in class and they're very excited. They don't realize how many times they get something wrong. Adults never want to talk during lessons because they're afraid of being wrong. Adults will preface correct answers with this is probably wrong. But like, shut up, you're paying for a, for a private lesson. This is the place to be wrong. You know, so adults especially think that being dominant in a career where they've dedicated a lot of their brain power, a lot of their work ethic and a lot of their study time. It's going to translate to chess. They do, they do their own kids. They helicopter their own kids because they try to apply a lot of the same stuff. Chess, the studying chess is different than studying anything else, anything else. Which seemed could be argued for martial arts, I guess, but. Yeah, 100%. He had to have a beginner's mind and what that actually means is sucking in every aspect of the game and, and studying all the interesting ways in which he's suck. And you will realize you get better without actually trying to get better. I show up to the boxing gym one day, I move my hips better. And I do shadow boxing. Sensei goes, you moving your feet better today, you got better. I'm like, I didn't practice footwork. It just your brain just starts putting it all together randomly. You might study a shit load and still lose 100 points. If you're going to study chess, Owen, for fuck's sake, this is the only activity where people go in going. How much do I have to work to be a grandmaster? No, where else in my life have I ever seen someone try to pick up a hobby and want to be the top ranking level? Only in chess. You're right. But like, for example, when I like grappling sports, I'll see people come to a gym and basically ask like, how long before I can get into the UFC, right? But you have to champion is different. I mean, no, grandmasters equivalent to getting into the UFC. Yes. Yeah. So, but people quickly realize when like the 110 pound girl taps them out over and over and they're 230 pound like. Rip dude, they realize like, okay, this is an art. This is a journey. Yeah. And I think if you resist the lessons that failure teaches you, that's when you don't grow. So like, just relax. And one of the things you have to learn probably place the chest to is to know how to relax your body, your mind. And just like, there's something about just like you said, like, if you don't resist, if you relax, then your body, your mind will learn the way of this game. And probably add to that is just put a lot of hours in of having fun. But then I, on that perpetual chess pocket, I listen to somebody that say like, it doesn't like puzzles, not that what matters is the number of hours you spend kind of suffering, meaning like thinking deeply, like, like, like, like, straining, like, thinking with your mind, like, really working hard. So, and then you know, you have the Magnus who says, no, what matters is the number of hours you spend having fun. Yeah, it's a mix. It's a mix. He's right. I don't quite agree with suffering, but I think people do a lot of fake learning. They play speed games. They just go through tactics. So, okay, I have to do 20 tactics. Okay, boop wrong. Next one. I used to tell my students, you need to do 10 puzzles and you need to get 100% correct. I don't care how long it takes. So I suppose that kind of is like the suffering theory. But if you do 30 puzzles and you get eight correct, what even is that? That's laughable and the correct amount of, you know, it was 29%. I don't know, but 26%. It's, you can't do that. You have to get things right and that's the only way you're actually. And that requires like thinking deeply and like really struggling. Like, especially if you're doing the puzzles at the level that that's your level. I've done the puzzle for an hour before because I was so stubborn. Yeah. I didn't want to just put in a wrong answer. Yeah. The guy was listening to you said, like, that's good. You should do that. Maybe for me and the same with blindfold chess, I have to say, like my blindfold skills, I never practice. I just, I can visualize the board quite well. I've played, and most I've played four games blindfolded at the same time. That sucks. That just feels horrible in the brain afterward. But like I can play four simultaneous games blindfolded. Yeah. What's that take to do that? I don't know. And I get asked that all the time, how do I practice? Why the fuck? Why would you do that, dude? So it's no need. It's a good party trick. It is, yes. It is. The video of Magnus doing it in Columbus Circle on YouTube has like, I don't know how many views I did it live. Well, now I'm sorry. I can't imagine how chaotic that was. But he, yeah, it's a great party trick. Yeah. Oh, there is a reddit thing. I forgot to ask Magnus that they asked me to ask him because they moved the wrong piece. Yes. And then somehow he remembered, I don't know how that happened. I have to tell you. I was, I kind of presume that he figured out from the way the other person was moving that they moved the wrong piece. Yeah. Yeah, I forgot to ask him that. Yeah. Why I forget? Let me remember, I'm just sucks. You said, you know, ups and downs in your childhood, a little rough sometimes. Also, you get attacked by the beautiful, wonderful people on the internet. Sure. So sometimes it's difficult. What's, uh, what's been the lowest point that you've ever gone to in your mind? In my career and my life. In your life and your career and everything, your mind. So have you ever been depressed? For sure. Yes. How, how did you, like if you can remember moments, how did you overcome that? Well, I, I will share two anecdotes. One, when I was, I was, uh, May 2012. So I was 16 and a half. And I was living in a household situation where I thought nobody knew what was going on basically without sharing, obviously, extremely personal details, like what was going on except me. And I confided in my grandmother. I was, uh, imagine living in a house where you basically feel like a prisoner. You don't want to interact with anybody in the house. You don't know how you're supposed to bring these things up. Of course, this sounds extremely vague. And I just don't, I don't feel like exposing all of my entire family drama to the audience. But I lived this way for probably something like eight months. I don't, I don't know, something ridiculous. It was the junior year of high school. So I was supposed to take my SATs. That was the year I was supposed to finish up my portfolio for college because you only get really a few months of senior years to sort of playing. It was a, it was a nightmare. Complete nightmare. And I, I don't know how I got through it. Time went by. I listened to sad music and tried to spend as little time as almost possible. I would pretend to fall asleep at my friend's houses so that my mom was like, you coming for dinner and I would just pretend to be asleep. So it was just a grind. Yeah, yeah, it was, it was a grind. I don't remember a whole lot from, from that period just sort of finding what made me happy and trying to focus on it. And I was a teenager in the house. I wasn't going to run away. I still had a roof over my head. So I'm not, not saying I had it better or worse than others. I just had it different. And actually recently, this is much more on my memory. I, more or less tore up a very happy life my wife and I had. And I've talked about this in bursts on stream. But essentially what happened was we had just been living in, it's actually funny that the way we got into this apartment was also very bad. But we were living in just a very like nice little apartment, like high-rise apartment safe. And the reason we moved into a high-rise was because we had lived in a house for two weeks that got broken into. Not because of who I am, but because we suspect we had people moving in mattresses and they went, oh shit, these two people live here. That's it. And basically there was three apartments. My upstairs neighbor let in somebody that they didn't expect. And the guy cracked our door open with a crowbar. Thank God that was the first day in two years my wife went to work. Did they know? Did they not know? I don't know. Everything happens for a reason. So we got hurt. Nobody got hurt. Yeah, they stole, they stole and some couple of important things, but nobody was hurt. And cops did nothing. So you moved into a high-rise. We moved into a high-rise in New York. Yeah, New York. For safety and we're away from things and we have our own nice little nook. And somewhere some months into it I started hearing noises from above our neighbors. And it started in the morning 7 a.m. It started in the afternoon and I picked up on it and I expected it every day for weeks. Then it was driving me crazy and I was like, okay, we're going to go have a civil conversation with whosever up there. Sounds like kids. But we go knock. Lady Gaslid the shit out of us. I've never been Gaslid that hard in my life. She went noise. What noise? It's probably our other neighbor who's a boxer. Lady, you have kids. We can hear you through the vents. You're talking to your kids to went to the front desk of the building. They did nothing. Went to the leasing office. They did nothing. And basically over time, I just let this drive me nuts. There was back to the stubbornness thing. I decided we were leaving. We were going to live somewhere. There was no noise. Because we can't beat these people. There's nothing we can do. Right? And my wife, I dragged her around to a bunch of different viewings because I was dead set. I was decided I was completely miserable. And we found a house to rent. Like a nice house. Family head just moved away. House. Stand alone house. Not going to have neighbors. But wife decided that not wife decided. We decided that the, it's too big. It's too big for us. So we're going to get a dog. We always wanted an animal. We're going to get a dog. So we get an absolute lunatic puppy. Who just doesn't let us sleep at all. This is on top of everything else to the mental health crisis that's going on. And the day we are moving to this house, I realize I fuck up. Like I realized that this whole thing was in my head and I don't want to leave. I don't want to leave. This could have all been avoided. And the guilt and res, I didn't want to exist. Like it's not that I, that wasn't suicide. But you know, the feeling of just, you want to just observe yourself from a distance. And I couldn't sleep. I thought my wife was going to leave me like, they just, my, and that's what anxiety does. It also takes everything you feel to an absolute dread. And that I experienced for a good chunk of two weeks. And then we kind of settled down and decided, like, we're going to live. Did you tell her about it? Like, we were able to talk through it. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Does she know the levels of madness that could be inside your mind? I don't know if she'll ever know, but I tried to tell her that. And give glimpses. Yes. I'm not sure you'll ever know. I kind of got point. Yeah, I tried to, that's why I tried to keep busy. But that was, that was the darkest that got. And yet through all of that, I went on stream every day. I made YouTube videos every day. Like I understood that I had a job to do. And, and I did it. And I talked about it here and there. But that was, that was the worst that ever got. Because I'm learning that the emotions I experience are guilt remorse. And your brain just goes in circles, basically. About things that you've done or haven't done. It's funny because noise can do that also. So the noise was real, but it was building in your head. Yeah. So I try to, I actually, it's kind of funny because I like to focus deeply. And I'll have like sources of noise. I've tried to teach myself over time. I'll go to like coffee shops and stuff. So like, I like, I almost try to put myself next to annoying situations so I get like trained. Real, maybe I should do that. But it's a certain point. At the same time, I've gotten the hang out with the certain people, especially in L.A. They're like in the middle of nowhere. Like a Malibu or something. And it's like that quiet. Can you hear your, your, your ringing? It's so quiet. Basically. And it's like, holy shit, it's a good play. It's a good way. If you want to write something or create something, this is like super quiet. So my mom does my mom's a science journalist, science author. She just published her first, her first book actually on a poop of all things. Yeah. Fecal with the waste management. It's actually very fascinating concept and looked through history. And she would do that. She goes to complete solitude. And she writes, yeah. It's beautiful. No sirens. I mean, New York is the opposite. That's so, you know, it's, you've, you've brought it. You brought it on yourself. I've lived there for 20 years. Has it been tough like going on stream to put on the face of happiness through that? Yeah. Yes. But I find my ways to have moments where I can talk about it. If it's on a stream, I don't get 10,000 live viewers. So it's very different. It's if I stream late night, I get a 1500, 2000 viewers. I used to care a lot more about viewers on, on stream. But I've basically invested fully in YouTube. So that's kind of the way I, and I think, I don't know. Maybe you can correct me. But I think people appreciate the human being behind the chest streamer. I think so. I think so. I think a lot of people not in the chest world, but just a lot of people. They put on a persona and just in general, social media is the highlights of your life. Or the lowlights, just as long as they're dramatic. But I've tried, I tried to be very open and honest. When I'm tired, I'm tired. It's what makes my recaps of my tournaments, I think, so real. Yeah, man, you're an incredible person. I've been a fan for a long time. It's kind of funny that we connected and we got in chest to talk. Please, please keep creating, keep teaching people. For now, I'm not going anywhere. Well, it could end at any moment, as we talked about. Thank you so much for talking to Damien. Thank you for everything you do. It was an honor. It was great. Thanks for having me on. Thanks for listening to this conversation. We'll live your osman. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, let me leave you some words from Irving Cherniv. Every chess master was once a beginner. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.