 The following is a conversation with Bosch Graszenkarra. He's a democratic socialist, a political writer, founding editor of Jacobin, President of the Nation, former vice chair of the Democratic Socialist of America, and the author of the Socialist Manifesto, the case for radical politics, and an era of extreme inequality. As a side note, let me say that this conversation with Bosch Graszenkarra, who's a brilliant socialist writer and philosopher, represents what I hope to do with this podcast. I hope to talk to the left and the right, to the far left and the far right, always with the goal of presenting and understanding both the strongest interpretation of their ideas and valuable thought-provoking arguments against those ideas. Also, I hope to understand the human being behind the ideas. I trust in your intelligence as the listener to use the ideas you hear, to help you learn, to think, to empathize, and to make up your mind. I will often fall short in pushing back too hard, or not pushing back enough, of not bringing up topics I should have, of talking too much, of interrupting too much, or maybe sometimes in the rare cases not enough, of being too silly on a serious topic, or being too serious on a silly topic. I'm trying to do my best, and I will keep working my ass off to improve. In this way, I hope to talk to prominent figures in the political space, even controversial ones, on both the left and the right. For example, I hope to talk to Donald Trump, and Alexandria Cazio Cortez, to Ron DeSantis, and Barack Obama, and of course many others across the political spectrum. I sometimes hear accusations about me being controlled in some way by a government or an intelligence agency, like CIA, FSB, Mossad, or perhaps that I'm controlled in some way by the very human desire for money, fame, power, access. All I have is my silly little words, but let me give them to you. I'm not, and will never be controlled by anyone. There's nothing in this world that can break me, and force me to sacrifice my integrity. People call me naive. I'm not naive. I'm optimistic. An optimism isn't a passive state of being. It's a constant battle against the world that wants to pull you into a downward spiral of cynicism. To me, optimism is freedom. Freedom to think, to act, to build, to help, at times, in the face of impossible odds. As I often do, please allow me to read a few lines from the poem If, by Rajar Kipling. If you can keep your head when all about you are losing theirs and blame it on you, if you can trust yourself when all men doubt you, but make allowance for their doubting too. If you can wait and not be tired by waiting, or being lied about don't deal in lies, or being hated, don't give way to hating, and yet don't look too good, nor talk too wise. Even this very poem is mocking my overrermanic ridiculousness as I read it. The meta-irony is not lost on me, my friends. I'm a silly little kid trying to do a bit of good in this world. Thank you for having my back through all of it. All of my mistakes. Thank you for the love. And now, a quick few second mentionary sponsor. Check them out in the description. It's the best way to support this podcast. We got House of Macadamias for Snacks, Linnode for Linux systems, Onit for supplements, Inside Tracker for biomodinaring, and ExpressVPN for security and privacy. Choose wise and my friends. And now, onto the full Adreds. Never any ads in the middle. I hate those. I tried to make this interesting, but if you skipped them, please still check out our sponsors. I enjoy their stuff. Maybe you will too. This show is brought to you by a relatively new and uh, absolutely. It's not even relative. It's absolutely, objectively delicious sponsor. House of Macadamias. It's a company that ships delicious, high quality, and healthy macadamia nuts directly to your door. And all kinds of snacks based on macadamia nuts. The first shipment they sent me was just a source of a lot of happiness for me. I was going through some tough times in my life. But recently, there's been a lot of ups and downs. It's been uh, it's been a while ride. It's been a while ride. And uh, there's something about sitting in that couch I have, which I got so I can feel like an adult. And contemplating the ups and downs of life. And just letting my mind become still. Emptied of thought. And then just slowly with the uh, with the stupid smile on my face, consume macadamia snacks. There's a lot of sectional in your windows. I can do it here, by the way. If you doubt my ability to do sectional in your windows, um, how dare you. But I'm going to keep a respectful and say that it's a 30% less carbs than uh, that almonds. Oh man, I don't even know. I think I've been always criticized in my life. One of the harshest criticisms throughout my life is I don't know how to pronounce almonds. Is it almonds? And the almonds, almonds, almonds, almonds. It's almonds, right? Yeah. It's almonds. Anyway, what matters is this snacks are delicious. And actually as a sponsor, they're awesome. They're with us for the long haul and they've just been so kind and respectful big fans and I'm just a big fan of there. So anything you could do to support them, uh, I would love it. It just means a lot to me when there's great companies, uh, doing great stuff and just being great people. I mean, forget all the like the products and all that. Just I love it. So support them. They're really good people. Anyway, speaking of really good people and a really good company, that you should definitely support is Linode. And this episode is brought to you by it. It's a Littings virtual machines. I use it a lot. It's an awesome computer infrastructure that lets you develop, deploy and scale with applications. You build faster and easier. There's nothing better than Littings. And here you don't have to have Linux and your machine. You can have it in the cloud and you can have it not just the little baby machine. You can scale. You can launch a giant machine. You can't launch. Many machines. By the way, they do have really good customer service 24, 7, 365. But that's not what matters. What matters is Linux is awesome. Did I say that? Linus Torvald is definitely somebody who needs to talk to somebody post that on Reddit. Why have you not talked to Linus Torvald yet? And that's a good question. I'm not sure I know exactly how to reach him. Which sounds kind of funny. And I think he's not. He's a difficult person to get to to do a long form interview. I think he's source of happiness isn't doing the work in serving the Linux community. He's doing the low level kernel development and managing the community. Know that. I don't know how much he enjoys conversation. Or educating or inspiring others about the work going on in Linux. I think it's really important. Because I think the world, I mean, so many important things in the world run on Linux. And I don't know why we don't always celebrate that. I mean, it's one of the things I really love doing with this podcast is just celebrating amazing people. Using technology or using whatever skill they have to try to build a better world. And I think that's what Linus is doing. That's what people working on Linux all through the stacks. Well, there's different distributions, the different packages and all that kind of stuff. There's the open source movement in general. It's just beautiful to see all the stuff you see on GitHub. It warms my heart to see all these really into engineers just building stuff. Small stuff and big stuff. And many of it. Helps make the world a better place. It really, I believe, and honestly does. Anyway, visit linode.com slashlex for free credit. This episode is brought to you by Onnet. A nutrition supplement and fitness company. They make alpha brain, a new tropic that helps support memory, mental speed, and focus. I sometimes take alpha brain if I know I have a very difficult design or programming task. At hand, it's going to take several hours of just focus work. And I'm not quite feeling it. So if I know there's a deep work session that's going to involve some mental blocks, mental struggle, where it's going to be dead ends, and so on, I'll take it off of brain to help me out. I recently been trying to adjust ways in which I slice my day. I really do find that I'm exceptionally productive and mentally sharp and focused in the morning for several hours. So, two, three, four, five, six, seven hours in the morning. As long as it's not interrupted, as long as I don't talk or see other human beings, or see is okay. See and smile, you know, like the warmth of humanity is great. But there's something about talking that really drains me, especially in the morning. And then in the evening, the same. I just am exceptionally productive and can really focus for long periods of time. With that afternoon time, that I think is best for more like exercise and naps and more relaxing or like tasks that don't require much, much brain power. Anyway, it's kind of funny how each of us probably have our own little optimization problem that we're trying to solve about how what makes us feel good, what makes us, what enables us to interact with other human beings in our lives that we love and make them feel good and just be a productive member of society. Reach for the stars, be the best version of yourself, but also just enjoy it. I mean, it's a weird optimization problem that involves nutrition, that involves exercise. And I think in part, at least at some point in your life, it involves a kind of strict analysis of your schedule of how you spend the minutes in your day. And then I think part of that process is to then let it go. Similar with diet, you can have a strict diet once you understand the nature of calories and nutrition and vitamins so on that you can let go of that and have an instinctual understanding of food and you can start to really enjoy food. Anyway, you can get a special discount on alpha brain at lexfreedman.com slash on it. This show is also brought to you by Inside Tracker, a service I use to track biological data that comes from my body and gives me suggestions about what I should do in my life. Not all suggestions are basic lifestyle decisions and diet decisions, but I can't wait until we have something like a brain computing interface that enables you to make like career decisions, dating decisions, all kinds of decisions. Of course, not forcing them, just giving you a clipy that pops up and says, have you considered these red flags about this person that you're talking to? Or, hey, that interesting person deserves another look. I don't know. I'm joking, of course, because I think that that level of recommendation is difficult to achieve, but the point is there's so much data coming from you, human body, that I think medicine and just in general recommendation should be based at least in part on that data versus looking at generic population data about what's good for you in terms of diet and exercise and sleep and all that kind of stuff. I think this is the future and Inside Tracker is taking steps towards that future. It gets special savings for a limited time and you go to Inside Tracker.com slash lex. Finally, this show is also brought to you by Express VPN. I've used for many, many, many years the big sexy red button that you click and it just works and it protects your privacy on this big beautiful complex internet of ours that's full of chaos and dangers and so on. A good VPN should be your first layer of protection and it doesn't much of other things, of course, but I think the most important thing is it just works. It works fast, it works on any device, any operating system works on Linux, anything, Android, it's very intuitive to use. It does one thing and it does it extremely well and that's what I think great pieces of software, great services should do. Do one thing and do it extremely well. Now to me Express VPN for many years has been the embodiment of that idea. Go to expressvpn.com slash lex.bod for an extra three months free. This is the lex treatment podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description and now dear friends, here's Basque Sincara. Let's start with a big broad question. What is socialism? How do you like to define it? How do you like to think about it? Well, there's so many socialists out there and we can't seem to agree about anything. So my definition I'm sure is really just my definition, but I think at the minimum socialism is about making sure that the core necessities of life, food, housing, education, and so on are guaranteed to everyone just by virtue of being born so that those people can reach their potential. And I think that's a minimum requirement of socialism. Beyond that, I think socialism, especially democratic socialism, the type of socialism that I believe in, is about taking democracy from just the political democratic realm and extending it into economic and social spheres as well. So if we think the democracy is a good thing, why do we allow our workplaces to be run in autocratic ways? So economic, political, social, in all those realms, the ideas, the philosophical ideas apply. Like what are, if you can put words to it, what are some philosophical ideas about human beings that are at the core of this? I think at the core, it's the idea that we have intrinsic value. We are individuals that have unequal talents, of course, we're individuals that want different things, but this unique individualness can only truly come to light in a society in which there are certain collective or social guarantees. So we could think just like Stephen J. Gould, the scientist and socialist used to say about how many thousands of potential Einstein's or Leonardo da Vinci's that died in sweatshops and on plantations and never got the chance to cultivate what was unique and human about themselves and also never got a chance to have families and impart what was special and important to them to future generations and to posterity. My own grandmother was born in Trinidad in DeBago. She was a literate till her dying days. She in the East Orange, New Jersey. She never had the chance to write down her memories of her life in Trinidad as a young woman and what it meant. She of course had lots of children. She was able to impart some stories to her children and grandchildren, but I often think about what someone with her with an intelligence could have done with with a little bit more support. But if all human beings have intrinsic value, you don't have to be an Einstein for the application of some of the ideas that you're talking about. Is there a tension or a trade-off between our human civilization or society helping the unlucky versus rewarding the skillful and the hardworking? I think you do both. There's always a balance between the two. I think you'd reward people who make innovations and we would prove lives for everyone for their innovations by giving them even more consumption. Even that level of inequality while still making sure that there's not people in poverty and suffering. While making sure that we're going to give these people who want to work that extra 10 hours or 20 hours or want to apply their hard work, some extra benefits, but that these benefits would be not the extreme disparities that you have today. So at the core of socialism and maybe democratic socialism is maybe a reallocation of wealth, reallocation of resources? I think it's wealth and resources, yes, but it's also power. And I guess one way to think about this is some thinkers on the right like Hayek, they would say in their most generous moments talking about socialism, socialism, they would say socialist want to trade some of your freedom for equality. And that's them trying to just accurately describe what socialism is trying to do. The way that I would put it is a little bit different. Socialists are proposing a trade-off, but it's really a trade-off between freedom and freedom. And by that I mean, let's say you set up a successful business and you set up a business right here in Austin, Texas, some sort of firm, it's producing some widget or whatever and it's producing a good that people really want and demand, but you have some competition, you decide to hire 20, 30 people to help you. You enter into a free contract with these people who under capitalism of course, we're not living in feudalism, have the option to join any other firm, but they like you and they like this firm and they like your offer and you're paying them, let's say $20 an hour for 40 hours of work per week. Now, if the government comes along and says, okay, there's now a new minimum wage, the minimum wage is $22 an hour and also there's a maximum work week, 35 hour work week. If you work someone over 35 hours, even if they agree, you have to pay them time in half. Now, that of course is now an abridgment of your freedom as an entrepreneur, your freedom to set certain terms of employment, to engage in a contract with free people. But now your workers and other workers in the sector, because if you did it unilaterally, you'd just get undercut by your competition. Now, these people now have a few extra hours a week they could do whatever they want with. They could watch more NFL with it, they could spend more time with their friends or family or whatever else and they're still getting paid the same if not better because the wages also went up. So it's really a question often of trade-offs between who's freedom and autonomy, are you going to prioritize the freedom and autonomy of the entrepreneur or the capitalist in this case, or the freedom and autonomy of ordinary workers. Now, you could create a society that swings so far in the direction of prioritizing the freedom of one group or one class or whatever else compared to another that you end up in some sort of tyranny. Now, if the state's that you Lex, you're a capitalist so you don't get the right to vote or we're going to take away your private home or your ability to do things that we think are intrinsic human rights. Now, this would be tyranny, this would be an abridgment of your rights, but shaping your ability in the economic sphere to be an economic actor is I think within the realm and scope of democratic politics. Yeah, so those are the extremes you're referring to and one perspective I like to take on socialism versus capitalism is under each system, the extremes of each systems and the moderate versions of each system. How can people take advantage of it? So it seems like no matter what part of human nature is, whatever the rules, whatever the framework, whatever the system, somebody's going to take advantage of it. And that's the kind of pragmatic look at it in practice, what actually happens. Also, the incentives and the human behavior, what actually happens in practice under these systems. So if you have a higher and higher minimum wage and people watch more and more NFL, how does that change their actual behavior as a productive member of society and actually at the individual level as somebody, as somebody who could be an Einstein and she's not too because NFL is so awesome to watch. So like, is both how do people malicious people that want to take advantage? Maybe not malicious, but people that like me are lazy and want to take advantage. And people that also I think like me, like I tend to believe about myself that I have potential. And if I let my laziness naturally take over, which it often does, I won't materialize the potential. So if you make life too easy for me, I feel like I will never get anything done. Me personally, of course, there's a giant set of circumstances of the unlucky and the overburdened and so on. Okay. So how can people take advantage of each system, socialism, capitalism? So for one thing, people are going to take advantage of systems. They're going to find loopholes. They're going to find ways around. They're going to find ways to, to at times, dominate and course others, even in systems meant to get rid of domination and coercion. That's why we need to design our systems in such a way that it eliminates as many of these things as possible. And also, that's why we need democracy. We need freedom. So in a Soviet system, for instance, you have the rise of this authoritarian bureaucracy that dominated, of course, others in the name of socialism. Now, that system desperately could have used some political democracy and some check somewhat people were doing and some ability to reverse their power. And as soon as, of course, little elements of democracy was brought to that system, the system collapsed because there started to be outlets for dissent and for dissatisfaction. So I think we can't design a priority, a perfect system. We need to be committed to certain principles that allow systems to be perfected. And for me, that's the importance of democracy. So even a few years ago, not to go on a tangent, but people are allowed in Chinese authoritarianism. And they're saying China is building this efficient system. The state runs so well. There's technocratic excellence. Plus, there's just productivity and they're just working harder than Americans and whatever else. But look at in practice, what really happened with COVID, both the initial suppressing of information about what was happening in Wuhan and the outbreak were many ordinary Chinese workers and doctors and others were trying to get the word out. And they were suppressed by Communist Party officials locally in Wuhan, probably with occlusion and naturally, nationally. And now with zero COVID policies and whatever else. So I think that often we find that even though it seems like these are our weak systems and then democracy makes us less competent technocratically and otherwise, I think it's kind of a necessity for systems to grow and evolve to have that freedom in civil society. But as for individuals, now the first part of it is, yeah, I think people should be free to make their own choices. You might have tremendous potential, but you might choose to spend it in leisure. And leisure doesn't only mean doing, you know, sitting around at home, drinking a bunch of beers, kind of wasting your life away that way. Leisure might mean spending more time with their friends and family, building these sort of relationships that are going to maybe not change the world in some, some medicines, but we'll change the lives of the people around you and we'll change your community for the better. I'm taking notes here because I, for me, leaves you just not playing a lot of skyrim. This whole family relationship then, I'm going to have to work on that. I didn't realize that's also including leisure. I'm going to have to reconsider my whole life here. Anyway, no, leisure should mean civic activity too, right? I mean, there's that famous book, the Robert Putnam one, Bowling Alone or whatever, which described that for now, I mean, I'm, was worth mentioning it to nine. I like video and computer games, you know, so I definitely do that type of leisure too, but I found a lot more richness in my life when, in the last decade, a lot of my leisure has returned to like going to the local bar for like the couple drinks I have a week instead of doing it at home alone, watching TV or something, you know, because you get that random conversation, that sense of a place and, and belonging. But, I guess what's the undercurrent, maybe, of your question was, now, if you have a system with lots of carrots, but not the whip of, hey, you might be destitute, you might be unemployed, you, you might not be able to support yourself unless you're, you're working a certain amount. Would we still be as productive? Would we still be able to generate enough value for society? And I think that that's a question that, that is, is quite, quite interesting. I think that we're living in a society now with enough abundance that we could afford. More people deciding to opt out of the system out, out of production and that the carrots of staying in, you know, more money for consumption, more ability to do cool things, more just social rewards, the comes from being successful or from, from providing would be enough. But that's another thing that would have to be balanced in a system. So if we were seeing mass unemployment by choice in a democratic social system, then you might need to reconfigure the incentives. You might need to encourage people to go back into production. But that's something that, again, you could do through democracy and through good governance. You don't have to set the perfect blueprint in motion. You know, write up a treatise now in 50 years for now, you know, try to follow it like it's scripture. So by the way, I do like, how you said whip instead of stick in carrot and stick. That's putting a weight on the scale of which is better. But yes, but I would actually argue to push back that the wealthier we get as a society as a world that the more comfortable the social mass become. So the less of a whip or stick they become. Because one of the negative consequences, even if you're on welfare is like, well, life is not going to be that great. But the wealthier we become, the better the social programs become, the easier life becomes at the bottom. And so you might not have this motivation financially to get out from the bottom. That said, the pushback and the pushback is that there's something about human nature in general, money aside, that strives for greatness, that strives to provide a great life, a great middle class life for your family. And so that's the motivator to get off from the bottom. Well, I think a lot of people who are stuck at the bottom of the labor market today, one, these are people who are kind of are our true philanthropist, because a lot of them are the ones who are working two jobs and are working 60 plus hours and are providing in this country, it's such a bargain for their labor because they're so underpaid. So many of the things that the rest of us use up to to enjoy life and consumption or whatever else. Like I got here from downtown Austin and I think my lift, you know, I did tip, but I think my lift was like eight bucks space or whatever else, you know, it's the, I think that we are all indebted to people who are working and we don't see it at various stages of the production process from, you know, the workers in China and Taiwan producing, you know, technological things that we're recording this on to, you know, growers and workers and agriculture in the US. So I think that one, worth in class people are already working, but as far as, you know, getting out from under poverty and and desperation, we're in a society that doesn't give people a lot of tools. So if you don't have access to good public schools from, you know, age five until, you know, 12, 13, it's going to be really hard to move from generations of your family being involved in manual labor to doing other forms of labor. You're going to be stuck at a certain part of our labor market as a as a result. If you don't have access to decent health care, you know, throughout your life, you might be already preordained to an early grave by the time you, that something kicks in, you really want to change something in your life and then your mid 20s. Obviously, it's a combination of agency and all these other factors. There's still something, I think a natively human and at least striving that a lot of people have, but we don't really give people in our current society the tools to really be full participants in our society. We just take for granted, for example, and I'm from the Northeast, so I give like excessively Northeast example. We take for granted that that someone from, you know, Hartford Connecticut is going to have your average working class person Hartford is going to have a very different life outcome than someone born on the same day, the same hour in and a grandage Connecticut. You know, we take for granted that accidents of birth are going to dictate outcomes. So you mean like depending on the conditions of where you grew up, there's going to be fundamentally different experience in terms of education, in terms of the resources available to you to allow yourself to flourish. Yes. If you do a poor city in a rich city and Connecticut is great. It's highly highly underrated. Both New Yorkers and people from Boston kind of have a colonial feeling about Connecticut where we make fun of it and we try to carve it up, you know, the West belongs to New York, the East of Boston, but you know, I'm here for you know, Connecticut nationalism. I think it's a great place. Okay. Can we actually step back a little bit on definitions because you said that some of the ideas practically that you're playing with is democratic socialism. We talked about the higher level, the higher kind of vision of socialism that ideals the philosophical ideas. But how does it all fit into the big picture historically of ideas of Marxism, communism and socialism as it was defined and experienced and implemented in the 20th century. So what's your key differences? Maybe even just like socialism communism. Yeah. Well, I hate the no-true Scott's been sort of responsible this, which is, oh, that socialism is bad. So it wasn't really socialism and my socialism is good. So it is socialism. But I think that socialism and communism share a common ancestor, which is they both emerged out of the turmoil and development of late 19th century capitalism and the fact that there was all these workers parties that were organizing across the capitalist world. So in Europe, for instance, you had this mass party called the German Social Democratic Party. And the became probably the most important, the most vibrant party in Germany in the 1880s and 1890s. But they were locked out of power because Germany at the time was still mostly a target. You know, it had a parliamentary democracy, but it was a very undemocratic democracy. The Kaiser is still still ruled. These movements took root across the capitalist world, but including in Russia and in conditions of illegality. So it was assumed for many, many years in the workers movement across Europe and among socialists of Europe, they called themselves Social Democrats then, that the revolution would first probably happen in Germany in this developed growing hub of industrial capitalism and not in semi-futal Russia. But then, Warfare 1 came. The workers movement was split between parties that decided to either keep their head down or to implicitly support the war. And then, you know, support the war for now, keep your heads down, don't get banned, don't get arrested. Then we'll just take power after the war is over. And those like Russia and also in the United States for that matter, that chose the path of resistance to the war. And it was the Bolshevik faction of the Russian movement, but Lenin's Bolshevik party that took power in Russia after a period of turmoil where it didn't seem what was going to go to the fascist right, or was it going to go to the far left, there was a period of flux in turmoil in Russia, but definitely Olga Zhim was not able to stand. And these Russian social Democrats, these Bolsheviks, said, Social democracy has so betrayed the idea of internationalism and brotherhood and progress that was supposed to stand for, that we can't call ourselves Social Democrats anymore. We're going to go back to this old term that Marx used, we're going to call ourselves Communists. And that's where official kind of communism out of Russia emerged. In other parts of Europe, parties were actually able to take power some in the interwar period, but most in the post-war period. And they also came out of this old social democratic movement. And these parties mostly just call themselves Socialists. And a lot of them still on paper wanted to go beyond capitalism, but in practice, they just managed capitalism better in the interests of workers. But they all had the same common ancestor. And in practice, to me, social democracy means trying to insert doses of socialism within capitalism, but maintaining capitalism. Communism met this attempt to build a socialism outside of capitalism and often authoritarian ways, in part because of the ideology of these communists, but in part because of the conditions in which they inherited. They were inheriting a democracy. They were inheriting a country that had been ruled by the Tsar as for centuries. And with very little condition, like a very weak working class, very poor and devastated by war, and so on, where authoritarianism kind of landed itself to those conditions. And then there's me. And then there's democratic socialists. And the way I would define it is, we like a lot of what the Social Democrats accomplished. But we still believe in going beyond capitalism, and not just building socialism within capitalism, but we believe in this ultimate vision of a world after capitalism. What does that world look like and how's it different from communist? Actually, maybe we can linger before we talk about your vision of democratic socialism. What was wrong with communism, Stalinism, implementation of communism in the Soviet Union? Why did it go wrong? And in what ways did it not go wrong? What ways did it succeed? Let me start with the second part of that question. And that's a very difficult one to answer, in part because I morally and ethically am opposed to any form of authoritarianism or dictatorship. And often when you talk about the successes of a government or what it did developmentally, they might have been positive, we have to abstract ourselves from what we morally believe and just just kind of look at the record, right? I would say that the Soviet experiment started off by and Lenin's time as the attempt to kind of just hold a holding action. Hey, we don't really have the conditions to rule this country. We have the support of the working class or most of it, but the working class is only 3% of the population. The peasantry is really against us. A lot of this 3% of the population has died in war and half of them supported the Mensheviks and the more moderate socialist anyway. But the alternative in their minds was going to be a far right reaction, some sort of general taking power in a coup or whatever else, or just them ending up back in prison because a lot of them were in prison on the czar or just killed. So they figured, all right, we're going to have a holding action where we maintain as much of this territory of the old Russian Empire as possible. We'll try to slowly implement changes, restabilize the economy through something called the new economic program, which was kind of a form of social democracy, if you will, because it allowed market exchange for the peasants combined with state ownership of industries in the cities. And for a while, it seemed to be working. The revolution never came that they were expecting in Western Europe, but in Russia itself, they were able to restabilize things by the middle or end of the 1920s. And they were able to build more of a popular base for some of their policies because people who had seen the chaos of World War I and revolution and then civil war kind of just wanted stability. And after a decade plus of war, if you had a government that was able to give you enough to eat and a job, you know, that was good enough for them, then Stalin came into power and he wanted to rapidly industrialize. And his logic was the revolution is not going to come in the West. We need to build socialism in one country and we need to catch up with the West. We need to turn ourselves into industrial powerhouses quickly as possible. And that's where you got forced collectivization to try to increase the productivity of Russian agriculture through state ownership of previously fragmented agricultural holdings and through the implementation of mechanization, so bringing more machines to make agricultural more productive, all under state ownership. Plus more ambitious attempts to build heavy industry through five-year plans. Now, I say this kind of cool, but we know in practice what that meant. You know, forced collectivization was a disaster. I mean, first of all, I think it was built on the faulty premise that scale always equals more productivity when in fact, especially in agriculture, but in any field, it's a little bit more complicated than that. And it led to millions of deaths, you know, led to famine, it led to host of other problems, industrialization in the way that it happened under Stalin also kind of unbalanced the Soviet economy to lean to heavy towards heavy industry, not enough for medium or light industry. But this did mean, especially the five-year plan industrialization, did manage to put Russia on a different developmental trajectory. So by the time the post-war period came, one, it might have gave them the ability to survive the Nazi invasion to begin with. That's a complicated question. And then by the time the post-war period came, Russia had kind of jumped ahead of its developmental trajectory in a way that a lot of other countries didn't do. There are a few examples. Like, Japan is one, the managed to, if you kind of ran a scenario where Japan would be in the 1870s, 1880s and ran it a hundred times, the Japan of the post-war period is kind of one of the best outcomes, right? And I think that you could say that about Russian economic development, its ability to catch up at a certain level to the West. And then after that, of course, later on, as economies got more complex, as they kind of moved beyond regular heavy industry and as the main stable of the economy, the Russian economy and its command system was unable to adapt and cope and ended up falling back behind the West again by the 1970s. So all this is a very long story to say that a lot went wrong and Russia, the economic picture is actually a little bit more complicated. Politically, I think it's just a small party without much pop of the support, but with real pop of the support in a couple of cities, a lot of pop of the support empire wide took power and they felt they couldn't give back power and they kept holding on to power and eventually among their ranks in these conditions. One of history's great pyrrents took power and was able to justify what he was doing in the context of the Russian nation and development, but also all the threats that came from abroad to the civil war wasn't just a civil war, it was really an invasion by many imperial powers all around the world as well. So I think a lot of it was conditions and circumstance and I guess the question really is to what role ideology played, is there something within the social tradition that might have lended self to authoritarianism and that's something we should talk about. And that's really complicated human question. It does seem that the rhetoric, the populism of workers unite, we've been fucked over for way too long. Let's stand together. Somehow that message allows flawed or evil people to take power. It seems like the rhetoric, the idea is so good, maybe the utopian nature of the idea is so good that allows a great speaker to take power. It's almost like if the mission, like come with me friends beyond the horizon, a great land is waiting for us, that encourages sort of yeah dictators, authoritarianist to take power. Is there something within the ideology that allows for that, for the sort of for lying to people essentially? Well, I might surprise you with my answer because I would say yes, maybe, but I think that it's not just socialism. Any sort of ideology that appeals to the collective and appeals to our long term destiny either as a species or as a nation or as a class or whatever else can lend itself to authoritarianism. So you can see this in many of the nationalisms of the 20th century. Now, some of these nationalisms used incredibly lofty collective rhetoric like in Sweden, the rhetoric of we're going to create the people's home. We're going to make this a country with dignity for all Swedes. We're going to make this a country that's more developed, more free and so on. And they managed to build a pretty excellent society in my estimation from that. You know, in countries like fascist Germany and Italy, they managed to do horrendous things in Japan and horrendous things with that. In the US with national popular appeals, FDR was able to unite a nation to elevate ordinary working class people into a position where they felt like they had a real stake in the country. And I think did great things with the New Deal. In Russia, of course, this language was used to trample upon individual rights and to justify hardship and abuses of ordinary individual people in the name of a collective destiny. A destiny, of course, it was just decided by the party in power and during the 30s and 40s by just dawn himself really. Now, I think that that's really the case for making sure that we have a bedrock of civil rights and democracy. And then on top of that, we can debate. We can debate different national destinies. We can debate different appeals, different visions of the world. But as long as people have a say in what sacrifices they're being asked to do, and as long as those sacrifices don't take away what's fundamentally ours, which is our life, you know, which is our our basic rights. And voice, our voice. So this complicated picture, because help me understand, you mentioned that social democracy is trying to have social policies within a capitalist system, in part, but your vision, your hope for social democracy is one that goes beyond that. How do you give everybody a voice while not becoming the Soviet Union, while not becoming where basically people are silenced either directly through violence or through the implied threat of violence and therefore fear? So I think you need to limit the scope of where the state is and what the state can do and how the state functions, first of all. Now, for me, social democracy was like the equivalent of I'll give a football analogy. It was the equivalent of getting to the red zone, and then kicking a field goal. You'll take the three points, but you would have rather got a touchdown. And for me, socialism would be the touchdown. It's not a separate different playing field. Some people would say socialism will be an interception. It's sure. No, and they would have the right to to again, to say that and to say we shouldn't go go further. And most coaches would take, you know, we take the safe route, right? So you're going, you're going against the decision. Anyway, they're not just taking it. Yeah, yeah, but I understand, I understand. So for you, the goal is full socialism, but I'll take the three points. You know, it's it's a part of what I just want to march down the field. I want to get get within scoring position. The reason why we should really move from this analogy, but the reason why I call myself a socialist is looking through history and these examples of social democracy. You saw that they were able to give working class people lots of rights and income and power in their society. But at the end of the day, capitalists still have the ultimate power, which is the ability to withhold investment. So they could say in the late 1960s and early 70s, listen, I was fine with this arrangement 10 years ago. But now I feel like I'm going to, you know, take my money and I'm going to go move to a different country or I'm just going to not invest because my workers are paid too much. I'm still making money, but I feel like I could be making more. I need more of an upper hand. So their economic power is then challenging the democratic mandate of Swedish workers that were voting for the Social Democratic Party and were behind this this advance. So to me, what socialism is in part is taking the means of production, where those capitalists power is coming from and making it socially owned so that ordinary workers can control their workplaces, can make investment decisions and so on. Now does that mean total state ownership of everything or a planned economy? I don't think that makes any sense. You know, I think that we should live in a society in which markets are harnessed and regulated and so on. My main problem is capitalists ownership. In part, on normative grounds, just because I think that it doesn't make sense that we celebrate democracy in all these other spheres, but we have workplaces that are just treated like tyrannies. And in part, because I think that ordinary workers would much prefer a system in which over time they, you know, accrued shares in ownership, where they got in addition to base kind of ways they got dividends from their firm being successful and that they figured out how to, you know, large firms, they're not going to be making day-to-day decisions by democratic vote, right? But maybe you would elect representatives, elected managements, once every year or two, depending on your operating agreement and so on. That's kind of my vision of a socialist society. And this sounds, I hope, like, agree or disagree, like it would not be a crazy leap into year zero, right? This could be maybe a way in which we could take a lot of what's existing in society, but then just add this on top. But what it would mean is a society without a capitalist class. This class hasn't been, you know, individually, these people, you know, haven't been taking to reeducation camps or whatever else, but they're just no longer in this position. And they're now part of the economy in other ways. Like, there'll probably be the first set of highly competent technocrats and managers and so on. They'll probably be very well compensated for their time and expertise and whatever else. But to me, both the practical end of things, like taking away this ability to withhold investment and increasing our ability to democratically and shape investment priorities and to continue down the road of social democracy and on normative grounds by kind of egalitarian belief that ordinary people should have more stake in their lives in the workplace. Leads me beyond social democracy to socialism. So there is a tricky thing here. So in Ukraine, especially, but in the Soviet Union, there's the Kuwaitz, the possible trajectory of fighting for the beautiful message of respecting workers' rights. Has this dynamic of making an enemy of the capitalist class, too easily making an enemy of the capitalist class with a central leader, populist leader that says the rich and the powerful, they're taking advantage of you. We need to remove them. We need to put them in camps, perhaps. Not said explicitly until it happens. It can happen overnight. But just putting a giant pressure on that capitalist class. And again, the Stalin type figure takes hold. Trying to understand how the mechanism can prevent that. And perhaps I'll sort of reveal my bias here. Is that been reading, I was going to say too much, maybe not enough, but a lot about books like Stalin's War on Ukraine. And just I've been reading a lot about the 30s and the 40s for personal reasons related to my travels in Ukraine and all that kind of stuff. So I have a a little bit of focus on the historic implementations of communism currently without kind of an updated view of all the possible future implementation. So I just want to lay that out there. But I worry about the slippery slope into the authoritarian figure that takes the sexy message, destroys everyone who's powerful in the name of the working class, and then fucks the working class afterwards. So first of all, I think it's worth remembering that the socialist movement had different outcomes across Western Europe and Eastern Europe. And in some of these countries in Western Europe, there wasn't actually democracy before the workers movement and for the socialist movement. So the battle in Sweden, for instance, was about establishing political democracy, establishing troop representation for workers. And that's how the parties became popular, same thing in Germany too. Then it was the social democrats who were able to build political democracy. Then on top of that, add layers of economic democracy, social democracy. The Swedish social democrats ruled basically uninterrupted from the early 1930s until 1976. It's kind of crazy to think about, but they were just in government. They were the leading member of government that a few different coalition partners would shift. Sometimes they were with their gradients, sometimes they were with the communist briefly, but they ruled uninterrupted. And they lost an election in 1976, and they just left power. And then they got back into power in the 80s. So in other words, they created a democratic system, of course, with mass import of working-class people. Then they truly honored the system because when they lost power, they lost power. They left power. There's plenty of cases like that across Europe and the world, and in other countries like Korea and elsewhere where the workers movement, some was militant, the most class and trick workers. South Africa is the same way. Created democratic systems. Now, Russia, I think a lot of what happened had to do with the fact that it was never a democratic country. It was ruled by a party. And the party itself was very easy to shift from a somewhat democratic party in London's day to an authoritarian one in Russia. And then there was no distinction then between the party and the state. So your authoritarian party then became authoritarian total control over the entirety of the state. Now, the fact that the Soviet system involved total state ownership of production meant that the authoritarianism of the party state could go even deeper into the lives of ordinary people compared to other horrific dictatorships like Pinochet's Chile and so on. When maybe you could find some solace, like just at home or whatever else, you didn't have the same sort of totalitarian control of people's lives. But I would say that socialism itself is yield different outcomes. Now, on the question of polarization, I guess that implies that this polarization, this distinction, is a distinction that isn't real in society and that is kind of being manufactured or generated. You mean the capitalist class and working class is to clarify it. So in certain populist distinctions, the division is basically arbitrary or made up. The us first them polarization, depending who the us and who the them are. It's truly a something that's manufactured. But capitalism itself as a system, as a system based on class division, whether you're supporter or opposite, I think we should acknowledge it's based on class division. That is the thing creating that polarization. Now, I think what a lot of what socialists try to do is we try to take bits of working class opposition to capitalism, to their lives, to their way they're treated at work and so on. And yes, we do try to organize on those basis to help workers take collective action to help them organize and political parties and so on to represent their interests, economic and otherwise. But the contradiction exists to begin with. And if anything, this system, which I'm proposing, democratic socialism, would be kind of a resolution of this this this conflict, this dilemma, this thing that has always existed since you know, chief then and fall or and so on. We've had class division since the Neolithic Revolution. You know, I think this is a democratic road, road out of that that tension and that division of of humanity into people who own and people have nothing to give, but their ability to work. So that sort of that idea is grounded in going all the way back to marks that all of human history can be told through the lens of class struggle. Is there some sense? Can you still man the case that this class difference is over exaggerated that there's a difference, but it's not the difference of the abuser and the abused. It's more of a difference of people that were successful and people that were less successful. So I'll play devil's advocate, which is saying that maybe one could argue that in its purest, earliest stage capitalism is based on a stark difference. But then since then, two things have happened. One, a bunch of socialists and workers have organized to guarantee certain rights for working class people, certain protections. So then our system now, there are certain safety nets less than the US than in other countries, but in a lot of countries are pretty extensive safety nets. Even like 40 hour work week minimum wage, safety regulations, all that kind of stuff. And all those things are in my mind, those socialism within capitalism, because what you're doing is you are taking the autonomy of capitals to do whatever they want with people, contractor to them. And the only thing stopping them is, you know, them potentially being able to go to another employer, but even then it's kind of a potentially race to the bottom. If you can't get more than $2 an hour from any employer in your market, you're going to have to live with it. So one factor is we have built in those protections. So we've taken enough socialism into capitalism that you could say that at a certain point, maybe it makes a qualitative difference, not just a quantitative difference in people's lives. The other thing is over time we've gotten wealthier and more productive as a society. So maybe at some point, the quantitative difference of just more and more wealth means that even if in the abstract, the division between a worker and a capitalist is real. If that worker is earning, you know, a quarter million dollars a year and has a good life and only has to clock in 35 hours a week, 30 hours a week and has, you know, four weeks of vacation, then like, isn't it just like an abstract or philosophical difference? So I think you could level those two arguments. What I would say is that one, a lot of these rights that we fought for are constantly being eroded and they're under attacked in part because the economic power the capitals have bleeds into our political democracy as well. There's constant lobbying for all sorts of labor market deregulations and so on. I fundamentally believe that if tomorrow all those regulations went away, capitals would fight to pay people as little as possible. We'd be back in 19th century capitalism and not because they're bad people because if I'm running a firm and all of a sudden, my competition is paying is able to find a labor pool and is paying people less than me. I'm going to be undercut because I'll be able to take some of that extra savings and invest into new technology or whatever else and they'll gobble up my market share before or long. And then also beyond that, I do think there's a normative question here, which is, now, do we believe that ordinary people have a capacity to be able to make certain decisions about their work? Do we believe they know more about their work than their bosses? Now, I don't think that's not true at every level, but I think there's no doubt that in workplaces, workers know how to productively do their task in ways that their manager might not know. I think we've all been in workplaces where we've had managers who kind of don't know what you do or whatever else. And I think that collectively, if incentivize, we could have them one instead of hoarding or that information since they're getting a stake in production and so on, they'd be able to more freely share it and be able to reshape how their day to day work happens. And also with elected managers, you kind of take that up the chain. I think you would have perfectly efficient market based firms that could exist without capitalists. So there's a, I mean, there's a lot of things to say. Maybe within just very, very low level question of if the workers are running the show, there's a brutal truth to the fact that some people are better and the workers know this. This is Steve Jobs, A-Players. You want to have all the A-Players in the room because one B-Player can poison the pool, because then everybody gets demotivated by like, by the nature of that lack of excellence and competence. This is just to take sort of a crude devil's advocate perspective. Are the workers going to be able to remove the incompetent from the pool? In the name, in the goal of towards the mission of succeeding as a collective. So I think that any successful model of socialism that involves the market, you need two things. One is the micro level, you need the ability to fire people and for them to exit firms, which might be a slower process in cooperative based firms than it is in a capitalist firm without a union. But it would probably akin to the process that would happen in a capitalist firm, which there are many with unions. So you need that. And then at the macro level, you need firm failure. You need to avoid a dilemma that happened in Soviet style economies, which was soft budget constraints. And firms basically not being allowed to fail because the government was committed to full employment. The firms employed people. So even inefficient firms were at the end of the day, they knew they were going to be propped up by the government. And they would be given all the resources they would need, no matter how efficiently they were using those resources to maintain employment. So I think you need both. Do you worry about this idea of firing people? Man, I'm uncomfortable with the idea. I hate it, but I also know it's extremely necessary. So is there something about a collective, a social system that makes firing, you say it might be slower, might it become extremely slow, too much friction? Isn't there a tension between respecting the rights of a human being and saying, like you need to step up, maybe sort of deposit the care. You really encourage fellow workers know when there's a person that's not pulling their side of doing as great of a job as it could be. But it's in the person that's not doing a great of a job, go to start to manipulate the system that slows the firing in their self interest. Well, I think there would be certain. So maybe another way to put it is think about like if you're a partner at a law firm, right? I don't really know how law firms work. So I probably shouldn't use this analogy, but correct me if I'm wrong. But let's say you're a partner, you kind of have equity in your law firm or something beyond your billable hours. And let's say you're going to be fired from your law firm or they're laying off people or whatever else. They could just get rid of you, but they would also have to figure out how to kind of buy you out to after a certain point. So I think that like in a cooperative firm, you'd probably have a system where you after a certain point of working productively. You'd probably have a period where you get fired really quickly no matter what. But once you have job security kicks in, you would be able to, you know, it would be a process. It would probably be like, you know, a day or two process to figure it out. Or maybe they would have progressive discipline process, which is first you have to get a verbal feedback. And then maybe a written performance review, then you could be fired. I mean, that's how it works in a lot of workplaces with either unions or with just basic job security. Most countries, that's how it works because there's not at will employment in most countries. So I think that the real tension is if you fire someone, if you condemning them to destitution, then morally, you'd really feel something there as you should, as a human being concerned about other people. But in a social system or even basic social democratic system, there would be mechanisms to take care of that person. So one, if a firm is failing for any reason, they're getting out compete or whatever, whatever else. Those workers would then land in the hands just for a little bit of the state, right? And there could be active labor market policies to retrain people to go into expanding sectors. Or your sector is now obsolete. But here, you have these skills, you're going to be trained and here are some resources to kind of help you along your training. And then there's a bunch of firms hiring. So go on your way. And then also just with an expanded welfare state, being destitute in certain countries, being unemployed in certain countries is easier than in other countries or situations. So you know, you still can fall back on that mechanism and also in my vision of market socialism, democratic socialism, there would be an expanded state sector. Not anything you can imagine, but the way in which there's more of a state sector in countries like Norway or Denmark than there is in the US. So there would be various forms of state employment and whatever, whatever else. So I mean, I think that the real question is should being bad at your job or getting fired for any reason or getting laid off, should that be a cause to have you, you know, totally lose your shirt or maybe should you just have to rebound. Maybe you have less money for consumption or whatever else and you'll be on your way onto bigger and better things, you know, in a few months. So strong social net in many ways make it more efficient to fire people who are not good at their job because then they won't be that won't actually significantly damage their quality of life. And they have a chance to find a job at which they can flourish. Sure. Right. To step out into the macro, the there's a tension here as well. So you said that there's an equality between the classes, the capitalist class and the working class. And sort of there's a lot of ways you can maybe correct me on the numbers, but you could say that the top 1% of Americans have more wealth than the bottom 50%. Let's not talking about perhaps capitalist class and the working class, but it's a good sort of estimate, right? The flip side of that, if you just look at countries that have more economic freedom versus less economic freedom, more capitalism versus less capitalism, their GDP seems to be significantly higher. And so at the local level, you might say that there's an inequality, but if you look historically over decades, it seems like the more capitalism there is, the higher the GDP grows and therefore the level of the quality of life and the basic income, the basic wealth, the average, even including the working class goes up over time. Can you see like both sides of this? So I can definitely accept some of that premise. One, within capitalism, right, you want a bigger pie. Then if you divide up that pie, you know, you'll eat even if the bottom 10% of the working class share, let's say is less as a percentage, it's still more in raw terms, so it's better for everyone. The part that I would dispute is more economic freedom versus less economic freedom. So there's obviously some countries in which capitalism doesn't work and maybe economic freedom plays a role. Like if you're in a country like Egypt or India with the highly or previously highly bureaucratic system, so you need to get licenses to do anything and you need to run things for the state or we need to bribe someone to get an incorporation done or whatever else. That's in case in which I would accept the premise of, okay, economic freedom to take entrepreneurs to start something new is limited. There's all sorts of factors in which it's too difficult to start a firm and it benefits no one really except for whatever bureaucracy might be, might be taking their 15% cut. But in general, I think in advanced economies, it doesn't really work that way. So think about it this way. If you pretend like we're back, I'm sorry to go to Scandinavia again, but this is a good example. Let's see you're back in the 1970s in Scandinavia or whatever else. You're in a country with extremely powerful unions. So the unions have a lot of labor rights. The state has certain high taxation, certain guarantees on you too, but you're a capitalist there. Now, what would you do if your capitalist competitors in the US were able to pay workers $10 an hour and you have to pay them 20? You would probably, and assuming you can't just flee or shut down or whatever else, you'd probably find ways to use labor saving technology, right? That power of the high wages might encourage you to invest more in technology and to utilize people's times better so they're more productive at work. So they're not just like sitting around or whatever so this really happened in practice in the Scandinavian countries in part because it was combined with a certain type of a pattern-wage bargaining. So I'll explain this really simply, but let's pretend that you're in a sector with three different companies. I'll say on automotive sector and I'll just say one is GM, one is Ford, one is Chrysler. Now, all these workers in your sector are all unionized. They're all Swedish, UAW, whatever the equivalent is, members, and they're all paid the same and the union is setting through bargaining. The union is setting the wages across the sector. But the let's say GM is the most productive of these companies. Ford is number two, Chrysler is number three. The unions would intentionally set the wages, set their benchmark to Ford in the middle. So what that would do is say to Ford, okay, Ford will stay in business because they'll be able to meet the wage demands. Chrysler's might go out of business because they won't be able to meet the demands. So they'll have to really adapt really quickly. They might have to lay off people, they might have to restructure. So union knows this in advance and all the auto workers know this. But the most efficient manufacturer GM now has excess profits because if they were negotiating with just the GM workers, the GM workers might even have been able to demand more. But instead, these workers are packing their wage demands to Ford's level and GM is in theory able to expand and employ more people and adopt new production techniques with their surplus. Then those Chrysler workers would be absorbed by the state by act-to-labor market policies and then put back to work for GM or for these expanding sectors. So in other words, you're now in a situation where the state has a pretty big role in your economy. Take a lot of your money in taxes. The unions are really shaping your life as a capitalist far more that would happen in a country like the United States. And yet still, despite your more limited economic freedom, you're still creating a more productive economy. So it could work. The system has to be designed right. I think social democracies were designed the right way. I think any future democratic socialism after social democracy would have to be designed the right way. Could you just linger on that a little more of the pattern wage bargaining? So GM is the most efficient and Ford is the second most. Can you explain to me how can you explain to me again the wages, setting the wages to the Ford level, how that is good for GM? So how that encourages more GM? Yeah, this is just sectoral or actually in this case centralized wage bargaining. So setting the wages at a level that Ford can afford, but a level that would probably be too expensive for Chrysler in the automotive sector would benefit GM because they're drawing what we could call excess profits because GM, if the GM itself could potentially have to deal with just the enterprise of GM workers bargaining for wages. And if they saw their profitability was high, they would know their leverage and they would say, pay us even more, else we're going to go on strike. But instead they're accepting slightly lower wages and they would have otherwise had in return for the company having excess profits that they're through both the state, their union and sometimes like there's worker councils or whatever else, they're playing a role in saying, okay, we're going to make sure this excess profit is actually invested productively in order to expand employment and just output. Okay, can we talk about unions? In general, then what are the pros and cons of unions? So the interest of union maybe you can correct me if I'm wrong. I have a lot to learn both about the economics and the human experience of a union. The union's interest is to what to protect worker rights and to maximize worker happiness, not the success and the productivity and the efficiency of a company, right? No, I would disagree. So I think a union's interest is in what's collectively bargaining on behalf of workers because in certain cases, I am right now a manager at the Nation magazine, right? If I have a problem with my working conditions or I need to raise or whatever else, I could with my skill set, my background, my role in the company, I could go to my boss, the owner of the nation and say, okay, I need to renegotiate my contract on these terms. I could bargain, right? Now, if I was a ordinary worker at like a CVS or something, if I didn't like my conditions and I went to my boss and said, hey, I need a $2 raise and I need to be home by 830 because I have obligations at home. The boss would probably say, I'm sorry, that's not possible, right? Maybe try the right aid down the street or the Walgreens down the street or whatever. Now, if I went to the boss at a place like CVS or even better, if all the pharmaceutical workers at right aid CVS Walgreens went to our bosses and said, listen, we collectively need to $2 more and better average, shorter shifts or whatever else, then they would probably have no choice but to concede. You have to bargain collectively at any level if you're an ordinary worker and there are some exceptions, but that's for certain highly skilled workers, but even in those cases, of course, all workers are skilled. I mean, just the technical definition. Even in those cases, a lot of those workers have to bargain collectively as well in order to get more, more well, but they cannot make their demands so excessive that their firm gets out of business. The workers only are workers as long as they're gainfully employed. So often unions will try to select their wage demands at such a level that it ensures that their firm will stay in business. But the problem is the way firms go out of business isn't by explosion, like a way popcorn starts getting cooked. As a certain moment, it just is over. It seems like the union can, through collective bargaining, keep increasing the wage, keep increasing the interest of the worker until it suffocates the company that it doesn't die immediately, but it dies in like five years. So that might still serve the interest of the worker, but it doesn't serve the interest of society as a whole that's creating cool stuff and increasing sort of a market that's operating and increasing cool stuff and constantly innovating and so on and creating more and more cool stuff and increasing the quality of life in general. I disagree with the premise because I think even taking your example, that would be better for society. If a firm cannot pay its workers a living wage, but its competitors can, then that firm will either figure out a way to innovate, develop new techniques, new markets, new ways to be productive or it should go out of business. And it would be better for it to go out of business than to stay in business or to be artificially kept in business in any sort of way. And yeah, so that's the Chrysler, my old centralized bargaining. Right, but then there is innovation cost money too. So the flip side of that, I think to play devil's advocate is that it incentivizes automotive industries. It's probably a good example that it incentivizes cutting costs everywhere and sort of whatever that's been making you money currently, figuring out how to do that really well, without investing into the long term future of the company for like all the different ways it can pivot, all the different interesting things it could do, terms of investing into R&D, whenever there's more and more and more pressure on paying a living wage for the workers, it might not, again, it might suffocate and die over the next five, 10, 20 years, which might be a good destructive force from a capitalist perspective, but it might rob us of the Einstein of a company, right, of the flourishing that the company and the workers within it can do over a period of five, 10, 20 years. Well, this is just a problem with a lot of capitalism, which is about short-termism, right, because the same thing could be said from you're starting a company, you have a plan for it to make a lot of money, but your investors want you want dividends right away. So you have to take away from your long-term R&D or other plans and deliver short-term dividends. That's often why a lot of I think R&D is often rooted in state institutions and research and whatever else is being drawn on. And also I think that that's a reason why the state has some sort of role in fostering firms in either a my version of a socialist economy or a capitalist economy or whatever else to help with these time horizon problems. So I won't dispute that workers could play a role or wage demands could play a role in time horizon problems, but more often than that, it's coming from investors, it's coming from just a host of other market pressures that people might have. And I would say that in the real world, a lot of investment funds don't come from just retained earnings. It comes from a lot of you know sources. So I think this is a problem that could be solved through public policy, but definitely exists today as well. So you mentioned living wage. Is there a tension between a living wage? Maybe you could speak to what a living wage means. And the workers owning all of the profit of the company. Sort of this kind of spectrum. No, I guess the spectrum is from like no no minimum wage, the lowest possible thing you could pay to a worker. Then somewhere in that spectrum is a living wage. And then at the top is like all of the profit from the companies owned by the workers. So split to the workers. I mean, I think that any society is going to have to make distributional choices. You could have a margin of a variety of capitalists in which workers are paid quite little, but there's extremely high taxation and there's redistribution after the fact. You could imagine a system in which there's less taxation after the fact, but there's more guarantees and regulations on how much people are paid before the fact. In my vision of a social society, there would be similar way that unions work. And in my example, the centralized bargaining unions would work that bargain at the sectoral level and not just at the enterprise level, like our unions do today. There could be benchmarks set for different occupations or wages. And the reason why you would want to benchmark at a worker controlled firm is that you don't want workers self-exploring themselves in order to gobble up market share or because you don't want them collectively deciding, okay, we're going to invest in this longer term time horizon and outcompete other people that way. So you might say, okay, if you do this sort of clerical work, you have to be paid the equivalent of $15 an hour. That's a minimum, but on top of that, you get dividends from excess profits. And I think we'd also have to be combined with public financing for expansions and for development, which could be done in quite a competitive way. So you could have a variety of banks, you know, my vision, you know, state-owned banks. But how would they decide who to invest in and who to not invest in, who to give a loan for expansion to and who not to? Because you don't want it to be like, oh, I'm going to invest in my nephews firm and not this other firm. Or I'm going to invest in this guy's firm because he's a Italian, but not this guy's firm because he's Albanian or whatever else. Just make it rational at the level of their goal is just like any other investment person at a bank today to maintain a certain risk profile and to have an interest yield and decide to invest on that basis. So there's a huge auto firm that has been on business for 50 years that needs a little operating cash. Like, yeah, they could get their $50 million at 3% loan. If you have some crazy blue sky idea and you manage to get it to that point, maybe you do friends would get it at, you know, 12% or something close to what a VC would offer today. So I only kind of go into these details, not because to say that a system doesn't have to in advance map out all the different possibilities. But I think it does have to be willing to accept a lot of things that we know today. You know, I can't give you a version of socialism that's everything's going to be fine. We're going to live harmoniously. And we won't have these sort of tensions and, you know, you could hunt in the evening and, you know, fish in the afternoon and write criticism, you know, whatever else. I do hope that there's horizons beyond this that we could aspire to. I do have those visions. But for now, I think our task as socialists is to imagine a, you know, five minutes after, you know, midnight, like what can we do right away within our lifetime vision? So that means through some level of central planning, reallocating resources to the workers. So I think the primary mechanism in this private sector under socialism would be market mechanism, firms competing against each other to expand connected to a system of public financing. But even at that level, the individual bankers and public banks and so on would be operating based on their own rationality. And the state would certainly shape investment decisions, but maybe no more than they do in a lot of capitalist systems. So the state might already today and a lot of countries decide, you know, we want to invest in green technology. So it's going to be favorable rates for people or tax credits for people investing in green technology. So the state already shapes investment. I think what should be centrally planned, and this is where I'm proud to sound like an old school socialist is things like healthcare, things like transit, things like our natural monopolies of lots of types, you know, I think can be done very well through planning. And we already have plenty of examples. But a lot of this society, I think, would be the private sphere of worker controlled cooperatives competing against each other, weak firms failing, successful firms expanded. And the banks you're saying publicly or privately owned publicly owned. Let's just put it all on the table that it's almost guaranteed that every system has corruption. So I guess the bigger question is, which system has more corruption? This one was central planning and worker cooperatives versus unfettered capitalism or any flavor of capitalism. I think any system has potential for corruption. I think it depends on like how good your civil services, how much oversight do you have to resolve a problem once it arises? How does corruption happen in a social system? So you have to again, I apologize, but the large scale examples of it. So we can look at Soviet Union, China, Sweden, fundamentally different nations and histories and peoples and economic systems and political systems, but all could be called in part socialist. And so what, you know, there's a ridiculous almost caricature of corruption in the Soviet system, the gigantic bureaucracy that's built where somehow corruption seeps in through kind of dispersion of responsibility that nobody's really responsible for the corruption. I just had a conversation with Ed Calderon who fought the cartels in Mexico and there's a huge amount of corruption in Mexico, but it's not like even CNUS corruption, you understand where the cop pulls you over, you give this much money and so on. And so that kind of seems to happen in certain systems and it seems to have happened in social systems more than in capital systems in the 20th century. Or maybe I'm wrong in that. No, I mean, I think in a lot of countries it's seen as the cost of doing business, right? Now in particular countries built on a system of central planning or just state allocation resources with the state, both producers and allocates and things run through bureaucracies, then I think you're you're much more apt to have corruption than in a system with just a smaller sphere for the state. So for example, if you're in a hypothetical version of the US, you might see a lot more corruption like the post office, but you know, you wouldn't have that corruption in your workplace. So you kind of learn to go around that. For one thing, even in state sectors, you can have, and this often is the case in democratic countries, you have a transparent civil service where people who are corrupt are prosecuted by judges, where it's frowned upon and it just over time, it goes away. So you go from having political machines that were tied to certain, you know, had friends and certain police precincts and whatever else in the US in the 19th century and an early 20th century. So now today that would be a huge scandal and unheard of, right? So I think over time having a independent court system, having a truly meritocratic civil service can be implemented anywhere. I think though in the Soviet Union, the extra little bit that happened was you had a bureaucracy that just had so much power because the bureaucracy was producing and distributing everything and everyone was relying on the bureaucracy with jobs. The way to social advancement was through the bureaucracies. So you end up with people like Krushchev, you know, people going from peasants to, you know, supreme leaders of countries just through getting hooked up in the bureaucracy and advancing within it. And, you know, not all these were bad people. You know, I don't think Krushchev was that out of a person or Gorbachev, you know, they, they, they, they, this is their mechanism to advancement and systems like this. In the vision of democratic socialism that I propose, the state doesn't have that overriding power to begin with. But I think in either case, you know, corruption has arose in many different systems and has been successfully dealt with. I think on the developmental trajectory of even countries today that we think of as being very corrupt, corruption will, will, you know, fade away as well. But you definitely need a system in which individuals act, individual are incentivized to act rationally. So if you're in a system in which cops who are corrupt are prosecuted and investigated and there's internal controls, a civilian border you and kind of an internal investigators within police departments or whatever else, there will be less corruption over time if people are punished. If you're in a system in which if you're running a firm or you're the manager of a firm and elected manager and everyone of that firm is trying for more efficiency and trying for more excess profits or whatever else at the end of the day, you know, dividends at the end of the day, then if you try to hire your nephew and he's not good at your job, you're not going to win reelection, right? So you shouldn't, I think no system should rely on a change in culture that come naturally or some sort of individual altruism. I think the systems have to be constructed in such a way that it's not rational to behave poorly. In sort of from a theoretical perspective, either a socialist or a capitalist system can have, can have either culture, but it seems like if you prioritize meritocracy, if the people that are good, whatever the good means in terms of integrity, in terms of performance, in terms of competence, it seems like that leads to a less corrupt system and it seems like capitalism, there's all kinds of flavors of capitalism, but capitalism because it does prioritize meritocracy, more often leads to less corruption. So that's not a question of political or economic systems, a question of what kind of stuff do you talk about that leads to a culture of less corruption? First of all, I think theory may be capitals and words, meritocracy, but I think in practice anyone watching this or you and me would think of some of the people we know that work the hardest and they're often, you know, working class people, working in the food service industry or whatever else, right? I think we don't have in practice, I don't think we actually live in a society that rewards people for hard work. I think we reward people for a combination of accidents of birth plus hard work. So let me push back because yes, so I agree with you, but let me push back on a subtle point because I like to draw difference between hard work and meritocracy because as a person who works really hard, like I work crazy hard, but I've also worked with a lot of people, they're just much better than me. So hard work does not equal skill, good, productive. I just want to kind of draw that distinction, but I agree with you, I don't think our society rewards directly hard work or even high skill. There's many examples that we can see that it does not do so. So we have an unequal distribution of talent, of course. So if we lived in society in which there was some level of acceptable inequality, and it's a normative kind of the question of how much we would say it's acceptable, right? And that inequality was based on this unequal distribution of talent, then I think that would be fine with me, right? That would actually be meritocracy. What I see in the US is often okay, so if you are an upper middle class or rich kid and you get a good education, you know, K through 12, out of those people, there will be some that work extra hard and go on to do incredible things or very successful. And there will be other people that do not, right? And decide for whatever reason or go down a different path. And you could say maybe among that group of the upper middle class, you know, there is meritocracy, right? But they're actually given those opportunities to make their own decisions and to fail whereas many, many other people, the vast majority of American society, I would say 60 plus percent don't really get those opportunities to make those choices to begin with. And I would aspire to the type of world that leases as a first step in which our only inequalities are based on the are unequal innate kind of distributions of talent. I guess a lot of people worry that when you have a socialist in any degree central planning or perhaps a collective of workers that it won't result in that kind of meritocracy that you're talking about, but you're saying that no, it's possible to have that kind of meritocracy. Think about it this way. The workers themselves are incentivized and are shaped by market forces too, right? They're trying to to respond to consumer needs and preferences. They're trying to expand market share. They're trying to make make money. So it requires no kind of leap into these people are going to be more altruistic or whatever else, even on purely bourgeois terms. The same way you would maybe justify competitive capitalist firms. I think you could justify this system as long as you think that people elected management can perform just as well. I think based on the experiences of cooperatives we see that they can. Then at the state level, state bureaucracies have their own sort of sets of incentives. But in most systems that already have extensive state bureaucracies, these people at high levels are appointed or elected. They're held to certain standards. At the national level, a national government wants to maintain the tax revenue that they need to pay for services. We already have incentive structures that you could say that some people might disagree with the normative thing. Why would people have to own their own needs of production, control their workplaces or whatever else? Why do we need this level of equality? Can't we just get by with our existing system, but just make things a little bit easier for capitalists to make money than everyone will benefit whatever else? That's a normative question. In my vision of socialism, there'll be plenty of multiple parties with different views and perspectives, trying to either push a steeper into more radical forms of socialism or on the other hand, to roll back to more capitalist forms of government. I think that again, you can't try to make up a perfect system and try to implement it. You have to do it as a process democratically and so on. So just philosophically, in your gut, you're more concerned about the innate equal value of human beings versus the efficiency of this wonderful mechanism that we call human civilization, up producing cool stuff. Just like a gut, if we were sitting at a bar, that's where the gut feeling you come with. Of course, your mind is open, but you want to protect the equal value of humans. So I don't want to fight the hypothetical. So I'll say equality. I am concerned with equality, but I don't think the two are necessarily always in tension. But also when you think about all the great things that human beings have produced, often I think people today just look at the end outcome. We go to the paramedics and we'll marvel at the paramedics and the human achievement that I took to make it happen. But we won't stop to think about all the suffering that went into the making of that thing. So I think we kind of lean in the opposite direction. We'll be marvel at our achievements, but we don't often think about the suffering or exploitation that went into certain human achievements. I would love a society in which we could marvel at things and not have to worry about the exploitation that was involved because there was no exploitation or oppression involved. There was just human ingenuity and creativity and collaboration. And to degree, which you made disagree to the degree there's a tension between the two at least give equal weight to the consideration of the suffering and don't just marvel at the beauty of the creations to the degree there's a tension between what what Stalin did actually to it's not just capitalist, but what Stalin did was he sacrificed whole generations because he thought that he was building something for the future for future Russians to to enjoy and for future people of the world to enjoy and actually that analogy that I just gave by the paramedics was was written by Karl Katsky the German socialist anti-stalinist critic when he was complaining about US journalists and others going to Russia in the 1930s and marveling at all the new industries. Are these people blind to the suffering behind these things that they're marveling about? Speaking of which I think you mentioned in the context of a social democracy that freedom of speech and freedom of the press or basically the freedom of people to have a voice is an important component which I think is something that caught my ear a little bit because if you think about the Soviet Union and one of the ways that the authoritarian regime was able to control it's almost part of the central planning is you have to control the message and you have to limit the freedom of the press so there's a kind of notion especially in like ideas or maybe caricatures of the ideas of cultural Marxism sometimes caricatured even further as walkism that you want to be careful with speech with speech you want the sense of speech because some speech hurts people so in some sense you want to respect the value the equality of human beings by being careful towards you say so what is there a tension there for you? I think there's no tension and part I think that it is very condescending or patronizing to assume that people can't take debate that people can't either society or individuals visually be engaged in the exchange of ideas without or even very vigorous debate without you know being broken by it just not the case I'm basically a free speech absolutist I mean I would draw the line and obviously direct incitements of violence or certain other speech like that but in general you think a lot of people would be surprised to hear that? No I mean not not people who know my work I mean more generally I think a lot of people on the right even in the center I think might have the idea that a lot of the far left wants to censor them I think some of the center left wants to censor them but I think a lot on the far left on the the Marxist or Socialist Left I think that you know a free speech is more or less the norm? Yeah where is the the imperative the sense that coming from? Is this just some small subset of the left on Twitter? Is there some philosophical idea behind certain groups that like if we're to steal man the case and which group actually has the interests of humanity in mind in wanting to censor speech? I think we might need to just take it case by case for an example by example because honestly I would have to think about a particular case but let's just say generally that a lot of American liberalism rightly sees the revolution around the civil rights and later the extension of this rights revolution for gay rights and and so on as being a very positive achievement of the last half century and I completely agree. Now for me now that we've won those rights a lot of our battle for change needs to go beyond the representational realm and needs to really reground itself in the material bread and butter struggles of ordinary people trying to survive the battle for good health care for all Americans and so on. These are my immediate demands. I think there's a segment of American liberalism that doesn't want to go in that confrontation economic direction and wants to scare it away from battles over things like universal health care and so on and really are just still caught at this battle over rights and representation and it's devolved in such a way that they feel like they need to make change the way they make change is only through interventions and culture because they don't really have the same sense of class and class struggle that agree or disagree with it. It's a very material plane. So instead you know they look at comedians who said the wrong thing or they look at all sorts of other ways to make change. It's not really making a change. It's just making them look bad and making our culture worse and I think that where that's where a lot of it comes from but I think that a lot of the left even the left that's much more into battles over you know race and lots of other stuff like real serious anti-races on the left. Of course I'm an anti-races but a lot of my work is focused on the primacy of class but even these people are very concerned about material struggles and issues and they don't really care about you know these issues they think are ephemeral kind of issues. So when you focus exclusively on language that somehow leads you to a stray like on being concerned about language without of like deeper economic inequalities and so on you just become an asshole that's on Twitter pointing out how everything how racist everyone is. So that anti-racism becomes a caricature of anti-racism. Exactly because anti-racism was really about the struggle of people for equal rights and voting. It was about the struggle for people who were trapped into you know bad neighborhoods because they were they couldn't get decent jobs and their neighborhoods were redlined or whatever else. It was really like a struggle for survival and what was the main demands like the language of this one. It was the march for for jobs and freedom. It was the slogan I am a man you know serving the kind of universal dignity of people. This is what the civil rights movement was was about and it wasn't surprised there was a lot of self-described socialists people like Bayard Russian Bayard Rustin, A Philt Randolph, Martin Luther King Jr. I mean these were people who who were Ella Baker they were socialists you know and and I think a lot of Americans agree with them with their immediate demands even though they weren't themselves a socialist but it was a very materialistic struggle and I think a lot of this has been co-opted into just some sort of vague and you know just disconcerting complaints about language or culture and so on. Martin Luther King was a socialist two degrees the a socialist I would love to learn about that. Martin Luther King I think broadly called himself at various points his life a Christian socialist or a democratic socialist especially after his speech against the Vietnam War and the Riverside Church I think that was 67. The last years of his life he became much more involved in struggles against war and also struggles for workers rights you know he was assassinated when he was at a rally at workers rights or he thought the next battle was going to be an economic battle he had this famous line where he said I don't just want to integrate the lunch counter if it means that we can't afford to order a burger while we're there you know that was the line along those lines and I think that got to his point with the civil rights struggle was part of a step of building some sort of wider movement so he and these other civil rights leaders were very much interested in working with organized labor working with you know the left as a was constructed then and building some sort of mass space for not just rights but redistribution. Yes fascinating it's fascinating which figures self identified on one part socialists Albert Einstein Albert Einstein wrote an article for the first issue of this left wing magazines actually still publishing today called Monthly Review and I think 1949 and his his his articles called by socialism I don't think it's paywalled so so people should should check it out but yeah Einstein was one huh huh so probably the central idea is the pacifist the anti-war idea for him or no honestly it's been so many years since I read it I think it was more about I think it was actually more economically focused but I would need to go back and but is a is war in general a part of the fundamental ideas the socialists are again democratic socialists are against like what's the relation between socialism and war so I think that traditionally in the socialist movement war was associated with capitalist competition and inter national competition and you can look at more were one is very much a case were different nations were competing with each other and developing quite violent rivalries that was in part based on competition and the periphery over access to markets and colonies and and whatever else so it was very easy to draw direct correlation I am opposed to to more I'm opposed to imperialism the domination of strong nations you know dominating smaller nations I wouldn't call myself a pacifist I think most socialists wouldn't call themselves pacifists because there are some struggles that are worth fighting for you know there's national liberation struggles and so on were if there's no democratic avenue for for change you know positive change has been made through through armed revolts around colonialism and whatnot but we're living in an age where hopefully you know I know neither of us have children but our our children or children children you know the future won't have to live through war and that is one thing that as countries have gotten more developed as a world has changed we've actually seen less and less war like I won't dispute pinker on on this I think it's true obviously Putin's invasion of Ukraine and you know the conflict in Ethiopia is like kind of an exception but on the on the the whole I think we're we're going in that in that direction but I think it's always been you know I've major organizing plank of socialists against war and against just kind of this sense of right-wing nationalism and national identity that often leads to war and obviously not ever on the right has embraced that a lot of libertarians are consistently anti-war as well but I think the right ideologically has been associated with war even if some advocates of capitalism have happened then there's the military industrial complex which is the financial machine of the whole thing I presume well well since a lot of that is government what's the relationship to socialism and the military industrial complex well a lot of its government contracts but it's privately produced right my company's a Glocky market Martin and things like that um you could draw a very crude materialist connection between any of these things and to to to kind of prove an ideological point uh but we could produce just as many arms and then just bury them or never fire them off or whatever whatever else obviously there are companies that have a vested interest in um heightening up tensions or saying that we need to buy a new weapon system to be prepared for a conventional war with China Russia uh meanwhile I think we all know that if there's going to be conventional war between these countries like it's gonna you know it's gonna lead to something worst and and you know no amount of advanced fighter jets is gonna make a make a difference um but I try to avoid crude or causal connections even though there are relationships like it's kind of like um the old slogan which was quite an effective slogan in the early 2000s and my my first anti-war marches when I was a teenager I definitely have shouted at the kind of no war for oil like both is like correct in that it gets to what people senses of like what's going on how it's bad but also like analytically it's kind of wanting to explain what really happened or why we ended up in the you know in the Middle East which is like a much more complex geopolitical story yeah and it is a story of geopolitics it's perhaps less a story of capitalism or socialism it's a story yeah it's a it's a geopolitical story that I think actually operates outside of the economic system of the individual nations it has to do more with honestly in part egos of leaders um and there's a international battle for resources but surely there's alternatives yeah definitely and I think that part of what being a socialist is is about dreaming in the long term about a different sort of world without it might needless divisions of people into nations with standing armors you know I'm sure we'll still have pride about war from and there's still be distinctive cultural features and so on about where we're from um we definitely would at least for the foreseeable future be divided into um places as like administrative units but the idea that there should be a Mexican army and an American army and a Russian army and a Ukrainian army is just on the face of it I think the long run will be seen as ridiculous just like we see it as ridiculous today looking back at the idea that you know um a um lord from London would you know be engaged in civil strife with the lord from like Liverpool and a bunch of peasants will die would die you know just kind of on the face of it just seems kind of ridiculous these different places would have their own banners and lords and armies I think in the long run you might have to zoom out a thousand years from the long run people will say the same about nation states and standing armies and battles over you know specks of dirt that mean nothing in a cosmic sense yeah no for sure aliens would laugh at us or humans that go far beyond earth and look at the history well most of the history will be forgotten because if humans successfully expand onto the universe just the scale of civilization grows so fast that the the bickering of the first few thousand years of human history will be seem insignificant there's a very marxless idea that I both appreciate in one way but on the other hand it's kind of scary which is that you know um human history is only now beginning before we're in prehistory yeah but in the future like will be in kind of real history um I you know I think that that a lot of really important history has already happened and and um and I think posterity will will remember and I think that it will be easier to sign um you know certain people the role of like villains the people um you know not to engage in the contentious topic off topic of Ukraine or whatever else but the idea that you know one government or bad would launch a you know more to recover you know um or to take you know several hundred square miles of territory and tens of thousands of people die I think seems absurd to us many people today luckily but it would not have seemed to serve 56 years ago it would have just been a normal thing right these kind of territorial disputes and so on and I think you know projecting the future I think within our lifetimes we'll live to see um that kind of conflict be eradicated and in part you could say that like why I think it's because of popular pressure and organization so you could say kind of the pro worker socialist organizing part of it making it less normal if you're a capitalist you could say uh well markets are more interlinked so war is even more rational um I don't really have a firm answer or whatever it is you know I think it's a good thing you mentioned Marx's view of history it's kind of interesting to just briefly talk about what do you think of it what do you think of this um Marx's view of how the different systems evolve from the perspective of class struggles we were talking about well I fundamentally I'm a Marxist I fundamentally believe in in the broad contours of of historical materialism but I think we should be clear of what Marxist theory tells us and what it doesn't tell us you know I think Marxist theory tells us pertinent things about how societies evolve about how the distributional resources work in any given society um who owns who doesn't how um the conflict distributional conflicts and so on I think Marxism can tell us a lot how surplus is distributed exactly yeah exactly what it can tell us is like um as a friend put it like the sex appeal of blue jeans or whatever else you know that that's beyond what Marxism is meant to do what economic system can tell us about the sex appeal of blue jeans no economic system but socialism in the Soviet sense when it was turned into you know the Soviet style dialectical materialism was meant to tell us everything from um you know explain genetics and agriculture whatever else um in a very disastrous way you know so I definitely don't believe in the application of these these ideas in an extremely wide way and also I'm a Marxist because it's a framework that helps me understand pertinent facts about the world um if at some point I no longer think so think the framework is doing that I will not be a Marxist but I'm a socialist on normative grounds because I have certain beliefs about the quality of people because I I believe in we should have a society with liberty with equality with fraternity and that I hope I'll always be a socialist until the day I die but it's kind of a very unscientific or unserious thing to say this is my framework from beginning to end you know for the rest of my life but from a perspective history should say that so Marx says that you go through societies go through different stages could be crudely summarizes primitive communism imperialism maybe slave society feudalism defined by marketellism then capitalism and socialism and finally stateless communism communism am I then then miss something that I mean I think that was that was close enough I mean I think that's definitely uh true of of Marxist theory that the contradictions of capitalism the fact that it has brought together all these workers uh all these materials or whatever else and it's now allowing us to socially create wealth on a mass scale but that wealth is that process is being privately uh directed and also the surplus is being privately kind of appropriated um is a contradiction and that would lead to some sort of rebellion or revolution or change and we'll have and eventually this contradiction would be a federal production too so we would have to move uh into socialist uh society but actually just the backtrack so in terms of the contradiction so it starts when we're in a village hunter gatherers that's what you call primitive communism where everyone is kind of equal it's kind of a collective right all right maybe it's just just let me hold on a second and then inequality's form of different flavor so that's what imperialism is this one dude rises to the top and has some control of different flavor that's what feudalism with when you have one dude at the top and you have merchants doing some trading and so on and then at least the capitalism when you have private ownership of companies and they do some they they result in some kind of class inequality and eventually that results in a revolution that says no that's this inequality's not okay it's not natural it doesn't respect the value of human beings and therefore it goes to socialism where there is under Marx's view I guess some role for the state state is doing some redistribution and then the pure communism at the end is when it's uh you know like it's a collective where there's no state centralized power so is this what's part of that is wrong no I think and broadly the Marxist theory of history is about different types different modes of of of production that existed various times um based on material um condition so in the early times in this this theory um there was not much surplus being generated right and there was generally egalitarian societies uh then um as we became agricultural as society developed there was more surplus being produced uh then there was a group of people the ruling classes of their their age that controlled and distributed that that controlled that divisional labor and appropriated more of the surplus for themselves and they weren't involved in productive labor in the early print of society everybody's involved in productive labor later on you had casts of priests who did nothing but kind of prey and write and and kind of lecture people day right and you had um kings and rulers and bureaucrats and traders and so on you have a more complex division of labor but also more inequity um driving out of that um capitalism was a revolutionary system because it took away one it made us tremendously more productive right it expanded production beyond our wildest imaginations but it also no longer bound uh workers to their Lord or manner or whatever else they were now free to move free to engage in contracts with employers and and and so on um but even though workers are now producing all this tremendous wealth and even though productive forces had been matured in such a way uh they were ultimately taken away from all the wealth they were created they got some of it back they were in wealthy societies but they were all there collectively together producing this wealth and that was a potent force so Marx theorized that would lead to uh revolution or change in a in a socialist direction i think in fact what we saw was that yes workers are dependent on on capitalist are dependent on workers but the dependency is um obviously symmetrical in the sense that workers are also dependent on capitalist but in fact it's an asymmetrical dependency and that ordinary workers need their jobs more than capitalist need the contribution of individual workers so it became kind of a collective action problem where you would need the massive workers to get together decide to change things but also people would be afraid because they'd be dependent on their jobs for their livelihood and so on so revolution became a lot harder than people thought especially in democratic countries where workers had certain outlets and certain powers and rights and responsibility you know it's no surprise that where you did have socialist revolutions they were in places like the third world post-colonial states trying to merge out of colonialism they were in places like in a china and russia autocratic countries and never in an advanced capitalist country now in marx's theory of history even as interpreted by a lot of smart marx's like g.a. Cohen and others um there is a certain inevitability to socialism after capitalism the way that I would put it myself is I kind of have a more as you could say like conti and view of it like I think socialism is something that ought to happen but it's not something that necessarily will happen and will need to organize and persuade and also potentially again the key part of any social system that's democratic is you have to allow for the possibility of a democratic revision to a different sort of system so I'd be more than happy in my vision of socialism for there to be capitalist parties um getting you know in my hopefully three four or five percent of vote maybe a lot more in the same way that in the u.s. or a public we could right now have a monarchy party no one's going to support a monarchy party in the in the u.s. and serious um numbers although that's gaining popularity in europe or elsewhere no in uh isn't there in the anarchist tradition isn't there aren't they saying that one of the ways you could have a leader's in monarchy because they're more directly responsible to the citizens if you have a leader it's healthier to have a monarch anyway and not yeah yeah yeah I've heard this stated in the left wing anarchist traditions like anarchist in the clesson or whatever I was like that their slogan is kind of no kings no gods no masters or whatever so no bosses so they they definitely would not agree with that but I'm you know not familiar enough anarchism is runs a gamut from left to right and interesting I'll I'll have to ask about I'll have to ask about that but yeah okay so you're you're not you don't believe Marx's theory of history in the sense that it everything every stage is a natural consequence of every other stage of course he would predict that somebody like you must exist in order for the for those stages to go from one to the next because you might because you have to believe ought in order for action to be taken to inspire the populace to take action so two things one is I do broadly believe in Marx's theory of history because it just explaining how productive forces develop in the relations of production in any given system I guess there's a theory of transition from capitalism to socialism that Marx didn't really spell out but it was kind of implied they would it would naturally happen and Marx was living in an era of tremendous up people you know Marx himself actually saw when he was living in London in the 1870s the Paris commune when workers took over for just a few months but they took over the producers of Paris took over the city basically created their own government their own system and so on so he was living through an era of up people and angles especially oversaw was the mentor to all these rising um socialist parties so he was very close closely collaborating with socialist and places like Britain and Germany when they were drafting their first programs for the social democratic party so it felt like this was going to happen and felt like this rise in working class would take power but I think the stability of the system was underestimated it's easy to see the contradictions in the system but can you see its mechanisms of stability the way in which mass collective action or revolutions more the exception or the the norm could you have imagined if your Marx not only how much wealth the system would produce over time which I think he could have imagined but also developments like the welfare state and mass democracy and universal suffrage which might have changed how workers relate to the system or operate within it so I think it's just a transition part that I think wasn't spelled out properly but I think in either case as socialist we can assume that history is working in our favor we just need to kind of hold out and wait for the inevitable revolution we have to convince people of both one the struggle for day-to-day reforms and why it's important to be politically organized why it's important to be a member of a union or to advocate for things like a universal health care or whatever else try to kind of build the cohesion and sense of self of the the class then ultimately for the desirability once we accomplish it once we build social democracy have going beyond social democracy which is of course the challenge now I don't think it requires leadership from the outside I think there are plenty of organic leaders that have emerged from the working class that have advocated for for socialism from the working class and if you look at the class composition during the glory days of the European socialist parties I mean this was very much a working class parties and organizations it's only been the last like 30 years that it's been taken over by professionals and you know not on quintidentally you know they have accomplished in a little when those those 30 years so that's the practical and the pragmatic and we actually jump to the to the at the horizon as you mentioned as a social democratic you focus on the policies today but you also have a vision and dream of a future and so Marx did as well so the perfect communism at the end can you can you describe that world also is there almost that world that's that has elements of anarchism so again like I said there's Michael Malice next door so like a narco communism I don't even know if I'm using that term correctly but basically no central control can you describe what that world looks like yeah I think the traditional socialist vision of kind of if you want to call it full communism would be very similar to the anarchist vision of a world without coercion mass abundance and so on I myself don't share that vision I believe that we will always need to have a state in some form as a way to one even just mediate difference I think traditionally a lot of Marxists have thought that after you remove the primary contradiction quote unquote of class that the other all other political questions would be resolved and I think that's a lot behind a lot of the thinking of we're gonna have a full communism after politics I don't think there will be an after politics I think for one thing let's say I'll give you another northeastern example let's say me and you are trying to with different groups of people we're trying to figure out how to build a crossing of the Hudson River and for various reasons you and the people around you want to build a bridge mean the people around me need want to build a tunnel that's a question that you will probably need a mediation for right you'll need one it's a big project so there'll be a very complex division labor and so on but even beyond that just that politically you will need the state to mediate the difference you'll need to have a vote have a vote the people trust have institutions of people trust and so on to make a decision society is never going to go beyond that decision making you don't think it's possible outside the state to create stable voting mechanisms or as human nature can always seep into that I just wonder why we would have to if the state is democratic and responsive the state is an authoritarian so might not be called a state but it would function as a state right but why not just call it a state but in other words like if you don't have something like that then don't you have a greater risk of tyranny or tyrant emerging in the vacuum so I think people's fear of the state is what would happen to the state had too much power and I think that's legitimate fear that's what we have democratic kind of checks on state power and and and certain darren to use and of freedom and so on but yeah I guess I just wonder I'm more afraid of the vacuum and not having a democratic responsive state and and what the world would turn into and also I'm just not a utopian thinker that makes sense like I must I like to think that I'm an egalitarian thinker I'm a socialist but my mind just goes to like you know I can see a vision of the future that I would like like 50 60 years for now um maybe there's some sort of future of superabondons and automation and there's some sort of techno utopian future we don't want some of those things that that would exist in my um you know five minutes for now vision of socialism but I just don't see it and in general I'm kind of weary of visions of change that seem like they're not built off little thing pieces that we have now and not built up history and experience and whatever else like I don't want a year or zero I don't even like the term prehistory because I think there's a lot in history that I want you know I want I want Shakespeare under socialism you know I want I want a lot of things that that I think we should be grateful for um there's a part of tradition that I think that exists that's hierarchical and exploitative and whatever else but there's another part of tradition that's our sense of place and belonging and our connection with the past and hopefully the the future and I want to keep that yeah so you're worried about revolution or otherwise the vacuum being created and you're worried about the the things that might fill that vacuum so the anarchists often worry about the the same mechanism of the state that controls voting or keeps voting robust and resilient and stable the same mechanism also having a monopoly on violence and so that's the tension so they're very they get very nervous about a central place having a monopoly on violence whereas if there is going to be a place within a monopoly on violence let's just say we temporarily take that for granted should it not be a place with a skilled elected accountable transparent civil service with a democratic mandate and so on yeah yeah yeah well put uh speaking of AI just just to go on that tangent do you think it's possible to have a future world is the 50 years 50 honey years where AI there's an AI sort of central planning sort of the um we remove some of the human elements that I think get us into a lot of trouble like you could you can take a perspective on the Soviet Union then the flaws of the system there have less to do with the different ideologies more to do the humans and the vacuums and how humans fill vacuums and the corrupting nature of power and so on if we have AI that it's that's more data driven and it's not susceptible to the human elements is that possible to imagine such a world almost like a from a sci-fi perspective maybe in the future you can imagine certain calculation problems that arose during central planning solve through advanced computing but I would say that there's another whole set of problems with the system that were incentive problems and I'm not sure how that advance computing would solve the incentive problems of how do you get people to actually produce things that other people want kind of that informational question and how do you communicate without endless meetings or someone reading a brain what do you actually want um so so there's there's that kind of informational question but then there's the incentive of you know how do you get people to work efficiently at work and how do you get firms to um to use their resources that they're getting more more efficiently and I think solving the calculation problem solves some of these questions but not all of them but you know I that that's kind of a who knows but if you're a vision of the future requires some sort of leap into technological unknown that's very hard to advocate for it's exciting to consider the possibility of technology empowering a better reallocation of resources if if you care about of kind of the innate value of human beings and think of the mechanism of reallocation resource good way to empower that uh equality that it's nice to remove the human element from that like if you work really hard and you're really good at your job it's nice to be really data driven in allocating more resources to you so kind of like I kind of think that the agency part requires human beings and conscious human activity so I think if you have a sort of planning system that works um and let's say the technology is there for it to work I would want it to be democratic planning in such a way there's a human element there is some debate and deliberation society and also even in my vision of socialism with the state sector and state investments and so on I want there to be more public discussion and debate about certain things so it's not just left to technocrats because you don't want to live in society where you're you just find out the next day that there's some massive infrastructure project that you haven't you know how to chance to think about or debate or feel like you're participating in you know and and debate is not just facts and logic that's that's why if the whole universe was about facts and logic computers could do a better job of that there's something about humans debating each other they go goes into the difficult gray areas of of what it means to be human or what it means to have a life that's worth living um that requires humanity um and I'm also worried about while I'm excited by the possibility of AI controlling everything have joking but the reason I'm really terrified of that is because usually there's a possibility of a human taking control of that system so you now start to get the same kind of authoritarian thing well I am a human I'm smart enough to be able to control this AI system and I will do based on what this AI system says uh what's good for you is kind of like talking down to people and then use that AI system to know have the same kind of thing as hall and mor in 1930s and also our preferences might change so an AI system might say the goal of humanity is to just increase infinitely efficiency or or increase output whereas we might collectively decide that you know we we have enough and we want to you know to have a trade off right and I think that you know we need a system that allows for people to make certain trade-offs and have more of this uh leisure that I've been learning about from you this is very interesting concept leisure we're gonna have to how do you spell that all right so if we can step into the practical we're talking about historical and philosophical into the practical of today what are some of the exciting policies that represent democratic socialism today modern socialism uh I think you mentioned some of them you know Medicare for all or universal healthcare um something you haven't mentioned is tuition free college increasing minimum wage maybe stronger unions like we talked about what are some ideas here what what are some ideas there's especially policies especially exciting to well I think that hours reduction has always been an important demand for socialists um so I mean it's been a reality in certain countries like France and in recent uh decades where part of the logic is if you have a bunch of people working for 40 plus hours a week and you also have some unemployed people who would like more employment then it's not as there's some game you could reduce hours to 35 hours and still maintain the same output by employing more people to kind of fill the slack in in hours so one I think it's a solid eristic thing and working class move been screen unemployed and employed workers I also think that um yeah it gives people more time so Marx was a big advocate in his day of um a 10 hour um a bill in in in in the UK that would have reduced the hours of of working time and reduced child or eliminated or reduced child labor and and other things as well and part of it was this is a radical demand because it's reducing the sphere as you saw out of exploitation so it's putting limits on on how much time the capitals can take from ordinary workers and how much freedom they would they would have um with healthcare one I just think it's a like a government healthcare system you know you could tell me that you don't want it in the US but you can't tell me it doesn't work because we've seen it work and every other major industrial system in different forms so what is that usually involved what is universal healthcare involved so there's different varieties in the UK for instance they have a national health service in which uh medical personnel and hospitals are uh run directly by the state it's almost like a mini-soviet system to be honest but just for healthcare and it works pretty well just for healthcare um and I think it's it's one example of the way in which you could actually take the market so I give you a vision of socialism that involves a lot of market but I think there's certain spheres where you could remove the market from and still have um an efficient system um in part because you know this is a area in which uh we people don't have obviously for cosmetic procedures whatever they have preferences but for most routine things that people do in healthcare they just need to see a doctor you know they need to get diagnosed um some of these systems have had trouble with weightless for specialists or whatever that's more of like an allocation problem of if you want more specialists you pay specialists more like this is this problem that could be solved by like through the mechanisms of a planning and and government run healthcare so that's that's kind of the most left wing that you could get is what the system the United Kingdom um beyond that you have a system like medical for all where you say all right most of the doctors besides for public hospitals that already exist um are going to be privately employed by hospitals the hospitals are going to be private but um instead of having all these different insurance carriers we're just going to have one national insurance carrier that we're all going to pay into that national insurance carrier is going to negotiate um the price of healthcare with doctors a price of um of drugs with pharmaceutical companies and so on to hopefully reduce um uh prices and to implement a different little bit of planning into into the system because if there's only one you know uh big national insurance company um that that company has a lot of weight and power but you know you could still visit your same doctor and um there's still some uh it's not as radical of a of a shift in that direction and that's a dominant demand of Bernie Sanders and the left right now um there's 30 plus million people in the US would be insured that currently aren't insured if we move to this system there's a lot of other people that are under insured or worried about how to pay co-pays or or premiums involved i think it would be a net benefit for the vast majority of the US um population even if it was offset with certain taxes because we spend a lot of money out of pocket with with health insurance and it's a demand also that's like widely popular so for me so almost like if you're trying to build support for um something like socialism we were talking this loft division of socialism after capitalism or what worker um ownership the means of production would look like in practice and and so on and by the way you're one of the few interviewers who ever asked me any the the details so it's it's good that i had a i've been thinking of a rough sketched my head for the last you know whatever 16 years i've been a socialist but but we have to start in the hair now and if you can't convince people the the state could play a bigger role in their health insurance and you can convince americans and all host of other sectors that they should be living in something closer to social democracy how are you going to convince those people that they should be worker ownership of the means of production that it's kind of a ridiculous like leap um if if you don't have the credibility as the group of people organizing for universal health care organizing for a $15 bin of wage enable to get the goods and also in practice as we fight for these reforms ordinary people will have a better sense at least my my hope is of what it means to be involved with politics and what politics can do for their lives it's positive because right now when we talk about politics it often just seems that we're talking about um like a very glib cultural conflict removed from the things that are important in our lives whereas in truth i think politics can be a tool for us to make our lives better yeah and there's like deep ideas here where in some sense universal health care and worker collectives are not so radically different that there's just uh there's philosophical ideas to explore and except and also from my perspective at least maybe i'm wrong on this but it seems like with a lot of things at the core of politics the right answer from an alien perspective is not clear like everybody's very certain to what's the right answer everyone's certainly universal health care is terrible or in the case of universal health care majority people think it's a good idea but i don't think anyone knows because i think that depends on cultural history on the on the particular dynamics of the country of a political system on the dynamics of the economic system in this country of the changing world the 21st century is different than the 20th century maybe the failures of communism of the 20th century will not be repeated in the 21st century or the flip side of that maybe capitalism will actually truly flourish or with the help of automation in the 21st century i don't think anyone knows so like you're people like you are basically saying like arguing for ideas and we'll have to explore those ideas together um why do you think if universal health care is popular why don't we have universal health care in the United States well democracy is a great thing political democracy is wonderful it came from the struggles of ordinary people to expand suffrage and so on but the economic sphere and trench power in the economic sphere bleeds into our political democracy so i think there's a lot of people with the vested interest in not having universal health care um there's a large industries with the vested interest in not having universal health care uh they uh pay for ads pay lobbyists they influence government and they have made it very difficult so you can't get universal health care um done without the bill even if you pass something you're trying to make a change like obama care was supposed to have a public option everybody's been running on a public option the democratic party for 12 13 years why don't we have a public option um people know that if people have the choice uh bombing into government plan they might just keep that might be the slow road to really having universal um health care so i think a lot of it's opposition do you like that idea the public option maybe you can like because isn't there complexities like pre-existing conditions so isn't a public option mean you can not have any insurance until you get the trouble and then you can if it covers pre-existing conditions just start paying for insurance then therefore young people don't pay for insurance isn't it better to go fall in i don't support a public option in part because i think we allow politicians to just say hey i support a public option well it's just kind of a way to signal your support for universal health care but give us nothing and i think that's what we saw um under with Biden a lot of other politicians that have supported uh public option i think in practice if a public option is defined in such a way that it just means you you um you know by default can just opt in to a public plan and let's say hypothetically you don't even have to pay for it then it's just a backdoor to universal health care really quickly because i think the vast majority of people who aren't currently covered and also a lot of employers to be honest would probably drop their private coverage that they knew their employees can just get a public option and maybe would only provide supplemental insurance or whatever else um but i think the broad overarching point of all these demands is to say that socialist need to be really connected to the day-to-day struggles of people to just improve their lives so if you're feeling like you're paying four hundred five hundred dollars on their bomb of care market for health insurance and that's hampering your ability to do what you want to do in your life then maybe you would support a candidate who's for universal health care if you feel like you're um struggling to uh find work that you could afford to pay your rent with or whatever else maybe you'll support a candidate committed to um all sorts of mechanisms to reduce housing prices or increase your power as a as a tenant um and you know whatever else so i think it's like these day-to-day concerns need to be connected to the more abstract and loft division of change otherwise our politics just becomes like this this fantasy world thing that's that's you know nice ideas to think about or debate but but really won't make much of a difference in people's lives what do you think about free college should college be free so i would say free college is not at the top of my list of priorities but it definitely should be free in my vision of a just um just society what is the your top is just to clarify is it is the universal health care up there yeah universal health care is probably more higher in my priorities than than free college i think right now the way our system is built when someone goes to college they're given credentials they're given to create a carry with them for the rest of their life it gives them a chance to join kind of a uh privileged part of the labor market right it's not a zero-sum game i don't want college educated people to think that um non-college educated people are their enemies and vice versa because a lot of them are just ordinary working the last people trying to survive and they're in different areas or in different sectors um you know some of them are in nursing sectors where they need a college degree and and so on but if you just make college tuition free what you don't also make uh trade skills and other things um uh to wish uh free for someone to learn how to become a nutrition or a plumber or whatever else then to some degree you're privileging one sector of the labor market over another um so i would advocate just if you're gonna make something like that free you just have to make sure you're doing any egalitarian way and that one the options the routes to college are more more equal so um you know there's more investment in k-12 education so that more kids in rough neighborhoods have the chance to go to college and for those that choose the trade route from from any any part of the country that they're um given the skills and resources for vocational um you know trainings and that those are also free and it just feels like in terms of order of operation i would just start with k-12 education improving it and and whatever else uh then college after but i'm not opposed to it so does that improving k-12 education does that mean investing more into it is that if simple as just increasing the amount of money that's invested in the in public education in general when it comes to the public sector or any any sphere that you're investing in uh obviously it's not just as simple as throwing money at a problem i do think we have a lot of schools that are um underfunded but we have other schools that are adequately funded but the conditions in which those schools are like the neighborhoods are in and and what's going on society um the problems are so deep that it's impossible for just education to solve everything and i think especially a lot of liberal think that education should be the panacea invest in education you'll help people if kids are living in poverty if they go into school hungry or whatever else like education's not gonna give them everything they need to to succeed so sometimes we i think put too much weight on on education and of course you can define education more broadly which is like the care of the flourishing of the young mind whatever that is and i would have to call it early yeah a lot of it starts with so near city at least we do have um universal pre-k so for mage three onward you you're the option for that i mean it's important for kids socialization you know their parents are now able to you know know that they could go to work or do something else and have their you know have the kids taking care of um there's a lot of measures like that that we could do to to equalize things and again for libertarians in the audience some of this stuff is scary because it's obviously more state involved state involvement pre-k state so ready to be very involved in k-12 more investment to state institutions like um are our state universities and in college but for me it's not a question of state versus non-state it's a question of um you know good outcomes for for people and it just happens to be that for working class people um having the collective power to elect representatives that will build a broader safety net is in their interest for upper-medal class people for others they could afford to pay for their own provisioning either directly or through like obama care like schemes where you just get a subsidy and you pay the rest yourself and whatever this is for really the bottom 40 percent plus of the population they really don't have any options so they prioritize other things and they end up with with some sort of injury or health problem or whatever else and it's it's bad for everyone in society but it's especially bad for the people at the bottom of the the labor market so i saw various estimates for socialist programs like social security expansion free college uh Medicare for all will cost upwards of forty trillion dollars over 10 years for zero okay they give argue with those numbers and so on but so there's a cost there's a taxpayer cost what are given the weight of that cost uh can you still make the case with these programs and then can you try to make the case against them that the cost is too high so i will not argue with you on the numbers because you just read random numbers i do think universal health care if done right can be basically cost neutral i think it's an exception because we spend a tremendous amount of money on on on health care a huge percentage or a GDP so i think it could be done in a way this close to cost neutral so actually can you argue on the numbers without arguing on the numbers so you're saying just your gut says that there's a lot of depending on how these programs are done there's a lot of variance in how much it will actually cost there's a lot of bureaucracy and billing right now in our health care sector for example there would be eliminated um there's a lot of costs that are spiraling upward of provider costs from both doctors hospitals but also pharmaceuticals to drug costs that insurance companies shoulder because the their market share is too fragmented to really negotiate hard um medicare could sometimes negotiate better rates but a medicare for all would negotiate even better rates so i think there's a cost viral that we can adjust with more government um involvement and there's a reason why we spend a bigger share of a GDP on health care than other places but but let me just accept the broad premise that social programs cost money um um now i think that that one for ordinary people most of them that trade off of even hypothetically if if taxes on um lower middle class and working last people in certain cases go up that trade off would still be in their benefit because they're the ones who currently who would be consuming more of those goods and also our tax system and what not is progressive so the the rich will pay pay more the majority will consume um more of them um also i think a lot of these programs are the bedrock of a healthy society so one reason for example that we have um so much crime and violence in the US there's lots of you know cultural and other um causes with our level of gun ownership american history and and so on but one one really important factor is just the level of poverty and inequality in the US compared to other other countries that combined with guns and and other factors means so we live in more violent unequal societies if you know a european would be shocked by the fact that in even some of our our nicest areas and our and cities and elsewhere because there's not a world violence too um it's just normal to have gun violence it's normal to have uh drug-related violence you know the we have what like four or five hundred people some years and like Baltimore a guy city of under a million getting getting killed um these are all recipes for a society in which uh one the public sphere is is drunk like crazy because you're not going to go wander out for an evening stroll in a park if you live in a dangerous area or whatever else like the the rot goes very deep and a welfare state is one way to to live in a better society for everyone um there's been plenty of of studies uh there's one book called the spirit level on um on inequality that was quite popular the just notes that inequality is really terrible for the psyches um of the rich too not just for for the poor so i think uh spending some more money living in more just society is doable there's different ways to to address certain costs um spirals one reason why our welfare states are getting more and more expensive is in part just because our population is is aging but many the same people who say we can't afford um more in our welfare states because um you know we're already spending so much of social security and all these other entitlements are the same people also for one you know closing borders so immigrants can come in uh to to help build the economy and to fill gaps in the economy and also who aren't for things that'll make it easier to have kids you know i'm uh 33 years old i have a lot of friends um who have been putting them off having kids until they say about x amount of dollars even though they have someone they could you know uh raise raise children with um because they can't afford the cost of child care they can with they can't you know their job probably won't get them more than four six weeks of of um family leave or or whatever else like this is not the case in other other countries so i i think there's all sorts of benefits from having a bigger uh welfare state but yes there are costs and there are going to be certain tradeoffs it's not a magical thing where you could just you know have everything with that tradeoffs so in a progressive tech system is there to to push back on the costs here is there a point at which taxing the rich uh it's kind of productive in the long term so in the short term there might be a net benefit of increasing taxes um because the programs the middle class the lower middle class gets is more beneficial so is there is there a negative side to taxing the rich in theory yes of course so one would be um if you tax a rich so much the a change their consumption patterns and that has negative impacts and economy as a whole like you like you would have to kind of really model it out but there would be a certain point in which the consumption changes might have net detrimental effects um i think that's more unlikely and the more likely the scenario is you tax corporations and and other um uh wealthy you know people in society to the point that um they have potentially less money for productive investment because you're in a capital society so you're relying on capitalists to invest so you kind of don't want to be in the worst of both worlds where you've gone too far for capitalism but not far enough for socialism um in my vision of course of socialism that's one reason why we'd have to take the investment function away from capitalist there there has to be if you're gonna make it so hard for them that they can't invest or they can't employ labor the way they're employing now you have to create another mechanism for supply to be created and that's why that's the transition point yeah um what about longer term de-incentivizing young people that are dreaming of becoming entrepreneurs and realizing that there's a huge tax on being wealthy so if you take these big risks which is what's required to be an entrepreneur and you are lucky enough to succeed and good enough to succeed that the government will take most of your money away I think realistically that's not a distance and for most people um first of all we already have progressive taxation system uh the government does take take a bunch of the money away and people are still striving to become rich a lot of what people want when they dream of success is they want accolades they want respect and of course they want some more wealth wealth they consume blood sugar goods with or whatever else but at a certain point it becomes better for the state to to tax and either redistribute directly or through social programs or redirect that money through tax credits and another ways to shape investment towards productive investment you know we don't want a society in which a bunch of rich people fly around in helicopters going from club to club while the productive economy um kind of does nothing right at that point I think a lot of ordinary rich people might prefer the government to come in to tax them and to try to spur investment in certain productive um sectors so it really just just depends but I honestly believe that that most people don't necessarily want to be rich for the sake of being rich they want to be successful and there's many different dynamics for that and um accolades and social respect is is an important one of them it's also why people who just become filthy rich often the first thing they do is start out philanthropic trust and try to give away their money because they want the social respect and accolades and whatever else they don't want just their money on that topic so a little bit of a tangent there's a lot of folks in the in the in the left community uh far left community socialist community that I think are at the source of a kind of derision towards the b-word the billionaires does it bother you or do you think that's in part justified a kind of uh using the word billionaire as a dirty word I think it's perfectly justified that it's a populous shorthand right um so obviously when I talk about inequality I often talk about power dynamics right between workers and bosses and and so on uh billionaires just the 99 1% version of it is just a populous shorthand to just explain the fact that uh there's um a lot of people who have accumulated obscene wealth um these people aren't in my mind parasites you know in the in the kind of very very old school um socialist rhetoric and that of course um capitalist provide employment take entrepreneurs come up with new ideas sometimes themselves sometimes directly manage uh work and whatever whatever else um but they exert so much power over the lives of not just their workers with society as a whole uh taking away some of their wealth and power is a way to just empower others um and again uh these things have policy trade-offs if you if you just snap your fingers and say um Elon Musk you're now um all your wealth is gone you're now you know on food stamps or whatever else in that kind of arbitrary way you'd be a total totally disincentivized people from trusting the rules of the game as they've been set up in a capitalist society and I think that would have negative consequences for workers but saying that hey this person has too much power and too much wealth and has too much ability to dictate things about the lives of others I think it's just simply a fact and um I think it's true in the cases of people who are good people and and have risen to this position and as true in the cases of people who are maybe not so good people and who have risen to these these positions so I agree with you in part but I have to push back here so one of the problems I see is using billionaires a shorthand to talk about power inequality and wealth inequality often dismisses the fact that some of these folks are some of the best members of our society so outside of the the in however the system has created inequalities a young person today should dream to build cool stuff not for the wealth not for the power of the fame but to be part of building cool stuff now there's a lot of examples of billionaires that have gotten there in shady ways and so on and you can point that out but in the same way we celebrate great artists and great athletes and great literary icons and sort of writers and poets and musicians and uh engineers and scientists we should sell up we should sort of separate the the human creator from the wealth that the system has given them that that that's what I worry about is like in our system some of the greatest humans are the ones that have become rich and so we sometimes mix up the if you want to criticize the wealth we sometimes criticize the human and the creator while that should actually be the person we aspire to be so you know I would agree with that um Lebron James if he's not already in his lifetime will be a billionaire um and he got his money largely through just being an incredible athlete excelling in his field more than anyone's you know Sassford Michael Jordan I think he's my number two he might be number one let's see um yeah yeah I'm willing to keep keeping open mind about the Lebron versus Jordan conversation but um you know he got that through his merit and he's been rewarded and a part he's getting rewarded because he's created vast amounts of wealth beyond what he's getting this is just this share you know it's the salary cap league uh whenever he's doing an endorsement obviously that company is is thinking that he's worth more than what they're paying him for that that endorsement and so on and to the extent with um Elon Musk people see innovation and they see someone who will put himself out there would sometimes crazy ideas because he's trying to think about the future and trying to just push things forward instead of just sitting on whatever money he has now and just investing it earning you know six percent you know for uh return for the rest of his life you know I think that that's that's a positive thing uh but I think it it doesn't get to the broader policy question when people in bulk billionaires they're invoking the specter of inequality and power um it it's not normally the rhetoric that I use because I propose and I use more traditional socialist rhetoric and and terms but I think it gets it something real so often with these sorts of shorthands we use in politics um there are um you know they're imperfect but they speak to to a real a real thing yeah and they they feed a little bit of fun that folks like AOC and Elon have with each other it creates it feeds it inspires it serves as a catalyst for uh productive discourse okay speaking of which you said you're a fan of Bernie Sanders uh would you classify yourself as a Bernie bro what's the technical definition of Bernie is that it's a subset no no no I'm sorry you're a sophisticated philosopher uh writer uh economic and political thinker of course you would not call yourself a Bernie bro I'm a comment myself a Bernie crowd that's because it was made up by liberal journalist to smear Bernie and his supporters well that's hilarious during the 2016 um campaign uh even though disproportionately his supporters were like young women in their 20s you know I'm but whatever I think I arrived for Bernie there's worse things than world being called a bro so that's fine what uh what do you like about Bernie Sanders and to what degree does he represent ideas of socialism to what degree does he represent the more traditional sort of liberal ideas I love Bernie uh most of all I like his clarity he's by far the best communicator we have on the left he speaks with a moral force he's relatable um and he's taken a lot of socialist rhetoric from academia and brought it down to its core in a way that's comprehensible for ordinary people and speaks to their daily lives so when Bernie does a speech people can finish his lines because they know what he's gonna say you know they know what points he's gonna hit because socialism in my mind should not be a complicated thing now when we get to more abstract discussions about what a future system would look like when we get to the policy trade-offs today I think we need to put on a different hat we shouldn't brace um all sorts of nuance and contradiction and complication when it comes to the core moral and ethical appeal I think Bernie grasped that and how to communicate it now Bernie Sanders was politicized a very long time ago um I actually once told him I've only met him a few times but one time I took a joke that um in his in his book he mentioned that one politicizing moment in his life was when the Brooklyn Dodgers left town and he was devastated because he was a Dodgers fan you know from Brooklyn and I said this is like 2020 campaign this may be 2019 I said Bernie you're right president you did not need to keep reminding people your age yeah um but um you know he he was politicized through the young people social sleek which was an old offshoot of the norm Thomas socialist party of America I said very old school socialist tradition then he was engaged in labor struggles in the 60s um he was engaged in the civil rights movement so he came from this old left generation that I think just had a more plain spoken more rooted way of understanding change and socialism it wasn't in my mind polluted by academia and by some the the turn towards issues of culture and yeah and I access to focus on representation or whatever else it was rooted it was really rooted in something economic in a way then obviously he had all his ideas and he was also a product to the left and that he went to Vermont he kind of did the back to the land thing he was basically like a not quite a hippie and an affect but he was out there trying to farm whatever and you know cold as hell northern Vermont and then he decided to to do politics do electoral politics and he failed for a long time he did third party politics he kept losing races I eventually he became by savvy and luck and things he learned the mayor of Burlington, Vermont and he just kept with the same message and my my book I talk about um I quote I think a Bernie speech from the 1970s one of his early campaigns and I compared it to a Bernie speech um during his 2016 campaign it was virtually identical millionaires was swap with millionaires and billionaires speaking of billionaires which is which is beautiful you know it's it's it's I think there's there's something you know great to what he offered American politics and also all around the world there's a socialist poll in politics whether you agree with it or not and all these countries in Europe and any any rich country Japan and so on and the US really didn't have that the further select you could go was like you know Chris Hayes and MSNBC or whatever um I'm very glad that there's there's a social support and I think we have Bernie to to thank for it um to the extent that a lot of you know self-described socialists don't think Bernie is a real socialist it's in part because he stays grounded in people's day-to-day lives and struggles I don't think he thinks often the way that that I do and other people more disconnected or step-on-move from day-to-day politics think about the future um contours of of a social society and so on but I think he's morally committed to a egalitarian different sort of future and I don't think he at least haven't heard him talk about sort of this big broad history and future so the Marxist ideology and so on not that he's afraid of or something it's just not how he thinks about it yeah I think he's a practical thinker and also yeah he is running even if he he he he should be afraid of it too because he is a you know he's is a major politician running for president I think what people want is they want they want the left wing of the possible and I at least the segment of the party that was voting for him the Democratic Party is voting for him they wanted something that was a step or two removed from what they had now it was visionary but not so far removed that it seemed like a scary leap and I think we we lost the lost a chance in 2016 to like someone that I think would have beaten Trump or the very least would have you know been close do you think the Democrats screwed him over yes not in the way of the liberator direct vote working but they put their thumb in the scale for sure I mean there's there's not even conspiracy theory there's all this stuff and the debates about Clinton you know being Clinton's people being fed questions and and whatever else and just the tone of the media the media was extremely dismissive and hostile to him I love that Bernie still does the Fox News town hall with his they're just him speaking to the people and he's not afraid of going on you know any sort of outlet and making his his case but I think a lot of the the liberal media in particular always had it out for Bernie Sanders what was that because I was really annoying that was really annoying how dismissive they were I I seen that in some other candidates like they were dismissive towards Andrew Yang in that same way so forget the ideology why are they so smug sometimes towards certain candidates what is that because I think that's actually at the core to a degree if Democrats or any party fails that it's that smugness because people see through that I think a lot of these people are friends even if they don't know each other they're friends because they went to the same schools they know the same people they have the same broad just ideology and worldview so they had a sense of what the Democratic Party should be and who should be running and who is going to win and also what was serious and on serious so Bernie would say some things about the world that objectively tell a lot of people seem correct or at least pretty close to correct and a journalist would just look at him like he's from outer space to some extent this also happens to people on the right you know people on the right often say things that I find repulsive or or just run but there's parts of the media that would describe their certain views as illegitimate or outside this boundaries of acceptable conversation I think there should be a few things outside the boundary of acceptable conversation you know hate speech and and so on but like there's this attempt to say their views are illegitimate and therefore anyone who votes for them for any reason is illegitimate too and that's one reason why I think it feel the kind of resentment and ultimately end up feeling the extremes of American politics that people feel like you know they're not being listened to and some of it is also style speaking and personality or if you're not willing to sort of play kind of a game of civility or there's like a proper way of speaking if you're a Democrat if you're not doing that kind of proper way of speaking people dismiss you I think in certain sense whatever you feel about him people dismiss Donald Trump for the same reason where it's the style of speaking the personality of the person that he's not playing by the rules of of polite society of polite politician society and so on and that that's really that troubles me because it feels like solutions the great leaders will not be polite in the way they're not they're not going to behave in the way they're supposed to behave and I just wish the media was at least open-minded to that like which I guess gives me hope about the new media which is like more distributed citizen media right that they're more open-minded revolutionary to the outsiders right I actually first I really like Bernie Sanders I first heard him on in conversation with Tom Hartman he had these like like weekly conversations and just the authenticity from the guy I didn't even know any context I didn't even know honestly he was a democratic socialist or anything the authenticity of the human being was really refreshing and when you I guess decided to run for president that was really strange I was like surely this kind of this person has no chance just like he seemed too authentic he seemed to like he's not going to be effective of playing the game of politics so it was very inspiring to me to see that you don't necessarily need to be good at playing the game of politics you can actually have a chance of winning yeah that was that was really inspiring to see what about some of the other popular candidates what do you think about AOC I don't know if she self-identifies as a socialist or not she does self-identifies as a democratic socialist I think she was a very inspiring figure for for a lot of people she was kind of out of this Bernie wave of the first set of Bernie candidates in 2018 that identified with him instead of the democratic party establishment I think that she's still developing as a politician and it's very difficult when you're in a deep blue district and when you don't often have to worry about re-election or talk to but modulate your rhetoric to win over swing voters in your district but then you're immediately a national and cultural figure so AOC basically goes from her views which are compelling in my mind a lot of her her programmatic views are compelling wins her district and then has her on rhetoric which to me compared to Bernie owes itself more to the academic left in the way that a lot of the left has learned to talk I don't mean academic in sense that she's like a Marxist or whatever else but academic in the way that she may be using it times like confusing language to convey basic points when she gets into like the like language of intersectionality and whatever else especially in the context of cultural issues and stuff like exactly instead of just the plain spoken Bernie like yet discrimination is is wrong if you ask him about a cultural issue I'll come down to the same side as AOC I'm sure you know nine plus tens out of times out of ten but I'll try to root it into just basic like yeah treat people with respect you know and they'll treat you with respect and that's the way we should govern our civic sphere you know and we don't need to talk about about intersectionality to I think get that but so there's that rhetoric but she's not just regular congressperson and a deep blue district she's also a national and international cultural and political figures who she's now a spokesperson because of large like a media event of her surprising upset election and her being you know young and like being really connected to this post-burning moment and I think amid these constant one attacks on her from the right and also this media attention and this notoriety she hasn't really modulated or adjusted her audience her rhetoric and how do you win over someone who really hates a lot of your ideas but might actually believe in some of your policies and I think she's been ineffective quite frankly in the last year making that transition whereas I think other politicians who are not so far left who don't identify socialists but let's say a John Federman has managed to become more effective and I don't think it's a question of character or whatever else and I like heo see so I don't want to put it so harshly but I think a lot of it has to do with her being a congressperson and a deep blue district and Federman being running for statewide office in a you know quote unquote purple state but at her best at her best she does it but it's like glimmers you it's kind of like I know what's what's border you biggest fan of I'll give you a sports analogy like the end of I mean NFL is up there of soccer is up there but probably UFC okay well I can't give you good analogy for any of those but it's like it's like a raw prospect like you know someone who who shows glimmers of hope so they were drafted really high and they bounce from team to team you're like I'm clinging on to my aoc stock but but I think that that she needs to be self critical enough and our team is to be self critical enough to know the goal is not merely to be a national cultural figure and win a reelection near a deep blue district the goal has to be to become truly a national political figure which will require changes a unifier an inspiring figure about the ideas as she represents definitely and she has other things against her like I'm obviously class focused but there's no denying I think that some of the hostility to her is like sexism you know it's rooted in I think people wanting to see her fail or whatever else but that's only some of it you know I think some of it otherwise is her struggling to relate to people who don't have a lot of her her you know starting points as far as moral and ethical beliefs yeah but she's actually great at flourishing in all the all the attacks she's getting she's she's doing a good job with that and a lot of those attacks will break me if I think yes that's that's the modifier she's under but you don't want that to become a drug to where you just get good at being a national figure that's constantly in the fights and are using that for attention so on you still want to be the unifier and that's the tricky tricky switch do you think there's a chance there's a world in which she's able to modulate it enough to be a unifier and run for president and when I think she's very far away from being able to do that I think that even other politicians that are also polarizing within the squad in terms of what they say their ideas whatever else are very effective communicators like Elhan Amar and others I think I think a OC I mean that's my hope right my hope is that someone like a OC could the last year plus have not has not been extremely promising you know and in my in my mind in part because she's become or she's continued to position herself as a lightning rod cultural figure whereas I think a national political figure needs to pick their spots and also pick their moment for changing their their rhetoric and adjusting to their audience and I think she does in certain environments but that needs to be your national message when you're out there you need to be speaking towards the not already converted and I think Bernie does that Bernie strips his politics down to the basics so I agree with you spiritually but I also we also have an example of Donald Trump winning the presidency isn't some isn't some of the game of politics that's separate from the policy being able to engage in rhetoric that's that leads to outrage and then walking through that fire with grace first of all I think Trump is kind of a unique personality in American history so it's hard to to to compare anyone to to Trump but don't you think AOC is comparable in terms of the uniqueness in the political system we're in or no I think Trump is much more of a firebrand anti-establishment force in that and I mean this negatively for what it's worth because I you know disagree with Trump but he was willing to set fire to the Republican establishment right he was able to self fund your largest campaign and he ready was a media figure without them AOC has been much more cautious with the Democratic Party establishment and part because she's not trying to run a national political campaign right now for the outside like a 5% chance they're gonna be president let me set fire to everything she's trying to help people and help her constituents through the game of getting committee appointments and you know getting wins in the margins and I think that's understandable for what is worth but in the process I think what's the difference between AOC and a progressive Democrat during 2016 used to be pretty easy to say the difference between the Bernie Crats and a progressive Democrat right because we were establishing our own outside third-force in American politics where you know you could knock on the door of a lot of people would end up voting for Trump and they would say oh I have a lot of respect for for Bernie whatever they were still gonna not vote for him but he wasn't considered part of the Democratic Party milieu I think now with AOC there's a much closer association of AOC in our policies with ordinary Democrats where she needs to draw stronger distinctions she doesn't need to do it like um Trump did with just Maniford got all of them though I found some of them amusing in the moment like all his nicknames about a lion Ted Cruz and then the rest you know um but I do feel like she needs to um yes differentiate herself a bit more but also just keep her language simple Trump was more complex than Bernie um in his his literal language but he was repetitive and there was kind of a rhythm and a cadence to Trump's speech I think AOC needs to like Bernie reduce her rhetoric down to a couple key lines and signatures and focus her politics not on 20 issues but on three or four most important issues and have that message discipline Bernie will do an interview and he'll write down hope you do interview Bernie um but me too right down like five things and I yeah I'm only gonna talk about these five things yeah as we're about this okay I'm talking about these five things so that's a message discipline that Bernie has been exemplary on yeah sure so but I think that's learned that could be developed I think she could develop it listen I hope I'm answering your question I think not the way I should answer it being someone you know broadcasting to um two people on the on the left and and and and you know elsewhere um I hope AOC goes in that direction I just think that she is a lot going against her just because she's already a national figure and she's in a deeper blue district but but we need to root our politics then in working class people and a lot of districts that I don't know the the type of kitchen table conversations are I hate that cliche but I just used it but a lot of these these conversations are just different in their tone and cadence and it's not just a question of I you know feathermen or Tim Ryan and Ohio and kind of just white working class voters I mean working class voters of any race um there's there day to day needs and the day to day things they want to talk about is just at a different plane than you know uh a Met Gala cultural statement yeah I mean it's clear that your respect and love are in and would like to see uh different ways I mean she's young so the different trajectories that she could develop that would ultimately make her good candidate I'm just looking odds here for and I disagree with them I'm buying AOC stock here given these odds so in terms of democratic who's going to win the 2024 election so that includes running and winning on the demogad side is 18% chance for Biden seven percent chance for Kamala Harris Gavin Newsom at 6% Michelle Obama at 3% Hillary Clinton at 2% and AOC at 1.5% and then Bernie at 1% so uh I would not buy AOC at that mark I would buy Biden like crazy though I'm not a gambling man but I would I would totally toss a toss a G at Biden at that amount AOC at 1.5% chance I think it's I think it's I don't think she runs um you don't think she runs yeah okay that's I don't think Bernie will primary Biden either I mean he but if Biden doesn't run then obviously it's an open field but I just feel like do you think Biden runs yes I think Biden probably runs oh boy do you think he's in combat president so it's just it's very hard to imagine another Democrat being able to do better than him all right uh what about the competition I think Donald Trump is the best thing for the Democrats period just because it would create this turnout mechanism this excitement around we have to stop Donald Trump he's attacking Decentis I mean already he's he's trying to you know the dysentimonious thing um but yeah he's I kind of like yeah Trump's kind of like the Don King of American politics you know yeah it's it's it's interesting what kind of dynamic AOC is created um it probably led to more people being interested in politics well almost guaranteed it led to more people being interested in politics but maybe not in a healthy way maybe it created an unhealthy relationship with politics where it created more partisanship for me I'm not I don't have a problem with partnership it's what kind of partnership so I think Trump has cultivated like a lot of right populist a relationship with his supporters it's almost like a leader fall or relationship and a way that doesn't actually enhance people's knowledge of politics and the issues but actually just fall lead some to fall the party line um ideally I think socialist politics and politics in the left should be something different um Eugene uh Debs the great American and socialist leader of the late 19th and early 20th century used to say um you know I'm not your Moses I can't promise to lead you to the um promise land because of I can lead you there and you just follow me there someone's just gonna lead you straight out as soon as I'm gone and I think there's something nice about that kind of anti um you know blind following leader follower kind of dynamic on the left and it's best that said in the way the at least the political race in the United States has turned out it seems like it's turned into a bit of an detainment and they're having uh personalities and characters is is really important so in terms of policy and actual leadership yes maybe having a leader um like an authoritarian big leader is not good but maybe for the race it is uh for the drama of it you just want to have drama and intention on people who are actually going to turn out to be good leaders that's a weird balance of strike yeah earn media is what they always talk about right in political campaigns like you know the more do you could get on tv um the better um even like I I really like federalman you just want to but a good part of his early campaign he had pivoted from talking about issues to just talking about dr. A's living in New Jersey and kind of having the troll campaign against him which I found amusing um but also and it was effective obviously one um but you know it's a bit depressing because I would have rather a whole campaign cycle about health care and jobs and other other issues yeah I'll yeah then this is the the hope is that people just get better at that kind of uh social media communication so I do actually think there's something about doing political speeches that makes you sound less authentic because you have to like do so many of them it's it must be exhausting to like day after day after day make the speech you're going to start uh sort of replaying the same stuff over and over as opposed to actually thinking about the words that are coming out of your mouth and then the public will know that you're not really being that authentic even though you believe those things you're just it's just tough I just wish we didn't they didn't have to do constantly do speeches so I think that the fact that Bernie's speeches very clearly like came out of if not directly his own pen but his own rhetoric over the years and he kind of wrote it seemed authentic yes even if he was repeating it I then trump his just wild improvisation yeah I think people found real you know in a certain way and I would love for the left more generally to tap into some of that anti establishment sentiment but obviously doing the way that's productive the doesn't blame immigrants or whatever else for problems but you know it is it's kind of built on a different basis but people are fed up for good reason with a lot of conventional politics and we need to speak to that otherwise it'll only be the right that is taking advantage of those people's uh anchor well um I almost forgot to ask you about China so both historically we talked about the Soviet union but what lessons do you draw from the implementation of socialism communism in Maoist China and modern China what's what's the good in the bad well I think it's very similar um to the Soviet case and that socialism came to China um through not a base of organized workers and and i capitals country to certain level development and so on but it came through the countryside and in conditions of civil war strife you had Japanese invasion and whatever else and Mao built his base in the peasantry uh then came down to the city to govern and try to build a base and rule over workers so it was kind of an inversion of classic socialist um theory now the same thing that I said before about Stalin and assessing the Soviet Union has to apply here because obviously you know I pose authoritarianism and you know I obviously all sorts of moral combinations I I should I should do but to look at what the Chinese Communist Party actually accomplished I think we kind of need to take a step backwards from our moral opposition to the means in which they accomplished it and just look at it developmentally China benefited greatly from the Communist Party's implementation of basic education and health care um so in a lot of China you had one of the conditions of women were absolutely terrible there was still foot behinding and all sorts of like terrible backward um practice um you had a huge vast majority of the population that was illiterate without any access to basic education and you had no health access especially in the countryside so those are the three good things that the China did improve the um status of women um get everyone into primary education and improve the lot of health care besides for that um their agricultural campaign was a failure just like stones for many the San Brazans I mentioned before um the greatly forward and crash industrialization didn't really work either um in a way is China better than India or other um countries that that didn't have the basic education and the strong state authority and and um the the health improvements and whatever I think maybe but I think that's why we need to sometimes go beyond just economic measures of success because if you told me tomorrow the US will grow at 3% if we maintain democracy but it'll grow at 8-9% everyone will be wealthier if we move just some sort of authoritarian government I think you're asking the wrong question if we're going to make your decision based on growth right because it has to be based on some sort of you know principle but the same dynamic of from the beginning the Chinese Communist Party ruling over people emerging from the outside through armed conflicts and ruling over um ordinary Chinese people have continued um since then jiao ping the policies have been better economically and often at times not always the technocratic governance has been you know quite good but that doesn't mean that the party has a democratic mandate or has the should have the right to govern as they see as they see fit because clearly you know it doesn't have that mandate in swads of the country or in places like Hong Kong or or or elsewhere um but to me um nothing the Chinese Communist Party does has anything to do with socialism I think even by their own definition today it really doesn't um it's a sort of nationalist authoritarian developmental state that has done some good things to improve the living standards of the Chinese people other things that were counterproductive and um you know as a democratic socialist you know I I certainly don't support that state but I also hope that the US and Biden will find a way to avoid um you know intense robbery and competition economically spilling over into something worse from a democratic socialist perspective what's one policy or one or two ways you could fix if you could fix China if you took over China what would you like to see change well the democratic part becomes before the socialist part so I would say there needs to be multi party elections in China and um state censorship and control over the press in other words needs to be be done with this was a immediate economic um policy I think the idea of maintaining um strong state control of certain you know commanding heights the economy while liberalizing other spheres has done quite well in China's case um lifting people out of poverty um but again you know there's something really lost in the society even if it's getting wealthier if you're great you know if ordinary people don't have the ability to um participate in dissent um freely and the Chinese authorities have allowed some you know it's not North Korea it's not a totally totalitarian state um there's been workplace protests it been all sorts of um anti-corruption local anti-corruption protests and things like that but it's up the government decides what's permitted and what's not at what particular moment and uh I think the long run um even if it can survive um there's there's a better way to do things which is quite simply um a democracy the thing is though the lessons of history that China is looking at this is dark aspect um so building on top of the fact that it seems like under Stalin and under Mao under Stalin's union and under Mao China has seen a lot of economic growth and then one dark aspect of that while under the great leap forward you have you know upwards of 70 million people dead today I think there's a large number of people who admire Stalin admire Mao what they admire is the stability and the strong leadership so in this there's a lot of people who miss this over union right the reason why they miss it is that it was a system they knew it provided the basics of their livelihood uh then afterwards like look at Russia in the 90s people were in chaos you know the Communist Party was had a huge amount of support democratically um anti-democratic measures had to be taken ironically against the Communist Party um to keep it from regaining more of a foothold in in Russia but we don't need that trade off you know we could have a form of um imagine of if Russia went to a system closer to social democracy that maintained um the stability that people wanted the welfare state that people wanted um but restructure the economy and not a shock way but in a way that it made sense and that ordinary people felt ownership of instead of just oligarchs who are a former Communist Party bureaucracy just dividing up the country for themselves um I think the same thing in China like first of all certainly from the west um you know the US government and people in the US should have you know have no say over what should happen in China right the the Chinese Communist Party has more authentic authentic authority than any of us do in the country but you know I think that the fears and stability that a lot of Chinese people have why I would imagine that even in a democratic election the uh uh Communist Party might have majority support is because they fear the unknown they fear collapse that was one of the big lessons of the the Soviet collapse right do you want China divided into five six states you know do you want economic turmoil do you want mass immediate privatization do you want whatever welfare state you have um destroyed and so on I think people are right to have those fears but there's a different route towards democratization that maintains stability right there's different routes that you could that you could have um you know democracy and not not every country had to go down the route of Yugoslavia and the USSR and and so on you are the founder of the magazine Jacobin of which I am a subscriber I recommend everybody subscribe what they you're on the left or the right the the magazine does tend to lean left does it officially say it's socialists we're a socialist publication we try to be interesting so we try to like you know have articles that they kind of have debates and contestation and whatever else but we're definitely we're also socialists well it's a lot of really interesting articles so I definitely recommend that people subscribe support I only like the like uh the product of the 21st century only subscribed to the digital version but I guess there's also paper version yeah there's like 70,000 subscribers and in print in print yeah does it come like on a scroll I don't even know to paper do they even publish paperlenses I'm gonna mail you a bunch of copies uh no it's perfect bound you know it's long issues are are um Jackman's publisher uh remake it for obviously did a redesign of the of the publication so it looks really good it's you know it's up there in the design award competition range it's nice it's sexy I'm like I can show it off to all my friends look put it in your coffee table you don't even have to read it first I need to get a coffee table but yes I'll get both that's what respectable don't listen I've upgraded my life I haven't had a couch I don't think ever so I got a couch recently because somebody told me that serious adults have a couch and I also got a TV because serious adults have a couch in a TV and as you see it's been here for many months and I still haven't like unboxed it so um this I'm trying to learn how to be an adult looking up on YouTube how to be an adult and learning slowly after that I'll look into this whole leisure thing anyway what's the origin of Jackman what was the what was that what was the mission and what's the origin story so I started Jackman when I was um between my sophomore and junior of college basically I was already a socialist I was involved in the democratic social America I was um in the youth section the young democratic socialist I was editing um the kind of youth online magazine called the activists back then and to be honest I had my ideology I had my views I had a group of people around me that we would debate together and occasionally write for this other publication the activist and and so on and yeah just a product of creative ignorance in the sense that I knew I had the capacity to maybe pull off an issue or two I just had no idea how long I would keep doing it you know and I just eventually consumed my life slowly but surely like I had I had different plans for my future I kind of you know but I ended up um just being a magazine publisher I literally didn't know what a magazine publisher was but uh it just kind of happened what's the hardest part about running a magazine well the hardest part is obviously the things just like any uh enterprise right the things beyond your control like you could put out something that you think is great or interesting but then you need the feedback of people actually subscribing do it and you occasionally encounter periods where you feel like you're doing your best work but you're not getting the audience response and I think you just need the kind of the self confidence to just keep doing it and obviously if you're totally obscure and crazy and way off the mark you're never going to build that that audience but I think a lot of publications have tried to same thing I guess goes with YouTube shows whatever else they try to adapt to what everyone else is doing right away when they don't achieve success where it was for me the early issues of jack up and got very little resonance and took a vow for it to build into something but a lot of it was just the confidence just keep going and keep publishing what I would want to read and just hope that I'm not so much of a weirdo that I'm the only one uh is there some pressure that you could speak to of audience capture because it is a socialist publication you have a fan base a readership base is there times you feel pressured not to say a certain thing not to call out bullshit not to criticize certain candidates all that kind of stuff yes definitely of course you know I um I myself am loser on the self-censorship than other people that's only because I've you know gotten this far just shooting for the hip or whatever and occasionally you know you'll come to our rash judgment right you'll speak too soon or complain about something too soon and you'll have to kind of either apologize or kind of reconsider whatever else um but on a host of issues uh you know I have used that maybe not all of the left has but I know that the core of my politics is a politics against you know oppression against exploitation against all the things that we we talked about and if you know that's at the core of politics then you could maybe say you know what I don't think the left should um should respond to the real racist in the still around the world by adopting like an excessively racialized rhetoric that makes sense like I fundamentally just am a universalist and I believe that people no matter where their backgrounds are and someone kind of want the same things for themselves and for their for their families and um I feel like a lot of the left or some of the left um not not even the far left more like the center left has adopted kind of a stance saying oh you we need to talk about white privileged or you know white carons or white guys or all white guys doing this or whatever else and to me it's not only wrong in a moral sense but it's counterproductive because the last thing I want is a young white teenager who um you know feels unrepresented politically um and wants to be a part of maybe even the left to feel like um like oh I should think more about my identity no the whole point of anti racist politics is that we want to live in the world where you know um you know mean you can go around the corner and get a bear and we're not you know people of two different races getting a bear we're just two you know guys in America getting a bear you know we're trying to get have the type of society in which there's less of that sort of communal or racialized identity and that was a whole point of a whole generation of anti racist struggle but now we seem to be kind of reifying it in the media and in culture and in politics and that's that's one issue where I've been kind of banging the drum on this to the point that it's annoying in certain parts of the left I don't think there's um maybe extreme opposition among socialists but it's more like a why do you keep focusing on this let's focus on our real enemy the right instead of criticizing you know this part of no I think it's really uh I I'm really glad you exist I'm really glad you're beating that drum because I think that's one of the uh one of the reasons that the left has not had broader impact or has not heard by more people that could hear its message is because the other ring the other ring of like as if there's there's there's uh two teams of as if it's black and white as opposed to having there's a common humanity in a common struggle amongst all of us uh you you also wrote the book that we mentioned a few times the socialist manifesto the case for radical politics in an era of extreme inequality what's the framework what are the ideas of the book so a lot of its look at socialism's past um present and future basically so a lot of it is historical um the opening chapter uses a um post-Assass factory as a way to explain certain Marxist concepts but also a theory of change like how we get from let's say pure capitalism to more regulated you know unionized and social democratic systems and then beyond social democracy into my vision of of socialism that's kind of the first little bit it's like a visionary kind of like look at the the future of socialism uh but then I try to explain why some of past socialist movements have gone run because I think we can't take for granted I think a lot of people want to live in a different or better society but they look at past examples and they're skeptical and I think there's good reason for skepticism so um I try to explain both the successes of certain systems like social democracy but also what happened in Russia China um and kind of more of historical overview uh then um the book kind of ends in the present it ends with looking at the Bernie Sanders campaign why resonated looking at some of the problems facing um the US the UK other advanced economies and why um I think the socialist message is still relevant because for the longest time um I'm 33 I became a socialist as like a teenager and for the longest time it seemed like I was just a member of the historical society you know keeping alive an idea that nobody was interested in anymore and now you know it's heartening to see more young people interested in the idea but we actually need to I think have a clearer sense of what we stand for and how we make our movement like it used to be more rooted in the working class so if anyone rewinds the tape and they go to when we first started talking about early socialism when I was talking about the German social democratic workers movement or um all these different early parties I think at various points I use the word worker and socialist movement interchangeably uh because in fact the time it was pretty interchangeable socialism was the ideology they had the appeal of the working class movement you know um you couldn't really separate between the two um now obviously socialism's like a fringe ideological concurrent among a very small minority of the working class um which is fine but we need to get to the point I think ideally where when people talk about unions and people protesting in social movements and socialism they all kind of are one and the same as part of the same broad broad movement how did you become a socialist what was the what was the personal story were the idea to hold in your mind so I'm the youngest of five I was the only one on my family born in the United States um so it was very obvious to me that my life outcomes were very different the life outcomes of my siblings so my three oldest siblings you know didn't go to college um after after high school some of them got their degrees um you know much later on as adults um but I was from a pretty young age had access to a grade public school district and um was put on the track to go to college you know this this is kind of the the outcome and like I said even my my grandmother was a literate um my mom didn't have a lot of educational opportunities early um you know in her in her life she actually graduated from college the same year I did so she she later got her kind of degrees and whatever else but um but to me it was obvious that so much of my life outcomes weren't just a product of hard work or my family sacrifices because of course I the same uh family as my my siblings um but the product of state institutions helping out evening things out uh public school district public library like all sorts of afterschool programs all that was the domain of the of the state and I really benefited from it so in a essence my core was the social democratically the state should we distribute a bit build in public institutions being equalizer now how it became a Marxist and a socialist was much more random I was just intellectually interested in it and eventually I kind of merged the two together where I merged together my more pragmatic and practical interest in day-to-day concerns and reforms and so on with my loftier intellectual interests and Marxism into you know the politics I have today which I try to kind of balance and do both and I think a lot of socialist and the organization that I joined as a teenager the democratic socialists of America and elsewhere uh try to do the two try to maintain some sort of balanced hair and you know our vision of the future what do you think Marx would say if he were to read your book uh socialist manifestant do a review so I think Marx would say that um my vision of a socialist aftercapitism maintains key elements of what he would uh uh uh uh uh uh uh the commodity so a lot of what Marx was concerned about was um what markets do to human relationships in a negative sense his early writings especially focused a lot on the alienation of labor my vision of socialism at least in the air term a lot about it is about um decommodifying certain sectors so reducing the market in certain sectors and reducing alienation but not eliminating it it is about eliminating exploitation and oppression so knowing Marx and knowing how critical he was of certain other socialist strands and tendencies and he would often write very snarky notes and letters to people like angles being like this guy let a sal is a total asshole uh then he would send a separate note to the sal saying hey can I borrow five grand this is actually true he did the boat he did the boat I think the same like um the same month um so he would be really good at Twitter is what you say oh he would be the best at twitter and also he used to be a he was a journalist before with his work for the New York Tribune um he was very clever very snarky he would be awesome at at Twitter I think him and Elon would have good back and forth but I think it would be critical some parts but I think that the strangest part for him would be reading the historical sections and seeing the way in which his ideas which is fundamentally ideas about human emancipation um we're used for for evil for hardship you know for in ways that did the opposite of emancipated but in some cases you know enslaved people and I think he would have definitely not want to be associated with them uh he probably would rather be associated with me than them but even then only begrudgingly okay what advice would you give to young folks in high school in college how to have a career that can be proud of our how to change the world I think be intellectually curious um you know read outside your your current beliefs and understand and read authors on their own terms so the worst thing the world deduced to read anything especially work of fiction but anything and try to deduce the authors you know backgrounds or politics whatever else like reading on its own terms first then you could reread it and kind of do other examinations or or whatever else and also read a lot of history so I started off reading books like Eric Hopper's bombs um uh four books on um history going from the 1700s all the way to 1994 the last books age of extremes but I think understanding history gives you a bird's eye view of everything uh sociology um economics everything so these big sweeping historical books are really useful to know like everybody should know basically you know what year um or at least like what decade you know surf term was abolished with dictates so as labor is about abolish you know what century magna carta was you know when the Roman Empire fell and that's kind of debated when the Roman Empire fell they're all these I think like being a person with a general knowledge and general sense of history and whatever else just makes you more eclectic and interesting and it's way better than just like especially a lot of my Indian friends you know the the it's not just Indians but the hyper focus on like you got a specialize and you got to like focus on on math or engineering whatever you want to do you just know your field very well but nothing else like I think there's something really too whether you're getting at school or you're just gonna do by yourself giving yourself kind of a liberal arts education I think there's a lot of power to sort of having the facts of history in terms of in time when stuff happened but also really powerful is knowing spatially like the geography that we're the we're a point in on a map and there's interesting dynamics that that happened throughout history of all the different nations in Europe of all the different military conflicts and the expansions and and the wars and the empires and all that kind of stuff it's it really puts into context how how human history is led to the place we are today because all the different geopolitical conflicts we have today even the politics of the day is grounded in history maybe less so for the United States because it has a very young history but that history even for the United States is still there right from the civil war and understanding that gives you context to when you tweet random stuff about this or that person or politician and so on yeah very true very true one of the regrets I have currently is I have perhaps been too focused on the 20th century in terms of history the present in the 20th century a lot of people write to me that there's a lot of lessons to be learned in ancient history as well so not just even an American history but just looking farther and farther and farther back yeah that feels like it's another time it's another place it's totally has no lessons but then you remind yourself that it's the same human beings right yeah and also we're no smart in them we just have more crude knowledge in part because of them yeah but like you know they're just as they were just as clever as us you know what do you think is the meaning of this whole experiment we have going on on earth now what's the meaning of life well I think there's no broad meaning of life there's you know it was an accident but we ourselves need to make our own meeting and for me a lot of it is about posterity trying to do something worthwhile while on earth but also leaving something behind it could just be relationships with friends or family in the future maybe having a family and then kind of like leaving behind that sort of legacy the little bits of yourself but also you know but them being able to learn the same way I have little bits of my my parents and my my grandparents in me and then also I think in a social sense zooming out from just the individual on the family um leaving the world behind a little better you know uh I would love to be a part of a movement that created a world with a little bit less suffering a little bit less oppression or exploitation or or whatever else um that's really why I'm uh why I'm a socialist you know it's not about snapping your fingers and curing the world of everything in one in one go but it is about I think putting our lives giving our lives some sort of meeting and purpose and you don't have to be a socialist do do that you could just do it at the you know at the um micro level on your own day-to-day interactions but I just feel like life has no good meeting without um without thinking of posterity in the future and I have to say thank you for doing so thank you for caring about the struggle of the people in the world through ideas that are bold and I think challenging for a lot of people in a time when socialism is something that can be attacked aggressively by large numbers of people still persevering and still exploring those ideas and seeing what of those ideas can make for a better world that's beautiful to see basket thank you so much for talking to you thank you for all the work you do I can't wait to see what you do next I appreciate it and uh yeah thanks for keeping an open mind with these conversations and to your audience too you know it's it's nice to have a space where you know people can debate and think at length and don't have to worry about sound bite culture thank you brother thank you for listening to this conversation with Baskara Sankara to support this podcast please check out our sponsors in the description and now let me leave you with some words from Karl Marx democracy is the road to socialism thank you for listening and hope to see you next time