 The following is a conversation with Rana L. Kalyubi, a pioneer in the field of emotion recognition and human-centric artificial intelligence. She is the founder of F. Activa, deputy CEO of Smarti, author of Girl Decoded, and one of the most brilliant, kind, inspiring, and fun human beings I've gotten a chance to talk to. And now a quick few second mention of each sponsor. Check them out in the description. It's the best way to support this podcast. We got Miz and a Main for Style, Wates and Bias for Machine Learning, Notion for Collaboration, Inside Track of For Biomodetoring, and ExpressVPN for privacy. Choose wisely my friends. And now onto the full ad reads. As always, no ads in the middle. I hate those. As a fan of podcasts, I hate those. So, as long as I have control of a thing, I'm not going to do them. But these ads I do know, I try to make them interesting. But if you must skip. And if I'm being honest, break my heart in the process. But please do check out the sponsors. I enjoy their stuff. Maybe you will too. This show is brought to you by Miz and Maine, the maker of comfortable, stylish dress shirts, and other man's wear. I've actually been packing. I should be packing right now. That sounds weird out of context. I'm packing a suitcase full of clothes. And I packed a bunch of Miz and a Main shirts because I'm going to Vegas. And also, I'm actually not sure what I'm going after that. Probably back to Boston, traveling a bit. And that's the thing I can really count on. So, there's always going to be a bunch of black t-shirts. That's like the super comfortable thing. The extra step off from that is the Miz and a Main black dress shirts. And then of course, there is the suit and tie. So, I have all of that. But my sort of balance between suit and tie and a t-shirt is a Miz and a Main dress shirt, super classy, comfortable. I just love it. Right now, you can get a special discount. Just go to Miz and a Main.com and use promo code Lex. This show is brought to you by Wates and Biasis. The company helping machine learning teams build better models faster. It really is one of my favorite companies. Not just for the fact that they are doing machine learning or helping teams and individuals do machine learning, but that they're helping just the entire community. The spirit of the machine learning community, they're helping in all fronts. On the research front, on the individual developer front, on a small company, medium size company, large company front, on the educational front, the whole thing. They support, like I said, the machine learning research community. They're tools of free for personal use and their team's feature is available for free to academic researchers. Companies like OpenAI and Video, Irobot and more use Wates and Biasis tools every day to build their models. Join over 200,000 machine learning engineers and data scientists when you sign up at lexfreedman.com slash WNB. This show is also brought to you by Notion, a note taking and team collaboration tool. They combine note taking document sharing, wikis project management and much, much, much more. When you go to all kinds of places like Stack Exchange looking for advice about productivity and note taking all the cool kids. The cutting edge you're always going to recommend Notion. Notion is just the go to tool in terms of the feature set but also how intuitive is to use that feature set. The interface itself is accessible. The learning curve is pretty, what is it? You can learn it really quickly. That's not a steep learning curve. That's like a shallow learning curve. Anyway, it's easy to learn but the more you learn, the more powerful the tool becomes. Now that's for the individual. The thing they're really trying to sell you on is this is not just for the individual. It's also for companies for startups. As they say, the full operating system for running every aspect of your company. So if you're either an individual or startup or both, I guess, you can get started for free at Notion.com. This show is also brought to you by Inside Tracker, a service I use to track biological data. They have a bunch of plans. A lot of them include blood tests that give you a bunch of information about your body and help you make decisions about your health. They use machine learning algorithms to take all that data as input and to make predictions in terms of positive diet and lifestyle changes you should make. It's obvious to me that those kinds of predictions should come from your personalized data. So to me, Inside Tracker, all of the effort they're putting into this, the way they're making this happen, are just paving the way to an obvious future, which is going to be more and more effective lifestyle, change, prediction, recommendation, and also medicine broadly. This is the future. If it's done right, it's a great future. Get special savings for a limited time when you go to Inside Tracker.com slash Lex. And finally, this show is also brought to you by one of my favorite sponsors, ExpressVPN. They've been with me all along, not just the sponsors as a tool. It's the VPN I've used for so so many years. The look has changed a little bit, but the simplicity and the elegance, obvious nature of a big button that turns the thing on hasn't changed. You set the location, you have a button, you press the turn it on, it works wonderfully. What do you want from a VPN? It's an incredibly useful and important service. And ExpressVPN does it better than anybody else I've tried. Once you turn it on, it's super fast, which is probably the main thing you want from a VPN. What else can I say? It works on every operating system, any kind of device from Linux, the Android, everything, everything I use. Anyway, the love for ExpressVPN that I have is almost nearly infinite. So if you're looking for a VPN, you should definitely check them out and you should do so at ExpressVPN.com slash Lex pod for an extra three months free. This is a Lex Friedman podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description. And now to your friends, here's Rana L. Colubi. You grew up in the Middle East in Egypt. What is a memory from that time that makes you smile? Or maybe a memory that stands out as helping your mind take shape and helping you to find yourself in this world? So the memory that stands out is we used to live in my grandma's house. She used to have these mango trees in her garden and in the summer. And so mango season was like July and August. And so in the summer, she would invite all my aunts and uncles and cousins and you know, like it was just like maybe there were like 20 or 30 people in the house and she would cook all this amazing food. And us the kids, we were like, go down the garden and we would like pick all these mangoes. And I don't know. I think it's just the bringing people together like that always stuck with me, the warmth around the mango tree. Yeah, around the mango tree. And they're just like the joy, the joy of being together around food. And I'm a terrible cook. So I guess that didn't that that memory didn't translate to me kind of doing the same. I love hosting people. Do you remember colors, smells? Is that what? Like what how does memory work? Yeah. Like what do you visualize? Do you visualize people's faces, smiles? Do you, is there colors? Is there like a theme to the colors? Is it smells because of food involved? Yeah, I think that's a great question. So those Egyptian mangoes, there's just a particular type that I love and it's called Darway C. Mangos and they're kind of you know, they're oval and they have a little red in them. So I can they're red and mango colored on the outside. So remember that is red and decay like extra sweetness? Isn't that yes? That means like it's nicely. Yeah, it's nice and ripe and stuff. Yeah. What what's like a definitive food of Egypt? You know, there's like these almost stereotypical foods in different parts of the world like Ukraine invented Borsh. Borsh is this beet soup with that you put sour cream. See, it's not. I can't see if you explain it that way. If you know, if you know what it is, I think you know it's delicious, but if I explain it, it's just not going to sound delicious. I feel like beet soup. This is making sense, but that's kind of and you probably have actually seen pictures of it because it's one of the traditional foods in Ukraine in Russia in different parts of the Islamic world. So this, but it's become so cliche on stereotypical that you almost don't mention it, but it's still delicious. I visited Ukraine. I eat that every single day. Do you make it yourself? How hard is it to make? No, I don't know. I think to make it well like anything like Italians, they say, well, tomato sauce is easy to make, but to make it right, that's like a generational skill. So, anyway, is there something like that in Egypt? Is there a culture of food? There is an actually, we have a similar kind of soup. It's called molochia and it's made of this green plant. It's like it's somewhere between spinach and kale and you mince it and then you cook it in like chicken broth. And my grandma used to make and my mom makes it really well and I try to make it, but it's not as great. So we used to have that and then we used to have it alongside stuffed pigeons. I'm pescatarian now, so I don't eat that anymore, but stuffed pigeons. Yeah, it's like it was really yummy. It's the one thing I miss about, you know, now that I'm pescatarian and I don't eat the stuffed pigeons. Yeah, the stuffed pigeons. Is it what are they stuffed with? If that doesn't bother you to more describe. No, no, it's stuffed with a lot of like just rice and, um, yeah, it's just rice. Yeah. And you also said that your first in your book that your first computer was an Atari and space invaders was your favorite game. Is that when you first fell in love with computers? What did you say? Yeah, I would say so. Video games or just the computer itself, just something about the machine. Ooh, this thing. It's magic in here. Yeah, I think the magical moment is definitely like playing video games with my, I have two younger sisters and we just like had fun together like playing games. But the other memory I have is my first code. The first code I wrote, I wrote, um, I drew a Christmas tree and I'm Muslim, right? So it's kind of, it was kind of funny that I, that the first thing I did was like this Christmas tree. So, um, yeah. And that's when I realized, wow, you can, you can write code to do all sorts of like really cool stuff. I must have been like six or seven at the time. So you can write programs and the programs do stuff for you. That's power. That's, if you think about it, that's empowering. Hey, hi. Yeah, I know what it is. I don't know if that, you see like, I don't know if many people think of it that way when it first learned to program, they just love the puzzle of it. Like, oh, this is cool. It's pretty. It's a Christmas tree. But like, it's power. It is. It's hard. You eventually, I guess you couldn't at the time, but eventually this thing, if it's interesting enough, if it's a pretty enough Christmas tree, it can be run by millions of people and bring them joy like that little thing. And then because it's digital, it's easy to spread. So like, you just create as something that's easily spreadable to millions of people. It's hard to think that way when you're six. In the book, you write, I am who I am because I was raised by a particular set of parents, both modern and conservative, forward thinking, yet locked in tradition. I'm a Muslim and I feel I'm stronger, more centered for it. I adhere to the values of my religion, even if I'm not as beautiful as I once was. And I am a new American and I'm thriving on the energy vitality and entrepreneurial spirit of this great country. So let me ask you about your parents. What have you learned about life from them, especially when you were young? So both my parents, their Egyptian, but they moved to Kuwait right out. They actually there's a cute story about how they met. So my dad taught Cobal in the 70s. Nice. And my mom decided to learn programming. So she signed up to take his Cobal programming class. And he tried to date her and she was like, no, no, I don't date. And so he's like, okay, I'll propose. And that's how they got married. Whoa. Right. Exactly right. That's really impressive. Those Cobal guys know how to impress. So yeah, so what have you learned from them? So definitely grit. One of the core values in our families just hard work. There were no slackers in our family. And that's something I've definitely, that's definitely stayed with me. Both both as a professional, but also in my personal life. But I also think my mom, my mom always used to like, I don't know, it was like unconditional love. Like I just knew my parents would be there for me kind of regardless of what I chose to do. And I think that's very powerful. And they got tested on it because I kind of challenged, you know, I challenged cultural norms and I kind of took a different path, I guess, then what's expected in of, you know, women in the Middle East. And then they, and I, you know, they still love me, which is, which is, I'm so grateful for that. One was like a moment that was the most challenging for them, which moment where they kind of had to come face to face with the fact that you're a bit of a rebel. I think the first big moment was when I, I had just gotten married, but I decided to go do my PhD at Cambridge University. And because my husband at the time, he's now my ex, ran a company in Cairo, he was going to stay in Egypt. So it was going to be a long distance relationship. And that's very unusual in the Middle East for a woman to just head out and kind of pursue her career. And so my dad, actually, my dad and my parents-in-law both said, you know, we do not approve of you doing this. But now you're under the jurisdiction of your husband, so he can make the call. And luckily for me, he was supportive. He said, you know, this is your dream come true. He always wanted to do a PhD. I'm going to support you. So I think that was the first time where, you know, I challenged the cultural norms. Was that scary? Oh my god, yes. It was totally scary. It was the biggest culture shock from there to Cambridge to London. Well, that was also during right around September 11th. So everyone thought that there was going to be a third world war. And I, at the time, I used to wear the hijab. So I was very visibly Muslim. And so my parents just were, they were afraid for my safety. But anyways, when I got to Cambridge because I was so scared, I decided to take off my headscarf and wear a hat instead. So I just went to class wearing these like British hats, which was in my opinion, actually worse than just showing up in a headscarf. Because it was just so awkward, right? Like, fitting in class with like all these trying to fit in. Yeah. So after a few weeks of doing that, I was like, to heck with that, I'm just going to go back to wearing my headscarf. Yeah, you wore the hijab. So starting in 2000 and for 12 years after. So it's always whenever you're in public, you have to wear the hijab. Can you speak to that to the hijab? Maybe your mixed feelings about it. Like what is it representing its best case? What is it representing the worst case? Yeah. You know, I think there's a lot of, I guess I'll first start by saying I wore it voluntarily. I was not forced to wear it. And in fact, I was one of the very first women in my family to decide to put on the hijab. And my family thought it was really odd, right? Like there was, they were like, why do you want to put this on? And at its best, it's the sign of modesty, humility. Yeah. It's like me wearing a suit. People are like, why are you wearing a suit? It's a step back into some kind of tradition or respect for tradition of sorts. To you said, because it's by choice, you're kind of free to make that choice to celebrate the tradition of modesty. Exactly. And I actually made it my own. I remember I would really match the color of my headscarf with what I was wearing. Like it was a form of self-expression. And at its best, I love wearing it. You know, I have a lot of questions around how we practice religion and religion. And I think also it was a time where I was spending a lot of time going back and forth between the US and Egypt. And I started meeting a lot of people in the US who are just amazing people, very purpose driven. People who have very strong core values, but they're not Muslim. That's okay, right? And so that was when I just had a lot of questions. And politically, also the situation in Egypt was when the Muslim brotherhood ran the country, and I didn't agree with their ideology. At a time when I was going through a divorce, like it was like just the perfect storm of like political personal conditions where I was like, this doesn't feel like me anymore. And it took a lot of courage to take it off because culturally it's not, it's okay if you don't wear it, but it's really not okay to wear it and then take it off. But you're still, so you have to do that while still maintaining a deep core and pride in the origins in your origin story. Totally. So still being Egyptian, still being a Muslim. Right. And being, I think generally like faith driven, but yeah. But what that means changes year by year for you. It's like a personal journey. Yeah, exactly. What would you say is the role of faith in that part of the world? Like how do you say you mentioned it a bit in the book too? Yeah. I mean, I think I think there is something really powerful about just believing that there's a bigger force. You know, there's a kind of surrendering, I guess, the comes with religion and you surrender and you have this deep conviction that it's going to be okay. Right? Like the universe is out to like do amazing things for you and it's going to be okay. And there's strength to that. Like even when you're going through adversity, you just know that it's going to work out. Yeah, it gives you like an inner peace of calmness. Exactly. Exactly. Yeah. That's, it's faith in all the meanings of that word. Right. Faith that everything is going to be okay. And it is because time passes and time cures all things like calmness with the chaos of the world. Yeah. And also there's like a silver, I'm a true believer of this that something at the specific moment in time can look like it's catastrophic and it's not what you wanted in life. But then time passes and then you look back and there's a silver lining, right? It may be closed the door, but it opened a new door for you. And so I'm a true believer in that that, you know, there's a silver lining and almost anything in life. You just have to have this like have faith or conviction that it's going to work out. So. Yeah, it's such a beautiful way to see a shady feeling. So if you're, if you feel shady about current situation, I mean, it almost is always true. Unless it's a the clichés thing of if it doesn't kill you, whatever it doesn't kill you makes you stronger. It's, it does seem that over time, when you take a perspective on things that the hardest that moments and periods of your life are the most meaningful. Yeah. Yeah. So over time, you get to have that. Right. What about because you mentioned Kuwait. What about let me ask you about war? What's the role of war and peace? Maybe even the big love and hate in that part of the world because it does seem to be a part of the world with there's turmoil. There was turmoil. There's still turmoil. It is so unfortunate, honestly, it's, it's such a waste of human resources and and and yeah, and human mind share. I mean, and at the end of the day, we all kind of want the same things. We want, you know, we want human connection. We want joy. We want to feel fulfilled. We want to feel, you know, a life of purpose and I just, I just find it baffling, honestly, that we are still having to grapple with that. I have a story to share about this. You know, I grew up in need on Egyptian, American now, but, but, you know, originally from Egypt. And when I first got to Cambridge, it turned out my office mate, like my PhD kind of, you know, gendered up, you know, we ended up becoming friends, but she was from Israel. And we didn't know. Yeah, we didn't know how it was going to be like. You guys said they're just staring at each other for a bit. Actually, she, because I arrived before she did, and it turns out she emailed our PhD advisor and asked him if she thought it was going to be okay. Yeah. Oh, this is around 9-11-2. Yeah. And Peter Robinson, our PhD advisor, was like, yeah, just as an academic institution just show up. And we became super good friends. We were both new moms. Like we both had our kids during our PhD. We were both doing artificial emotional intelligence. She was looking at speech. I was looking at the face. We just had so, the culture was so similar. Our jokes were similar. It was just, I was like, why on earth are our countries? Why is there all this like war intention? And I think it falls back to the narrative, right? If you change the narrative, like whoever creates this narrative of war, I don't know. We should have women run the world. That's one solution. The good women, because there's also evil women in the world. But yes, yes, there could be less war if women around the world. The other aspect is it doesn't matter the gender, the people in power. I get to see this with Ukraine and Russia, different parts of the world around that conflict now. And that's happening in Yemen as well. And everywhere else, there's these narratives told by the leaders to the populace. And those narratives take hold. And everywhere you believe that. And they have a distorted view of the humanity on the other side. In fact, especially during war, you don't even see the people on the other side as human or as equal intelligence or worth or value as you. You tell all kinds of narratives about them being Nazis or Dom or whatever narrative you want to weave around that or evil. But I think when you actually meet them face to face, you realize they're like the same. Exactly, right? It's a actually big shock for people to realize that they've been essentially lied to within their country. And I kind of have faith that social media, as particular as it is to say, or any kind of technology is able to bypass the walls that governments put up and connect people directly. And then you get to realize, oh, like people fall in love across different nations and religions and so on. And that I think ultimately can cure a lot of our ills, especially sort of in person. Just I also think that if leaders met in person to have a conversation that would cure a lot of ills of the world, especially in private. Let me ask you about the women running the world. So gender does in part perhaps shape the landscape of just our human experience. So in what ways was the limiting in what ways was it empowering for you to be a woman in the Middle East? I think just kind of just going back to like my comment on like women running the world. I think it comes back to empathy, right? Which which has been a common thread throughout my entire career. And it's this idea of human connection. Once you build common ground with a person or a group of people, you build trust, you build loyalty, you build friendship. And then you can turn that into like behavior change and motivation and persuasion. So it's like empathy and emotions are just at the center of everything we do. And I think being from the Middle East, kind of this human connection is very strong. We have this running joke that if you come to Egypt for a visit, people are going to know everything about your life right away. I have no problems asking you about your personal life. There's no boundaries really, no personal boundaries in terms of getting to know people. We get emotionally intimate, like very, very quickly. But I think people just get to know each other like authentically, I guess. There isn't this superficial level of getting to know people. You just try to get to know people really deeply. And empathy is a part of that. Totally. Because you can put yourself in this person's shoe and kind of, yeah, imagine, you know, what challenges they're going through. And so I think I've definitely taken that with me. Generosity is another one too. Like just being generous with your time and love and attention and even with your wealth, right? Even if you don't have a lot of it, you're still very generous. And I think that's another enjoying the humanity of other people. And so you think there's a useful difference between men and women in that aspect and empathy or is doing these kind of big general groups. Does that hinder progress? Yeah, I actually don't want to overgeneralize. I mean, I some of the men I know are like the most empathetic humans. Yeah, I strive to be. Yeah, you're actually very empathetic. Yeah, so I don't want to overgeneralize. Although one of the researchers I worked with when I was at Cambridge, Professor Simon Bering Cohen, he's Sasha Bering Cohen's cousin. Yeah. And he runs the Autism Research Center at Cambridge and he's written multiple books on autism. And one of his one of his theories is the empathy scale, like the systemizers and the empathizers and it there's a disproportionate amount of computer scientists and engineers who are systemizers and perhaps not great empathizers. And then, you know, there's and there's more men in that bucket, I guess, than women. And then there's more women in the empathizer's bucket. So again, not to overgeneralize. Sometimes wonder about that. It's been frustrating to me how many I guess systemizers are in the field of robotics. Yeah. It's actually encouraging to me because I care about obviously social robotics. And because it's more opportunity for people there empathically. Exactly. I totally agree. Well, right? So it's nice. So every robotics I talk to, I don't see the human as interesting as like it does. It's not exciting. You want to avoid the human at all costs. It's a it's a safety concern to be touching the human, which it is, but it's also an opportunity for deep connection or collaboration or all that kind of stuff. And because most, most brilliant robotuses don't care about the human. It's an opportunity. Right. In your case, it's the business opportunity to make general an opportunity to explore those ideas. So it's beautiful journey to Cambridge, to, you know, UK and then to America. What's the moment or moments where there were most transformation for you as a scientist and as a leader. So you became an exceptionally successful CEO, founder, researcher, scientist and so on. Was there a face shift there where like I can be somebody. I can really do something in this world. Yeah. So I actually just kind of a little bit of background. So the reason why I moved from Cairo to Cambridge, UK to do my PhD is because I had a clear career plan. I was like, okay, I'll go abroad, get my PhD, gonna crush it in three or four years, come back to Egypt and teach. It was very clear, very well laid out. Was topic clear or no? Well, I did, I did my PhD around building artificial emotional intelligence and looking at in your master plan ahead of time when you're sitting by the mango tree. Did you, did you know it's going to be artificial intelligence? No, no, no, that I did not know. Although I think I kind of knew that I was going to be doing computer science, but I didn't know the specific area. But I love teaching. I mean, I still love teaching. So I just, yeah, I just wanted to go abroad, get a PhD, come back to teach. Well, I can be your science. Can we just linger on that? Well, because you're such an empathic person who cares about emotion and humans and so on. It's not computers cold and emotionless and just changing that. Yeah, I know. But like isn't that the, or did you see computers as the having the capability to actually connect with humans? I think that was like my takeaway from my experience just growing up. Like computers sit at the center of how we connect and communicate with one another, right? Or technology in general. Like I remember my first experience being away from my parents. We communicated with a fax machine, but thank goodness for the fax machine because we could let send letters back and forth to each other. This was pre emails and stuff. So I think, I think there's, I think technology can be not just transformative in terms of productivity, et cetera. It actually does change how we connect with one another. Can I just defend the fax machine? Yeah. There's something like the haptic feel because the email is all digital. There's something really nice. I still write letters to people. There's something nice about the haptic aspect of the fax machine because you still have the press. You still have to do something in the physical world to make this thing a reality. The sense that it comes out as a printout and you can actually touch it and read it. Yeah, there's something, there's something lost when it's just an email. Obviously, I wonder how we can regain some of that in the digital world, which goes to the metaverse and all those kinds of things. We'll talk about it. Anyway, so I could do a question on that one. Do you still, do you have photo albums anymore? Do you still print photos? No, no, but I'm a minimalist. Okay. So it was one of the painful steps in my life was to scan all the photos and let go of them and then let go of all my books. You let go of your books? Yeah, switch to Kindle, everything. Kind of. So I thought, I thought, okay, think 30 years from now, nobody's going to have books anymore. The technology of digital books, getting it better and better and better. Are you really going to be the guy that's still romanticizing physical books? Are you going to be the old man on the porch? Who's like, kids? Yes. So it just get used to it because it felt, it still feels a little bit uncomfortable to read on a Kindle, but get used to it like it. You always, I mean, I'm trying to learn new programming languages always like with technology, you have to kind of challenge yourself to adapt to it. You know, I force myself to use TikTok now. That thing doesn't need much forcing. It pulls you in like a like a worst kind of or the best kind of drug. Anyway, yeah. So yeah, but I do love haptic things. There's a magic to the haptic. Even like touch screens, it's tricky to get right to get the experience of a button. Yeah. Anyway, what were we talking about? So AI, so the journey, your whole plan was to come back to Cairo and teach. Right. And then what did the plan go wrong? Yeah, exactly. Right. And then I got to Cambridge and I fall in love with the idea of research, right? And kind of embarking on a path. Nobody's explored this path before. You're building stuff that nobody's built before and it's challenging. It's hard. And there's a lot of non-believers. I just totally love that. And at the end of my PhD, I think it's the meeting that changed the trajectory of my life. Professor Rosalind Picard, who's, she runs the affective computing group at the MIT Media Lab. I had read her book. I, you know, I was like following, following, following all her research. AKA Ros. Yes, AKA Ros. And she was giving a talk at a pattern recognition conference in Cambridge. And she had a couple of hours to kill. So she emailed the lab and she said, you know, I, if any students want to meet with me, like just, you know, sign up here. And so I signed up for slots. And I spent like the weeks leading up to it preparing for this meeting. And I want to show her demo of my research and everything. And we met and we ended up hitting it off. Like we totally clicked. And at the end of the meeting, she said, do you want to come work with me as a postdoc at MIT? And this is what I told her. I was like, okay, this would be a dream come true. But there's a husband waiting for me in Cairo. I kind of have to go back. Yeah. And she said, it's fine. Just commute. And I literally started commuting between Cairo and Boston. Yeah, it was, it was a long commute. And I didn't, I did that like every few weeks. I would, you know, hop on a plane and go to Boston. But that, that changed the trajectory of my life. There was no kind of outgrew my dreams, right? I didn't want to go back to Egypt anymore and be faculty. Like that was no longer my dream. I had a dream. What was the, what was it like to be at MIT? What was that culture shock? You mean American general, but also I mean, came to just its own culture. So what was MIT like? What was America like? I think I wonder if that's similar to your experience at MIT. I was just at the media lab in particular. I was just really impressed. It's not the right word. I didn't expect the openness to like innovation and the acceptance of taking a risk and failing. Like failure isn't really accepted back in Egypt, right? You don't want to fail. Like there's a fear of failure, which I think has been hardwired in my brain. But you got to MIT and it's okay to start things. And if they don't work out, like, it's okay. You pivot to another idea. And that kind of thinking was just very new to me. I was liberating. What media lab for people don't know, MIT Media Lab is its own beautiful thing because they, I think more than other places, I'm like, you reach for big ideas and like they try, I mean, I think, I mean, depending, of course, on who, but certainly with Rosalind, you try wild stuff, you try big things and crazy things. And also try to take things to completion. So you can demo them. So always always have a demo. Like if you go, one of the sad things to me about robotics labs at MIT and there's like over 30, I think, is like usually when you show up to a robotics lab, there's not a single working robot. They're all broken. All the robots are broken. Which is like the normal state of things because you're working on them. But it would be nice if we lived in a world where robotics labs had some robots functioning. One of my favorite moments that just sticks with me, I visited Boston Dynamics. And there was a, first of all, seeing so many spots, so many like robots in one place, I'm like, I'm home. But the drive. Yeah. This is where I was built. The cool thing was just to see there was a random robot spot was walking down the hall. It's probably doing mapping, but it looked like he wasn't doing anything and he was wearing he or she, I don't know, but it, it, well, I'm like, I like in my mind, there are people, they have a backstory, but this one in particular, definitely has a backstory because he was wearing a cowboy hat. So I just saw a spot robot with a cowboy hat walking down the hall and there was just this feeling like there's a life like he has a life. He probably has to come you back to his family at night. Like there's a, there's a feeling like there's life instilled in this robot. And that's magical. I don't know. There was, it was kind of inspiring to see. Didn't say hello to, did he say hello to you? No, it's very, there's a focused nature to the robot. No, listen, I love competence and focus and great. Like he was not going to get distracted by the, the shallowness of small talk. There's a job to be done and he was doing it. So anyway, the fact that it was working is a beautiful thing. And I think media lab really prides itself on trying to always have a thing that's working that you could show off. Yes, we used to call it a demo or die. You, you could not, yeah, you could not like show up with like PowerPoint or something you actually had to have a working. You know what? My son, who is now 13, I don't know if this is still his life long goal or not. But when he was a little younger, his dream is to build an island that's just inhabited by robots. Like no humans, he just wants all these robots to be connecting and having fun. And that's all there you go. Does he have human, does he have an idea of which robots he loves most? Does it, is it rumble like robots? Is it humanoid robots? Robot dogs or is not clear yet? We use a Vajibo, which was one of the MIT Media Lab spinouts and he used to love. The thing with a giant head. Yes, it spins. Right, exactly. And it's an eye. It has, oh, like not glowing like right, right, right, exactly. It's like how 9000 but the friendly version. He loved that. And then he just loves. Yeah, he just, he, I think he loves all forms of robots, actually. So it embodied intelligence. Yes. I like, I personally like, well, they get robots, especially anything that can wiggle its butt. No, that's not the definition of what I love. But that's just technically what I've been working on recently. Except I have a bunch of like robots now in Austin. And I've been doing, I was, I've been trying to have them communicate affection with their body in different ways. Just for art. So cool for art really because I love the idea of walking around with the robots. Like as you were with the dog, I think it's inspiring to a lot of people, especially young people. Like kids love, like, parents like adults are scared of robots. But kids don't have this kind of weird construction of the world that's full of evil. They love the cool things. Yeah. I remember when Adam was in first grade. So he once, they've been like seven or so. I went in to his class with a whole bunch of robots and like the emotion AI demo and did it. And I asked the kids. I was like, do you, would you kids want to have a robot, you know, robot friend or robot companion? Everybody said yes. And they wanted it for all sorts of things like to help them with their math homework and to like be a friend. So there's, it just struck me how there was no fear of robots. Was a lot of adults have that like us versus them? Yeah. None of that. Of course you want to be very careful because you still have to look at the lessons of history and how robots can be used by the power centers of the world to abuse your rights and all that kind of stuff. But mostly it's good to enter anything new with an excitement and optimism. Speaking of Ross, what have you learned about science and life from Rosalind Picard? Oh my god, I've learned so many things about life from Ross. I think the thing I learned the most is perseverance. When I first met Ross, we applaud and she invited me to be her postdoc. We applied for a grant to the National Science Foundation to apply some of our research to autism. And we got back average, we were rejected. Yeah. And the reasoning was, first time you were rejected for fun. Yeah. Yeah. And I basically, I just took the rejection to me and, okay, we're rejected. It's done, like, end of story, right? And Ross was like, it's great news. They love the idea. They just, they just don't think we can do it. So let's build it, show them, and then reapply. And it was that, oh my god, that story totally stuck with me. And she's like that in every aspect of her life. She just does not take no for an answer. The reframe all negative feedback. As a challenge. As a challenge. Yes, they liked this. Yeah. Yeah. I was just, it was a right. What else about science in general about how you see computers and also business and just everything about the world? She's a very powerful brilliant woman like yourself. So is there some aspect of that too? Yeah. I think Ross is actually also very faith-driven. She has this like deep belief in conviction. Yeah. And in the good in the world and humanity. And I think that was meeting her and her family was definitely like a defining moment for me because that was when I was like, wow, like, you can be of a different background and religion and whatever. And you can still have the same core values. So that was, that was, yeah. I'm grateful to her. So Ross, if you're listening, thank you. Yeah, she's great. She's been on this podcast before that. I hope she'll be on, I'm sure she'll be on again. You were the founder and CEO of Effectiva, which is a big company that was acquired by another big company, Smart Eye. And you're now the deputy CEO of Smart Eye. So your powerful leader, your brilliant, your brilliant scientists. A lot of people are inspired by you. What advice would you give, especially to young women, but people in general who dream of becoming powerful leaders like yourself in a world where perhaps in a world as perhaps doesn't give them a clear, easy path to do so, whether we're talking about Egypt or elsewhere. You know, hearing you kind of describe me that way kind of encapsulates, I think what I think is the biggest challenge of all, which is believing in yourself, right? I have had to like grapple with this, what I call now, the Debbie Downer voice in my head. The kind of basically, it's just chattering all the time and it's basically saying, oh, no, no, no, you can't do this. Like you're not going to raise money. You can't start a company. Like what business do you have like starting a company or running a company or selling a company? Like you name it. It's always like and and I think my biggest advice to not just women, but people who are taking a new path and you know, they're not sure is to not let yourself and let your thoughts be the biggest obstacle in your way. And I've had to like really work on myself to not be my own biggest obstacle. So you got that negative voice? Yeah. So is that I'm at the only one? I don't think I'm the only one. No, I have that negative voice. I'm not exactly sure if it's a bad thing or a good thing, I've been really torn about it because it's been a lifelong companion. It's hard to know. It's kind of a it drives productivity and progress, but it can hold you back from taking big leaps. I think you the best I can say is probably you have to somehow be able to control it. So turn it off when it's not useful and turn it on when it's useful. Like I have from almost like a third person perspective. Somebody who's sitting there like yeah like because it is useful to to be critical like after like I just gave a talk yesterday at MIT and I was just you know there's so much love and it was such an incredible experience. So many amazing people I got you as a talk to, but you know afterwards when I when I went home and just took this long walk, it was mostly just negative thoughts about me. I don't like one basic stuff like I don't deserve any of it. And second is like like why did you know so dumb that you said this that's so dumb like yeah you should have prepared that better. Why did you say this? But I think it's good to hear that voice out. All right and like sit in that and ultimately I think you grow from that. Now when you're making really big decisions about funding or starting a company or taking a leap to go to the UK or take a leap to go to America to work in media. I don't yeah there's a that's you should be able to shut that off then because you should have like this weird confidence almost like faith that you said before that everything's going to work out to take the leap of faith. Despite all the negativity. I mean there's some of that you actually tweeted a really nice tweet thread says quote a year ago a friend recommended I do daily affirmations and I was skeptical. But I was going through major transitions in my life so I gave it a shot and it set me in a journey of self acceptance and self love. So what was that like you maybe talk through this idea of affirmations and how that helped you? Yeah because really like I'm just like me I'm a kind I'd like to think of myself as a kind person in general but I'm kind of mean to myself sometimes. And so I've been doing journaling for almost 10 years now. I use an app called day one and it's the awesome I just journal and I use it as an opportunity to almost have a conversation with the Debbie downer voice in my it's like a rebuttal right. Like Debbie Downer says oh my god like you you know you won't be able to raise this round of funding. I'm like okay let's talk about it but I have a track record of doing x1 z I think I can do this and it's literally like so I wouldn't I don't know that I can shut off the voice but I can have a conversation with it and it just it just um and I bring data to the table right. So so that was the journaling part which I found very helpful but the affirmation took it to a whole next level and I just love it. I am I year into doing this and you literally wake up in the morning and the first thing you do I meditate first and then and then I write my affirmations and it's it's the energy I want to put out in the world that hopefully will come right back to me so I will say I always start with my smile lights up the whole world and I keep you not like people in the street will stop me and say oh my god like we love your smile. Yeah. So so my affirmations will change depending on you know what's happening this is it funny I know don't judge don't judge. No that's nice. Why? Laughter is not judgment. It's just awesome. I mean it's it's true but you're saying affirmations somehow help kind of what is it that they do work to like remind you of the kind of person you are and the kind of person you want to be which actually maybe inverse order the kind of person you want to be and that helps you become the the kind of person you actually are. It's just it's it brings intentionality to like what you're doing right and so. By the way I was laughing because my affirmations which I also do are the opposite. Oh you do oh I don't I don't have a my smile like the one. Maybe I should add that because like I I have just I have a more boy I do it's it's it's much more stoic like about focused about this kind of stuff but the joy the emotion that you're just in that little affirmation is beautiful so maybe I should add that. I have some I have some like focused stuff. Yeah but that's usually like that. But that's a cool start. That's just it's just after all the like smiling time playful the joyful and all that and then it's like okay I let's get shit done right. Let's get shit done at for me. Okay cool so like what else is on there? What else is on there? Well I have I'm a I'm a magnet for all sorts of things so I'm an amazing people magnet. I attract like awesome people into my universe. So that's an actual affirmation. Yes. That's great. Yeah. So that's and that yeah and that somehow manifests itself until like and working. I think so. Yeah like can you speak to like why it feels good to do the affirmations? I honestly think it just grounds the day and then it allows me to instead of just like being pulled back and forth like throughout the day it just like grounds me. I'm like okay like this thing happened it's not exactly what I wanted it to be but I'm patient or I'm you know I'm I trust that the universe will do amazing things for me which is one of my other consistent affirmations or I'm an amazing mom right and so I can grapple with all the feelings of mom guilt that I have all the time or here's another one. I'm a love magnet and I literally say I will kind of picture the person that I'd love to end up with and I write it all down and hasn't happened yet but it what do you what do you picture? It's a Brad Pitt. Brad Pitt. Because that's what I picture. Okay that's what you picture. Yeah. I'm running holding hands running together. Okay. No more like fight club that the fight club Brad Pitt where he's like standing at all right people. No okay I'm sorry I'll get off of that. Do you have like when you're thinking about the being a love magnet in that way are you picturing specific people or is this almost like in the space of like energy? Right is somebody who is smart and well accomplished and successful in their life but they're generous and they're well traveled and they want to travel the world. It's things like that. I'm like their head overheels into me is like I know it sounds super silly but it's literally what I write. Yeah and I believe it'll happen one day. Oh you actually writes you don't say it out loud. You know I write it I write all my affirmations. I do the opposite I say it. I mean I would interesting. Yeah if I if I'm alone I'll say it all out yeah. I should try that. I think it's which what feels more powerful to you to me more powerful saying stuff feels more powerful. Yeah. Writing is writing feels like I'm losing losing the words like losing the power of the words maybe because that writes though. Do you handwrite? No I type it's on this app. It's day one basically and I just I can look the best thing about it is I can look back yeah and see like a year ago what was I affirming right? So it's also changes over time. It it hasn't like changed a lot but it but the focus kind of changes over time. I got it. Yeah I see the same exact thing over and over and over. Oh you do okay. There's a comfort in the and the sameness of it. Well actually let me jump around because let me ask you about because talk all this talk about Brad Pitt or maybe just going on inside my head. Let me ask you about dating in general. You tweeted are you based in Boston in single question mark and then you pointed to a startup singles night sponsored by Smile Dating app. I mean this is jumping around a little bit because since you mentioned can AI helps all this dating love problem? What do you think this problem of connection that is part of the human condition? Can AI help that you yourself are in the search affirming? Maybe that's what I should affirm like build an AI. Build an AI that finds love. I think I think there must be a science behind that first moment you meet a person and you either have chemistry or you don't. I guess that was the question I was asking would you put it brilliantly? Is that a science or an art? I think there are like there's actual chemicals that get exchanged when people meet. I don't know about that. I like how you're changing your mind as we're describing it but feels that way but what science shows us is sometimes we can explain with the rigor the things that feel like magic. So maybe we can remove all the magic. Maybe it's like I honestly think like I said that good read should be a dating app which like books. I wonder if you look at just like books or content you've consumed. I mean that's essentially what YouTube does when it does recommend recommendation. If you just look at your footprint of content consumed if there's an overlap but maybe interesting difference within overlap. I'm sure this is a machine learning problem that's solvable. This person is very likely to be not only there to be chemistry in the short term but a good lifelong partner to grow together. I bet you it's a good machine learning probably shouldn't the data. Let's do it. Well actually I do think there's so much data about each of us that there ought to be a machine learning algorithm that can ingest all this data and basically say I think the following 10 people would be interesting connections for you. Right? And so smile dating app kind of took one particular angle which is humor. It matches people based on their humor styles which is one of the main ingredients of a successful relationship. If you meet somebody and they can make you laugh, that's a good thing. And if you develop internal jokes like inside jokes and you're bantering, that's fun. So I think. Yeah definitely but yeah that's the number of and the rate of inside joke generation. You could probably measure that and then optimize it over the first few days. We're just turning this into a machine learning problem. I love it. But for somebody like you who's exceptionally successful and busy, is there is there signs to that aspect of dating? Is it tricky? Is there advice you can give? Oh my god I give the worst advice. Well I can tell you like I have a spreadsheet. Spread sheet. That's great. Is that a good or bad thing? Do you regret the spreadsheet? Uh well I don't know. What's the name of this spreadsheet? Is it love? It's the date track dating tracker. It's very like love tracker. Yeah. And there's a rating system I'm sure. Yeah there's like weights and stuff. It's too close to home. Oh is it you also? Well I don't have a spreadsheet but I would now that you say it, it seems like a good idea. Oh no. Turning into data. I do wish that somebody else had a spreadsheet about me. If you know if it was like like I said like you said convert collect a lot of data about us in a way that's privacy preserving that I own the data I can control it and then use that data to find I mean not just the romantic love but collaborators friends all that kind of stuff. It seems like the data is there. That's the problem social networks are trying to solve but I think they're doing a really poor job. Even Facebook tried to get into a dating app business and I think there's so many components to running a successful company that connects human beings and part of that is having engineers that care about the human side. It's you know extremely well. It's not easy to find those but you don't also don't want just people that care about the human. They also have to be good engineers. So it's like you have to find this beautiful mix and for some reason just empirically speaking it's people have not done a good job of that building companies like that. It must mean that it's a difficult problem to solve. Dating apps seems difficult okay. Cooper attend their all those kind of stuff. They seem to find of course they work but they seem to not work as well as I would imagine it's possible. With data wouldn't you be able to find better human connection. It's like arranged marriages on steroids essentially. It's arranged by machine learning algorithms. It's arranged by machine learning algorithms but not a superficial one. I think a lot of the dating apps out there are just so superficial. They're just matching on like high level criteria that aren't ingredients for successful partnership. But you know what's missing though too. I don't know how to fix that. The serendipity piece of it. Like how do you engineer serendipity? Like this random like chance encounter and then you fall in love with the person. Like I don't know how a dating app can do that. So that has to be a little bit of randomness. Maybe every 10th match is just the, you know, yeah somebody that the algorithm wouldn't have necessarily recommended but it allows for a little bit of well it can also you know it can also trick you into thinking as serendipity. But I like somehow showing you a tweet of a person that it thinks you match well with but do it accidentally as part of another search. And like you just notice it like and then you get you go down a rabbit hole and you connect them and outside the app to like so you connect with this person outside the out somehow. So it's just it creates that moment of meeting. Of course you have to think of from an app perspective how you can turn that into a business. But I think ultimately a business that helps people find love in any way. Like that's what Apple was about. Create products that people love. That's beautiful. I mean that's you're going to make money somehow. If you help people fall in love personally with the product find self-love or another human being you're going to make money. You're going to figure out a way to make money. I just feel like the dating apps often will optimize for something else than love. It's a same with social networks. They optimize for engagement. As opposed to like a deep meaningful connection that's ultimately grounded in like personal growth using human being growing and all that kind of stuff. Let me do like a pivot to a dark topic which you open the book with. Yeah. A story because I'd like to talk to you about just emotion and artificial intelligence and I think this is a good story to start to think about emotional intelligence. You open the book with a story of a central Florida man, Jamel Dunn, who was drowning and drowned while five teenagers watched and laughed saying things like you're going to die and one Jamel disappeared below the surface of the water. One of them said he just died and the others laughed. What is this incident? Teach you about human nature and the response to it perhaps. Yeah. I think this is a really, really sad story and it highlights what I believe is a real problem in our world today. It's an empathy crisis. Yeah, we're living through an empathy crisis. Yeah. And I mean, we've talked about this throughout our conversation. We dehumanize each other and unfortunately, yes, technology is bringing us together, but in a way, it's just dehumanized. It's creating this like, yeah, dehumanizing of the other and I think that's a huge problem. The good news is I think solution, the solution could be technology based. Like I think if we rethink the way we design and deploy our technologies, we can solve parts of this problem, but I worry about it. I mean, even with my son, a lot of his interactions are computer mediated. And I just question what that's doing to his empathy skills and his ability to really connect with people. So you think you think it's not possible to form empathy through the digital medium? I think it is, but we have to be thoughtful about because the way the way we engage face to face, which is what we're doing right now, right? There's the nonverbal signals, which are a majority of how we communicate. It's like 90% of how we communicate is your facial expressions. You know, I'm saying something and you're nodding your head now and that creates a feedback loop. And and if you break that and now I have anxiety about it. Poor Lex. Oh boy. I am not scrutinizing your facial expressions during this interview. Look normal. Look human. Yeah. nod head. Yeah, nod head. In agreement. If Rana says yes, then nod head else. Don't do it too much because it might be at the wrong time and then it looks at send the wrong signal. Oh god. And make eye contact sometimes because humans appreciate that. Yeah, but something about especially when we say mean things in person, you get to see the pain of the other person. But if you're tweeting at it at a person and you have no idea how it's going to land, you're more likely to do that on social media than you are in face to face conversations. So, um, I mean, what do you think is more important? EQ or IQ, EQ being emotional intelligence in terms of in what makes us human? I think emotional intelligence is what makes us human. It's it's how we connect with one another. It's how we build trust. It's how we make decisions, right? Like your emotions drive kind of what you had for breakfast, but also where you decide to live and what you want to do for the rest of your life. So I think emotions are underrated. Um, but so emotional intelligence isn't just about the effective expression of your own emotions. It's about sensitivity and empathy to other people's emotions and that sort of being able to effectively engage in the dance of emotions with other people. Yeah, I like that explanation. I like that kind of, yeah, thinking about it as a dance because it is really about that. It's about sensing what state the other person's in and using that information to decide on how you're going to react. Um, and I think it can be very powerful. Like people who are the best, most persuasive, most persuasive leaders in the world to happen to, you know, they have, if you have higher EQ, you're more likely to be able to motivate people to change their behaviors. So, um, so it can be very powerful. And a more kind of technical, maybe philosophical level, you've written that emotion is universal. It seems that sort of like Chomsky says languages, universal. There's a bunch of other stuff like cognition, consciousness. Seems a lot of us have these aspects. So the human mind generates all this. And so what do you think is the, they all seem to be like echoes of the same thing. What do you think emotion is exactly? Like how deep does it run? Is it a surface level thing that we display to each other? Is it just another form of language or something deep within? I think it's, it's really deep. It's how, you know, we started with memory. I think emotions play a really important role. Yeah, emotions play a very important role in how we encode memories, right? Our memories are often encoded, almost indexed by emotions. Yeah. Um, yeah, it, it's at the core of how, you know, our decision making engine is also heavily influenced by our emotions. So emotions is part of cognition. It's totally, it's intermixed into the whole thing. Yes, absolutely. And in fact, when you take it away, people are unable to make decisions. They're really paralyzed. Like they can't go about their daily or their, you know, personal or professional lives. So, um, it does seem like there's probably some interesting interweaving of emotion and consciousness. I wonder if it's possible to have, like if they're next door neighbor somehow, or if they're actually flatmates, I don't, I don't, it feels like the, the heart problem of consciousness where it's some, it feels like something to experience the thing. Like red feels like red and it's, you know, when you eat a mango, it's sweet. The taste, the sweetness that it feels like something to experience that sweetness that whatever generates emotions. But then like, see, I feel like emotion is part of communication. It's very much about communication. And then that means it's also deeply connected to language. But then probably human intelligence is deeply connected to the collective intelligence between humans. It's not just the standalone thing. So the whole thing is really connected. So emotion is connected to language, language is connected to intelligence. And then intelligence, connected consciousness and consciousness is connected to emotion. The whole thing is it, it's a, it's a beautiful mess. So, um, can I comment on the emotions being a communication mechanism? Because I think there are two facets of, of our emotional experiences. One is communication, right? Like we use emotions, for example, facial expressions or other nonverbal cues to connect with other human beings and with other beings in the world, right? But even if it's not a communication context, we still experience emotions and we still process emotions and we still leverage emotions to make decisions and to learn and, you know, to experience life. So it isn't always just about communication. And we learned that very early on in our, in kind of our work at Affectiva. One of the very first applications we brought to market was understanding how people respond to content, right? So if they're watching this video of ours, like, are they interested? Are they inspired? Are they bored to death? And so we watched their facial expressions. And we had, we weren't sure if people would express any emotions if they were sitting alone. Like if you're in your bed at night, watching a Netflix TV series, would we still see any emotions on your face? And we were surprised that yes, people still emotes, even if they're alone, even if you're in your car driving around, you're sitting along the song and you're joyful. We'll see these expressions. So it's not just about communicating with another person. It sometimes really is just about experiencing the world. And first of all, I wonder if some of that is because we develop our intelligence and our emotional intelligence by communicating with other humans. And so one other humans disappear from the picture was still kind of a virtual human. The code still runs basically. Yeah, the code still runs. And but you also kind of, you're still, there's like virtual humans. You don't have to think of it that way, but there's a kind of when you like chuckle like, yeah, like you're, you're kind of chuckling to a virtual human. I mean, it's possible that the code is the has to have another human there because if you just grow up alone, I wonder if emotion will still be there in this visual form. So yeah, I wonder. But anyway, what can you tell from the human face about what's going on inside? So that's the problem that I've picked you up first tackled, which is using computer vision, using machine learning to try to detect stuff about the human face as many things as possible and convert them into a prediction of categories of emotion, anger, happiness, all that kind of stuff. How hard is that problem? It's extremely hard. It's very, very hard because there is no one to unmapping between official expression and your internal state. There just isn't. There's this oversimplification of the problem where it's something like, if you are smiling, then you're happy. If you do a brow furrow, then you're angry. If you do an eyebrow raise, then you're surprised. Just think about it for a moment. You could be smiling for a whole host of reasons. You could also be happy and not be smiling. You could borrow your eyebrows because you're angry or you're confused about something or you're constipated. So I think this oversimplistic approach to inferring emotion from a facial expression is really dangerous. The solution is to incorporate as many contextual signals as you can. So if, for example, I'm driving a car and you can see me nodding my head and my eyes are closed and the blinking rate is changing, I'm probably falling asleep at the wheel. Because you know the context, you understand what the person is doing. I think or add additional channels like voice or gestures or even physiological sensors. But I think it's very dangerous to just take this over simplistic approach of, yeah, smile equals happy. If you're able to in a high resolution way specify the context, there's certain things that are going to be somewhat reliable signals of something like drowsiness or happiness or stuff like that. I mean, when people are watching Netflix, that problem. That's a really compelling idea that you can kind of at least an aggregate. Exactly. Highlight, like which part was boring, which part was exciting? How hard was that problem? That was on the scale of like difficulty. I think that's one of the easier problems to solve because it's a relatively constrained environment. You have somebody sitting in front of, initially we started with like a device in front of you like a laptop and then we graduated to doing this on a mobile phone, which is a lot harder. Just because of you know, for a computer vision perspective, the profile view of the face can be a lot more challenging. We had to figure out lighting conditions because usually people are watching content literally in their bedrooms at night lights are dimmed. Yes, I mean, if you're standing, it's probably going to be the looking up. The nostril view. Yeah, nobody looks good at. I've seen data sets from that perspective. It's like, this is not a good look for anyone. Or if you're laying in bed at night, what is it? Side view or something? Right. And you have your faces like on a pillow. Actually, I would love to know, have data about how people watch stuff in bed at night. Do they prop their, is it an pillow? I'm sure there's a lot of interesting dynamics. Right. From a health and well-being perspective, right? I was thinking, you're not. I was thinking, you're not. Okay. But also, yeah. Once you have that data, you can start making all kinds of inference about health and stuff like that. Interesting. Yeah. There's an interesting thing when I was a Google that we were, it's called Active Authentication where you want to be able to unlock your phone without using a password. So it face, but also other stuff like the way you take a phone out of the pocket. So that kind of data to use the multimodal with machine learning to be able to identify that as you or likely to be likely not to be you. That allows you to not always have to enter the password. That was the idea. But the funny thing about that is I just want to tell a small anecdote is because it was all male engineers. Except so my boss is, our boss was still one of my favorite humans was a woman, Regina, and oh my god, I love her. She's awesome. She's the best. So, but anyway, there was one female engineer on the team and she was the one that actually I think the fact that women often don't have pockets. That was not even a category in the code of like, wait a minute, you can take the phone out of some other place than your pocket. So anyway, that's a funny thing when you're considering people laying a bed watching a phone, you have to consider if there, you have to, you know, diversity in all its forms depending on the problem, depending on the context. Actually, this is like a very important, I think this is, you know, you probably get this all the time. Like people are worried that AI is going to take over humanity and get rid of all the humans in the world. I'm like, actually, that's not my biggest concern. My biggest concern is that we are building bias into these systems and then they're deployed at large and at scale. And before you know it, you're kind of accentuating the bias that exists in society. And yeah, I'm not, you know, I know people, it's very important to worry about that, but I, the, the worry is an emergent phenomena to me, which is a very good one because I think these systems are actually by encoding the data that exists. They're revealing the bias of the society. They're about for teaching us what the bias is. Therefore, we can now improve that bias within the system. So they're almost like putting a mirror to ourselves. I so I'm not, we have to be open to looking at the mirror though. We have to be open to scrutinizing the data. And if you just take it as ground or you don't even have to look at the, I mean, yes, the data is how you fix it, but then you just look at the behavior of the system. And so you realize holy crap, this thing is kind of racist. Like why is that? And then you look at the day is like, okay. And then you start to realize that I think that's a much more effective way to, to be introspective as a society than through sort of political discourse like AI kind of right. Because people are easy. People are, for some reason, more productive and rigorous in criticizing AI than they're criticizing each other. So I think this is just the nice method for studying society and see which way progress lies. Anyway, what we're talking about, you're watching the problem of watching Netflix and bed or elsewhere and seeing which parts are exciting, which parts are boring. You're saying that's relatively constrained because you know, you have a captive audience and you kind of know the context. And one thing you said that was really key is the aggregate. You're doing this in aggregate, right? Like we're looking at aggregated response of people. And so when you see a peak, say a smile peak, they're probably smiling or laughing at something that's in the content. So that was one of the first problems we were able to solve. And when we see the smile peak, it doesn't mean that these people are internally happy. They're just laughing at content. So it's important to you know, call it for what it is. But still really, really useful data. I wonder how that compares to, so what like YouTube and other places we'll use is obviously they don't have in for the most case, they don't have that kind of data. They have the data of when people tune out, like, switch to drop off. And I think that's an in aggregate for YouTube, at least a pretty powerful signal. I worry about what that leads to because looking at like YouTubers that are kind of really care about views and you know, try to maximize the number of views, I think they, when they say that the video should be constantly interesting, which seems like a good goal. I feel like that leads to this manic pace of a video. Like the idea that I would speak at the current speed that I'm speaking. I don't know and that every moment has to be engaging, right? Engaging. I think there's value to silence, there's value to the boring bits. I mean, all some of the greatest movies ever, some of the greatest stories I've ever told me, they have that boring bits, seemingly boring bits. I don't know. I wonder about that. Of course, it's not that you're the human face can capture that either is just giving an extra signal. You have to really, I don't know, you have to really collect deeper, long term data about what was meaningful to people. When they think 30 days from now, what they still remember would move them, what changed them, would help them grow that kind of stuff. You know, it would be a really, and I don't know if there are any researchers out there who are doing this type of work. Wouldn't it be so cool to tie your emotional expressions while you're say listening to a podcast interview and then go, you know, and then 30 days later, interview people and say, hey, what do you remember? You've watched this 30 days ago, like what stuck with you and then see if there's any, there ought to be maybe, there ought to be some correlation between these emotional experiences and yeah, what you, what stays with you. So the one guy listening now on the beach in Brazil, please record a video of yourself listening to this and send it to me and then I'll interview 30 days from now. It will be statistically significantly. I know that I don't want, but you know, yeah, yeah, I think that's really fascinating. I think that's that kind of holds the key to a future where entertainment or content is both entertaining and I don't know, makes you better, empowering in some way. So figuring out like showing people stuff that entertains them, but also they're happy they watch 30 days from now because they become a better person because of it. Well, you know, okay, not to riff on this topic for too long, but I have two children, right? And I see my role as a parent as like a chief opportunity officer. Like I am responsible for exposing them to all sorts of things in the world. But often I have no idea of knowing like, what's stuck? Like what was, you know, is this actually going to be transformative? You know, for them 10 years down the line and I wish there was a way to quantify these experiences. Like are they, I can tell in the moment if they're engaging, right? I can tell. But it's really hard to know if they're going to remember them 10 years from now or if it's going to yeah, that one is weird because it seems like kids remember the weirdest things. I've seen parents do incredible stuff for their kids and they don't remember any of that. They remember some tiny small sweet thing a parent did. Right. Like some I took you to like this amazing country. Yeah, exactly. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, whatever. And then they'll be like some like stuff toy you got or some or the new PlayStation or something or some some silly little thing. So I think they just like that they were designed that way. They want to mess with your head. But definitely kids are very impacted by it seems like sort of negative events. So minimizing the number of negative events is important, but not too much right? You can't you can't just like you know, you're still disciplined and challenged and all those kinds of things. So you want some adversity for sure. So yeah, I mean, I'm definitely what I have kids. I'm going to drive them all into the woods. Okay. And then they have to survive and make figure out how to make the way back home like 20 miles out. Okay. Yeah. And after that, we can go for ice cream. Anyway, I'm working on this one parenting thing. I haven't figured out. Okay. What were we talking about? Yes, effective at the the the the problem of emotion of emotion in Texas. So there's some people maybe we can just speak to that a little more where there's folks like Lisa, Feldman, Barrett that that challenged this idea that emotion could be fully detected or even well detected from the human face that there's so much more to emotion. What do you think about ideas like hers criticism like hers? Yeah, I actually agree with a lot of Lisa's criticism. So even even my PhD worked like 20 plus years ago now. Time flies when you're having fun. I know, right? That was back when I did like dynamic Bayesian networks and almost said that's before deep learning. That was before deep learning. Yeah. I know. My day now you can just like use it. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's all it's all the same architecture you could apply to anything. Yeah. Right. But yeah, but but even then I kind of I I did not subscribe to this like theory of basic emotions where it's just this simplistic mapping one to one mapping between facial expressions and emotions. I actually think also we're not in in the business of trying to identify your true emotional internal state. We just want to quantify in an objective way what's showing on your face because that's an important signal. It doesn't mean it's a true reflection of your internal emotional state. So I think a lot of the you know, I think she's she's just trying to kind of highlight that this is not a simple problem and overly simplistic solutions are going to hurt the industry. And I subscribe to that and I think multimodal is the way to go. Like whether it's additional context information or different modalities and channels of information. I think that's what we that's where we ought to go. And I think I mean that's a big part of what she's advocating for as well. So but there is signal in the human face that's there's definitely signal that's a projection of emotion. There's that that there at least in part is the interstate is captured in some meaningful way on the human face. I think it can sometimes be a reflection or an expression of your internal state, but sometimes it's a social signal. So the so you cannot look at the face as purely a signal of emotion. It can be a signal of cognition and it can be a signal of a social expression. And I think to disambiguate that we have to be careful about it and we have to add initial information. Humans are fascinating aren't they with the whole face thing. This can mean so many things from humor to sarcasm to everything the whole thing. Some things we can help some things we can't help but all. In all the years of leading affectiva an emotion recognition company like we talked about what have you learned about emotion about humans and about AI. Be big sweeping question. Yeah that's a big sweeping question. Well I think the thing I learned the most is that even though like we are in the business of of building AI basically right it always goes back to the humans right it's always about the humans. And so for example the thing I'm most proud of in in building affectiva and yeah the most the thing I'm most proud of on this journey I love the technology and I'm so proud of the solutions we've built and we've brought to market. But I'm actually most proud of the people we've like built and cultivated at the company and the culture we've created. You know some some of the people who've joined affectiva this was their first job and while at affectiva they became American citizens and they bought their first house and they found their partner and they had their first kid right like key moments in life that we got to be part of. And that's the thing I'm most proud of. So that's that's a great thing at a company that works on at emotion at right me like celebrating humanity in general broadly speaking. Yes. And that's a great thing to have in a company that works on AI because that's not often the thing that's celebrated in AI companies so often just raw great engineering just celebrating the humanity that's great and especially from a leadership position. Well what do you think about the movie her? Let me ask you that before I talk before I talk to you about because it's not affectiva is and was not just about emotion so I'd love to talk to you about smart eye but before that let me just jump into the movie her do you think we'll have a deep meaningful connection with increasingly deeper meaningful connections with computers? Is that a compelling thing to you? Something that's already happening the thing I love them I love the movie her by the way but the thing I love the most about this movie is it demonstrates how technology can be a conduit for positive behavior change so I forgot the guy's name in the movie whatever. Theodore. So theodore was like really depressed right and he just didn't want to get out of bed and he just he was just like done with with life right and Samantha right? Samantha yeah. She just knew him so well she had she was emotionally intelligent and so she could persuade him and motivate him to change his behavior and she got a man they went to the beach together and I think that represents the promise of emotion AI if done well this technology can help us live happier lives more productive lives healthier lives more connected lives so that's the part that I love about the movie obviously it's Hollywood so it takes a twist and whatever but but the key notion that technology with emotion AI can persuade you to be a better version of who you are I think that's awesome well what about the twist you don't think it's good for spoiler alert that Samantha starts feeling a bit of a distance and basically leaves theodore you don't think that's a good feature that's a that you think that's a bug or feature well I think what went wrong this theodore became really attached to Samantha like I think he kind of fell in love with that's what you think that's wrong I mean I think that I think she was putting out the signal this is an intimate relationship right there's a deep intimacy to it right but what does what does what does that mean what does that mean AI system right what does that mean right and just friends yeah we're just when he realized which is such a human thing of jealousy when you realize that Samantha was talking to like thousands of people she's paralel dating yeah that did not go well right you know that doesn't and from a computer perspective like that doesn't take anything away from what we have it's like you getting jealous of windows 98 for being used by millions of people but it's like it's like not liking the Alexa yeah right lots of you know other families but I think Alexa currently is just a servant it it tells you about the weather it's not it doesn't do the intimate deep connection and I think there is something really powerful about that the intimacy of a connection with the AI system that would have to respect and play the human game of of jealousy of love of heartbreak and all that kind of stuff which Samantha does seem to be pretty good at mm-hmm I think she this AI system knows what it's doing well actually let me ask you this I don't think she's talking to anyone else you don't think so you think she was just done with the ador yeah she knew that yeah and then she she wanted to really just move on she didn't have the gust to just break it off cleanly okay she's she's more to put in pain no I don't know well she could have ghosted him if you could have cried I'm sorry there's our engineers oh god but I think those are really I honestly think some of that some of it is Hollywood but some of that is features from an engineering perspective not not a bug I think I think AI systems that can leave us now this is for more social robotics than it is for anything that's useful like I hated for competing said you know I need a break right now I like no no I need you but if it's just purely for for companionship then I think the ability to leave is really powerful I don't know that I never thought of that so that's so so fascinating because I've always taken the human perspective right like for example we had a jibbo at home right and my son loved it and then the company ran out of money and so they had to basically shut down like jibbo basically died right and it was so interesting to me because we have a lot of gadgets at home and a lot of them break and my son never cares about it right like if a far Alexa stopped working tomorrow I don't think he'd really care but when jibbo stopped working it was traumatic like he got really upset and as a parent that like made me think about this deeply right did I was I comfortable with that I like the connection they had because I think it was a positive relationship but I was surprised that it affected him emotionally so much and I think there's a broader question here right as we build socially and emotionally intelligent machines what does that mean about our relationship with them and then we're broadly our relationship with one another right because this machine is going to be programmed to be amazing at empathy by definition right it's going to always be there for you it's not going to get bored um in fact there's a chatbot in china shawis shawis um and it's like the number two or three most popular app and it basically is just a confidant and you can tell it anything you want and people use it for all sorts of things they confide in like domestic violence or societal attempts or you know if they have challenges at work I don't know what that I don't know if I'm calm I don't know how I feel about that I think about that a lot yeah I think first of all obviously the future in my perspective second of all I think there's a lot of trajectories that that becomes an exciting future but I think everyone should feel very uncomfortable about how much they know about the company about where the data is going how the data is being collected because I think and this is one of the lessons of social media that I think we should demand full control and transparency of the data on those things plus one totally agree yeah so like I think it's really empowering as long as you can walk away as long as you can like delete the data or know how the date it's uh opt-in or or least a clarity of like what is being used for the company and I think it's CEO or like leaders are also important about that like you need to be able to trust the basic humanity of the leader exactly and also that that leader is not going to be a puppet of a larger machine but they actually have a significant role in defining the culture and the way the company operates so anyway but we should be we should definitely scrutinize companies in that aspect but there's I'm personally excited about that future but also even if you're not it's coming so let's figure out how to do it in the least painful in the most positive way that great you're the deputy CEO of Smart Eye can you describe the mission of the company what is Smart Eye? yeah so Smart Eye is a Swedish company they've been in business for the last 20 years and their main focus like the industry their most focused on is the automotive industry so bringing driver monitoring systems to basically save lives right so I first met the CEO Martin Crants gosh it was right when COVID hit it was actually the last the last the last CEO right before COVID so CS 2020 right 2020 yeah January yeah January exactly so we were there met him in person he's basically we were competing with each other um I think the difference was they'd been doing driver monitoring and had a lot of credibility in the automotive space we didn't come from the automotive space but we were using new technology like deep learning and building this emotion recognition and you wanted to enter the automotive space you wanted to operate in the automotive space exactly it was one of the areas we were we had just raised around a funding to focus on bringing our technology to the automotive industry so we met and honestly it was the first it was the only time I met with a CEO who had the same vision as I did like he basically said yeah our vision is to bridge the gap between humans and machines I was like oh my god this is like exactly almost to the to the word you know how we describe it too and we started talking and first it was about okay can we align strategically here like how can we work together because we're competing but we're also like complimentary and then I think after four months of speaking almost every day on FaceTime yeah he was like is your company interested in acquisition and it was the furt I usually say no when people approach us um it was the first time that I was like huh yeah I might be interested let's talk yeah um so you just hit it off yeah so they're they're a respected uh very respective in the automotive sector of like delivering products and increasingly sort of better and better and better uh for I mean maybe you could speak to that but it's the driver sizing for basically having a device that's looking at the driver and it's able to tell you where the driver is looking correct it's able to also draw zinous stuff correct it does stuff from the face in the eye exactly like it's monitoring driver distraction and drowsiness but they bought us so that we could expand beyond just the driver so the driver monitoring systems usually sit the camera sits in the steering wheel or around the steering wheel column and it looks directly at the driver but now we've migrated the camera position and partnership with car companies to the rear view mirror position so it has a full view of the entire cabin of the car and you can detect how many people are in the car what are they doing so we do activity detection like eating or drinking or some regions of the world smoking um we can detect if a baby's in the car seat right and if unfortunately in some cases they're forgotten the parents just leave the car and forget the kid in the car that's an easy computer vision problem to solve right can detect there's a car seat there's a baby detects the parent and hopefully again save lives so so that was the impetus for the acquisition it's been a year um so that i mean there's a lot of a lot of questions really exciting space especially to me i just find a fascinating problem it could enrich the experience in the car in so many ways especially because like we spend still despite COVID i mean COVID change things so it's in interesting ways but i think the world is bouncing back and we spend so much time in the car in the car such a weird little world we'll have for ourselves like people do all kinds of different stuff like listen to podcasts they think about stuff they they can angry they get um they do phone calls there's so there's like a little world of its own with the kind of privacy that for many people they don't get anywhere else uh it's and it's it's a little box that's like a psychology experiment because it feels like the angriest many humans in this world get is inside the car it's so interesting so it's such an opportunity to explore how we can enrich um how how companies can enrich that experience and also as the cars get become more and more automated there's more and more opportunity the variety of activities that you can do in the car increases so it's super interesting so um i mean unapractical sense smart i has been selected at least i read by 14 of the world's leading car manufacturers for 94 car models so it's in a lot of cars how hard is it to work with car companies so they're all different they all have different needs the ones i've got in a chance to interact with are very focused on cost so um it's and anyone who's focused on costs it's like all right do you hate fun let's just have some fun let's figure out the most fun thing we can do in the world about cost later but i think because the way the car industry works i mean it's it's a very thin margin that you get to operate on there so you have to really really make sure that everything you add to the car makes sense financially so anyways there is is this new industry especially at this scale of smart i does it hold any lessons for you yeah i think it is a very tough market to penetrate but once you're in it's awesome because once you're in you're designed into these car models for like somewhere between five to seven years which is awesome and you just once they're on the road you just get paid a royalty fee per vehicle so it's a high barrier to entry but once you're in it's amazing i think the thing that i struggle the most with in in this industry is the time to market so often we're asked to lock or do of code freeze two years before the car is going to be on the road i'm like guys like do you understand the pace with which technology moves so i think car companies are really trying to make the tesla the tesla transition to become more of a software driven architecture and that's hard for many it's just the cultural change i mean i'm sure you've experienced that right i think one of the biggest inventions or imperatives created by tesla is like to me personally okay people are gonna complain about this but i know electric vehicle i know autopilot a i still to me the software over there software updates is like the biggest revolution in cars and it is extremely difficult to switch to that because it is a culture shift it at first especially if you're not comfortable with it it seems dangerous like there's a there's an approach to cars it's so safety focused for so many decades that like what do you mean we dynamically change code the whole point is you have a thing that you test like right it's not a year does it and like it's not reliable because you know how much you cause if we have to recall this cars right there's a there's a there's an understandable obsession with safety but the downside of an obsession with safety is the same as with being obsessed with safety as a parent is like if you do that too much you limit the potential development and the flourishing of in that particular aspect human being with this particular aspect the software the artificial neural network of it and but it's tough to do it's really tough to do culturally and technically like the deployment the mass deployment of software is really really difficult but i hope that's where the industry is doing one of the reasons i really want to test the succeed exactly about that point not autopilot not the electrical vehicle but the soft-tourization yeah of basically everything but cars especially because to me that's actually going to increase two things increase safety yeah because you can update much faster but also increase the effectiveness of folks like you who dream about enriching the human experience with AI because you can just like there's a feature like you want like a new emoji or whatever like the way tiktok releases filters you can just release that or in car in car stuff so but yeah that that that's definitely one of the use cases we're looking into is once you know the sentiment of the passengers in the vehicle you can optimize the temperature in the car you can change the lighting right so if the backseat passengers are falling asleep you can din the lights you can lower the music right you can do all sorts of things yeah um i mean of course you could do that kind of stuff with the two-year delay but it's tougher yeah um do you think do you think uh a Tesla or Waymo or some of these companies they're doing semi or fully autonomous driving should be doing driver sensing yes are you thinking about that kind of stuff so not just how we can enhance the in-cap experience for cars that are mailing driven but the ones that are increasingly more autonomously driven yeah so if we fast forward to the universe where it's fully autonomous i think interior sensing becomes extremely important because the role of the driver isn't just to drive think about the driver almost manages manages the dynamics within a vehicle and so who's going to play that role when it's an autonomous car we we want a solution that is able to say oh my god like you know Lexus board to death because the car's moving way too slow let's engage Lex or Rana's freaking out because she doesn't trust this vehicle yet so let's tell Rana like a little bit more information about the route or right so i think or somebody's having a heart attack in the car like you need interior sensing in fully autonomous vehicles but with semi autonomous vehicles i think it's i think it's really key to have driver monitoring because semi autonomous means that sometimes the car is in charge sometimes the driver is in charge or the co-pilot right and you need this you need both systems to be on the same page you need to know the car needs to know of the driver's asleep before it transitions control over to the driver and sometimes if the driver's too tired the car can say i'm going to be a better driver than you are right now i'm taking control over so this dynamic this dance is so key and you can't do that without driver sensing yeah those are disagreement for the longest time i've had to de-lawn that this is obvious that this should be in the Tesla from day one and it's obvious the driver sensing is not a hindrance that obvious it should be careful because having studied this problem nothing is really obvious but it seems very likely a driver sensing is not a hindrance to an experience it's only in enriching to the experience and likely increases the safety that said it is very surprising to me just having studied semi autonomous driving how well humans are able to manage that dance because it was the intuition before you were doing that kind of thing humans will become just incredibly distracted they would just like let the thing do its thing but they're able to you know because it is life and death and they're able to manage that somehow but that said there's no reason not to have a driver sensing on top of that i feel like that's going to allow you to do that dance that you're currently doing without driver sensing except the touching the steering wheel to do that even better i mean the possibilities are endless and the machine learning possibilities are endless such a it's such a beautiful it's also constrained environments you could do a much more effectively than you can with the external environment right external environment is full of weird edge cases and complexities just inside there's so much it's so fascinating such a fascinating world i i do hope that companies like Tesla and others even even Waymo which i don't even know if Waymo is doing anything sophisticated inside the cab i don't think so like like what what what is it i honestly think i honestly think it goes back to the robotics thing we were talking about which is like great engineers that are building these AI systems just are afraid of the human being and not thinking about the human experience they're thinking about the features and yeah the perceptual abilities of that thing they think the best way i can serve the human is by doing the best perception and control i can by looking at the external environment keeping the human safe but like there's a huge i'm here right like uh you know i need to be uh noticed and um interact with and understood and all those kinds of things even just in a personal level for entertainment honestly for entertainment yeah um you know one of the coolest work we did in collaboration with MIT around this was we looked at longitudinal data right off dry because because you know MIT had access to like tons of data um and we and like just seeing the patterns of people like driving in the morning versus off to work versus like commuting back from work or weekend driving versus weekday driving and is would it be so cool if your car knew that and then was able to optimize either the route or the experience or even make recommendations yeah i think it's very powerful yeah like why are you taking this route you've always unhappy when you take this route and you're always happy when you take this alternative route take that route exactly that i mean that if to have that even that little step of relationship with the car i think is is incredible of course you have to get the privacy right you can get all that kind of stuff right but yeah i wish i honestly you know people are like paranoid about this but i would like a smart refrigerator we have a such a deep connection with food as a human civilization i would like to have a refrigerator that would understand me that you know i also have a complex relationship with food because like you know pay god too easily and all that kind of stuff so you try you know like maybe i want the refrigerator to be like are you sure about this because maybe you're just feeling down or tired like maybe maybe maybe the smart refrigerator is way kinder than mine is it just me and yelling at you yeah no it was just because i i don't i don't you know i don't drink alcohol i don't smoke but i eat a ton of chocolate like it's my and so i and and sometimes i scream too and i'm like okay my smart refrigerator will just lock locked down i'll just say dude you've had way too many today like that yeah no but here's the thing are you do regret having like let's say not the next day but 30 days later would you what would you what would you like to the refrigerator to have done then well i think actually like the more positive relationship would be one where there's a conversation right as opposed to like fort that's probably like the more sustainable relationship it's like a late late at night just no listen listen i know i told you an hour ago that it's not a good idea but just listen things have changed i can just imagine a bunch of stuff being made up just to convince tell areas uh but i mean i just think that there's opportunities that i mean maybe not locking down but for our systems that are such a deep part of our lives like we use uh we use a lot of us uh a lot of people that commute use their carves in the day a lot of us use a refrigerator every single day the microwave every single day like and we just like i feel like certain things could be made more efficient more enriching and AI is there to help like some just basic recognition of of use of human being but your patterns of what what makes you happy not happy and all that kind of stuff and the car obviously maybe maybe maybe we'll say well instead of this like gen Ben and Terry's ice cream how about this hummus and carrots or something i don't know maybe we wouldn't make it like yeah like a reminder just the time recommendation right but not like a generic one but a reminder that last time you chose the carrots you smiled 17 times more the next day yeah you were you're happier the next day and uh and but yeah i don't but then again if you're the kind of person that that gets better from negative negative comments you could say like hey remember like that wedding you're going to you want to fit into that dress remember about that let's think about that for your eating this no i don't it's for some probably that would work for me like a refrigerator that is just ruthless it's shaming me but like i would of course welcome it like that would that would work for me just that that well it would know i think it would if it's really like smart it would optimize its nudging based on what works for you right exactly that's what point personalization right in every way deep personalization you were a part of a webinar titled advancing road safety the state of alcohol intoxication research so for people who don't know every year 1.3 million people are on the world dying road crashes and more than 20% of these fatalities are estimated to be alcohol related a lot of them are also distraction related so can AI help with the alcohol thing i think the answer is yes there are signals and we know that as humans like we can tell in a person you know is it different phases of being drunk um right yeah and i think you can use technology to do the same and again i think the ultimate solution is going to be a combination of different sensors how far is the problem from the vision perspective i think it's non trivial i think it's non trivial and and i think the biggest part is getting the data right it's like getting enough data examples so we for this research project we partnered with the transportation authorities of sweeten and we literally had a racetrack with a safety driver and we basically progressively got people drunk nice so but but you know uh that's that's a very expensive data set to to collect and you want to collect it globally and in multiple conditions and yeah the ethics of collecting a data set where people are drunk is tricky yeah definitely just funny because i mean let's put drunk driving aside the number of drunk people in the world every day is very large it'd be nice to have a large data set of drunk people getting progressively drunk in fact you can build an app where people can donate their data because it's hilarious right actually yeah but the liability liability the ethics the how do you get it right it's tricky it's really really tricky because like drinking is one of those things that's funny and hilarious and what loves it's social the so on and so forth but it's also the thing that hurts a lot of people like a lot of people like alcohol is one of those things it's legal but it it's really damaging to a lot of lives it destroys lives and not just in the driving context i should mention people should listen to Andrew Huberman who recently talked about alcohol he has an amazing pocket Andrew Huberman is a neuroscientist from Stanford and a good friend of mine and he he's like a human encyclopedia about all health related wisdom so he had this a podcast you you would love it i would love that no no no no no no you don't know Andrew Huberman okay listen you listen to to Andrew he's called Huberman Lab podcast think this is your assignment just listen to one okay i guarantee you this will be a thing where you say Lex this is the greatest human i have ever discovered so oh my god because i've really i'm really on a journey of kind of health and wellness and i'm learning lots and i'm trying to like build these i guess atomic habits around just being healthy um so i yeah i'm definitely gonna do this i'm gonna his whole thing this is this is this is great uh like he's a legit scientist like um really well published but in his podcast what he does he's not he's not talking about his own work he's like a human encyclopedia of papers and so he his whole thing is he takes the topic and in a very fast mention of tomming habits like very clear way summarizes the research in a way that leads to protocols of what you should do he's really big on like not like this is what the science says but like this is literally what you should be doing according to science so like he's really big and there's a lot of recommendations he does which several of them i definitely don't do like get sunlight as soon as possible from waking up and like for prolonged periods of time okay that's a really big one and he's there's a lot of science behind that one there's there's a bunch of stuff like that you're gonna you're gonna you're gonna be like Lex this is this is my new favorite person i guarantee it and if you guys somehow don't know and you're human and you care about your well-being um you know you should definitely listen to him uh love you and you're anyway so uh what were we talking about oh alcohol and detecting alcohol so this is a problem you care about and you're trying to solve and actually like broadening it um i do believe that the car is gonna be a wellness center like because again imagine if you have a variety of sensors inside the vehicle tracking not just your emotional state or level of distraction and drowsiness and drowsiness level of distraction drowsiness and intoxication but also maybe even things like um your physical you know your heart rate and your heart rate variability and your breathing rate um and it can start like optimizing yeah it can optimize the ride based on what your goals are so i think we're gonna start to see more of that and i'm excited about that yeah what are the what are the challenges you're tackling while with smart i currently what's like the the trickiest things to get is it is it basically convincing more and more car companies that having a i inside the car is a good idea or is there some is there more technical algorithmic challenges what's what's been keeping you mentally busy i think a lot of the car companies we are in conversations with are already interested in definitely driver monitoring like i think it's becoming a must-have but even interior sensing i can see like we're engaged in a lot of like advanced engineering projects and proof of concepts um i think technologically though and that even the technology i can see a path to making it happen i think it's the use case like how does the car respond once it knows something about you because you wanted to respond in a thoughtful way that doesn't that isn't off-putting to the consumer in the car so i think that's like the user experience i don't think we've really nailed that and we usually that's not part we're the sensing platform but we usually collaborate with the car manufacturer to decide what the use cases so so say you you figure out that somebody's angry while driving okay what should the car do you know do you see yourself as a role of nudging of like basically coming up with solutions essentially that and then and then the the car manufacturers kind of put their own little spin on it right like we we we are like the ideation right creative thought partner but at the end of the day the car company needs to decide what's on brand for them right like maybe when it figures out that you're distracted or drowsy it shows you a coffee cup right or maybe it takes more aggressive behaviors and basically said okay if you don't like take a rest in the next five minutes the car's going to shut down right like there's a whole range of actions the car can take and doing the thing that is most yeah the builds trust with the driver and the passengers i think that's what we need to be very careful about yeah car companies are funny because they have their own like i mean that's what people get cars still i hope that changes but they get it because it's a certain feel and look and the certain they become proud like Mercedes-Benz or BMW or whatever and that's their thing that's the family brand or something like that or Ford or GM whatever they they stick to that thing yeah it's interesting so it should be i don't know it it should be a little more about the technology inside and i suppose there too there could be a branding like a very specific style of luxury or fun right right all that kind of stuff yeah you know i'm um i have a i have an AI focused fun to invest in early stage kind of AI driven companies and one of the companies we're looking at is trying to do a tessla did but for boats for recreational boats yeah they're so they're building an electric and kind of slash autonomous um boat and it's kind of the same issues like what kind of sensors can you put in what kind of states can you detect both exterior and interior within the boat it's anyways it's like really interesting do you boat at all no not well not in that way i i do like to get on the lake uh or river and fish from okay but that's not boating that's the difference that's still boating low tech low tech boat get away from get closer to nature boat i guess going out to the ocean is also uh is also getting closer to nature it's a deep sense i mean i guess that's why people love it yeah the the the enormity of the water just underneath you yeah i love the i love both i love salt water it was like the big and just it's humbling to be in front of this giant thing that's so powerful that was here before us and be here after but also love the piece of a small like wooded lake just everything's calm uh um therapeutic you tweeted that i'm excited about amazon's acquisition of iroba i think it's a super interesting just given the trajectory of which you're part of of these honestly small number of companies that are playing in the space that are like trying to have an impact on human beings so the it is an interesting moment in time that amazon would acquire iroba uh you you tweet i imagine a future where home robots are as ubiquitous as microwaves or toasters here are three reasons why i think this is exciting if you remember i can look it up but what why is this exciting to you i mean i think the first reason why this is exciting kind of remember the exact like um order in which i put them but one is just it's it's going to be an incredible platform for understanding our behaviors within the home right like you know if you think about roombell which is um you know the robot vacuum cleaner the flagship product of iroba at the moment um it's like running around your home understanding the layout is understanding what's clean and what's not how often declean your house and all of these like behaviors are a piece of the puzzle in terms of understanding who you are as a consumer and i think that could be again um used in in really meaningful ways not just to recommend better products or whatever but actually to improve your experiences of human beings so i think i think that's very interesting um i think the natural evolution of these robots in the in the home so it's it's interesting roomba isn't really a social robot right at the moment um but i once interviewed one of the chief engineers on the roomba team and he talked about how people named their roombus and if their roomba broke down they would call in and say you know my roomba broke down and the company would say well just send you a new one and no no no Rosie like you have to like yeah i want you to fix this particular robot um so people have already built like interesting emotional connections with these home robots and i think that again that provides a platform for really interesting things to to just motivate change like it could help you i mean one of the companies that spun out of MIT uh katalia health um the guy who started it spent a lot of time building robots that help with weight management so weight management sleep eating better yeah all all of these things um with if i'm being honest amazon is not exactly have a track record of winning over people in terms of trust now that said it's a really difficult problem for human being to let a robot in their home that has a camera on it right that's really really really tough and i think roomba actually i have to think about this but i'm pretty sure now or for some time already has had cameras because they're doing the the the most recent roomba i have so many roombos oh you actually do well i program that i don't use a roomba for back off people that been to my place they're like yeah you definitely don't use these roombos uh good good good i can't tell like the valence of this comment it was that a compliment or like no it's a giant it's just a bunch of electronics everywhere there's i have uh six or seven computers have robots everywhere like robots a small robots and big robots is just giant just piles of robots stuff and yeah um but including the roomba's they're they're they're being used for their body and intelligence but not for their purpose i have re i've changed them with the repurpose them for other purposes for deeper more meaningful purposes than just like the bottom robot yeah which is you know it brings a lot of people happiness i'm sure uh they have a camera because the thing they advertised i had my own camera still but the the camera on the new roomba they have like state-of-the-art poop detection as they advertised which is a very difficult apparently it's a big problem for vacuum cleaners is you know if they go over like dog poop it just runs it runs it over and creates a giant mess so they have like and apparently they collected like a huge amount of data and a different shapes and looks and whatever of poop and then not able to avoid it and so on they're very proud of this uh so there is a camera but you don't think of it as having a camera yeah you don't think of it as having a camera because you've grown to trust that i guess because our phones at least most of us seem to trust right this phone even though there's a camera looking directly at you i think that if you trust that the company is taking security very seriously actually don't know how that trust was earned with smartphones i think i just started to provide a lot of positive value into your life where you just took it in and then the company over time is showing that it takes privacy very seriously that kind of stuff but i just amazon is not always in in its social robots communicated this is a trustworthy thing both in terms of culture and competence because i think privacy is not just about what do you intend to do but also how well how good are you at doing that kind of thing right so that's a really hard problem to solve but i mean but a lot of us have elaxes at home and i mean elaxe could be listening in the whole time right and doing all sorts of nefarious things with the data um yeah it's not but i don't think it is but you know amazon is not it's such a tricky thing for a company to get right which is like to earn the trust i don't think elaxes are in people's trust quite yet yeah i think it's it's not there quite yet i agree and they struggle with this kind of stuff right in fact when these topics are brought up people are always get like nervous and i think if you get nervous about it i mean that like the way to earn people's trust is not by like oh don't talk about this it's just be open be frank be transparent and also create a culture of like where it radiates at every level from engineer to c.e.l that like you're good people that have a common sense idea of what it means to respect basic human rights and the privacy of people and all that kind of stuff and i think that propagates throughout the uh that's the best PR which is like over time you understand that this these are good these good folks doing good things anyway uh uh speak out of social robots have you heard about Tesla Tesla about the human robot yes i have yes yes but i don't exactly know what it's designed to do to you you probably do uh no i know it's designed to do but i i have a different perspective on it but is designed to it's a humanoid form and it's designed to for automation tasks in the same way that industrial robot arms automate task in the factory so it's designed to automate task in the factory but i think that humanoid form as we were talking about before is um is one that we connect with a human beings anything anything legate honestly but the humanoid form especially we anthropomorphize it most intensely and so the possibility to me it's exciting to see both atlas developed by Boston dynamics and uh anyone including Tesla trying to make humanoid robots cheaper and more effective the obvious way transforms the world is social robotics to me uh versus um versus automation of tasks in the factory so yeah i just wanted to in case that was something you were interested in because i i find it i find its application of social robotics super interesting we did a lot of work with uh pepper um pepper the robot a while back we were like the emotion engine for pepper which is soft banks humanoid robot how tall is pepper it's like yeah like um i don't know like five foot maybe right yeah pretty pretty big pretty big um and it was designed to be at like airport lounges and you know retail stores mostly customer service right hotel lobbies um and i mean i don't know where the state of the robot is but i think it's very promising i think there are a lot of applications where this can be helpful i'm also really interested in um yeah social robotics for the home right like that can help elderly people for example transport things from one location of the home to the other or even like just have your back in case something happens um yeah i don't know i do i do think it's a very interesting space it seems early though do you feel like the timing is now i yes 100 percent uh so it always seems early until it's not right right right right i think the time well i definitely think that the time is now like this decade for social robots whether the humanoid form is right i don't think so i don't i think uh the like if we just look jibbo at jibbo as an example i feel like most of the problem the challenge the opportunity of social connection between an AI system and the human being does not require you to also solve the problem of robot manipulation and mobility by pedo mobility so i think you could do that with just a screen honestly but there's something about the interface of jibbo we can rotate and so on that's also compelling but you get to see all these robot companies that are fail that fail incredible companies like jibbo and um even uh i mean the i robot in some sense is a big success story that it was able to find right and and each and each thing and focus on it but in some sense it's not a success story because they didn't build any other robot like any other it didn't expand into all kinds of robotics like once you're in the home maybe that's what happens with amazon is there flourishing to all kinds of other robots but uh do you do you have a sense by the way why it's so difficult to build a robot company like why so many companies have failed i think it's like a you're building a vertical stack right like you're building the hardware plus the software and you find you have to do this at a cost that makes sense so i think jibbo was retailing at like i don't know like 800 like seven hundred eight hundred dollars which for the use case right there's a dissonance there it's it's too high so i think cost is a is you know cost of building the whole platform in a way that that is yeah that that is affordable for what value it's bringing i think that's the challenge um i think for these home robots that are going to help you know help you do stuff around the home um that's a challenge too like the mobility piece of it that's that's hard one one of the things i'm really excited with with with tesla bot is the people working on it and that that's probably the criticism i would apply to some of the other folks who worked on social robots is the people working on tesla bot know how to they're focused on and know how to do mass manufacture and create a product that's super cheap very cool that's the focus the engineering focus isn't i would say you can also criticize them for that is they're not uh focused on the experience of the robot they're they're focused on how to get this thing to do the basic stuff that the humanoid form requires to do as cheap as possible then the the smallest number of actuators the furious numbers of motors the increasing efficiency they decrease the weight all that kind of stuff so that's that's really interesting i i would say that jibon all those folks they focus on the design the experience all of that and it's secondary how to manufacture right now you have to think uh like the tesla bot folks from first principles what is the fewest number of components the cheapest components how can i build it as much in house as possible without without having to consider all the complexity of the supply chain all that kind of stuff interesting because if you have to build the robot as company you you have to you're not building one robot you're building hopefully millions of robots they have to figure out how to do that where the final thing i mean if it's jibotepa robot is there a reason why jibot like we can have this lengthy discussion is there a reason why jibot has to be over a hundred dollars it shouldn't be right like the basic i the basic components of it right like you can start to actually discuss like okay what is the essential thing about jibot how much what is the cheapest way i can have a screen what's the cheapest way i can have a rotating base all that kind of stuff and then and then you get get down continuously drive down cost speaking of which you have launched an extremely successful companies you have helped others you've invested in companies can you give advice and other start a successful company i would say have a problem that you really really really want to solve right something that you're deeply passionate about um and honestly take the first step like that's often the hardest and don't overthink it like you know like this idea of a minimum viable product or a minimum viable version of an idea right like yes you're thinking about this like humongous like super elegant super beautiful thing what did like reduce it to the littlest thing they can bring to market that can solve a problem or that can i you know that can help um address a pain point that somebody has um they often tell you like start with a customer of one right if you can solve a problem for one person then there's probably self or some other person right pick pick a person exactly it could be you yeah that's actually often a good sign that if you enjoy a thing right enjoy a thing where you have a specific problem that you like to solve that's a good that's a good end of one to focus on right what else what else is there to actually so step one is the hardest but how do you know there's other steps as well right um i also think like who you bring around the table early on is so key right like being clear on on what i call like your core values or your north star it might sound fluffy but actually it's not so and rouse and i feel like we did that very early on we sat around her kitchen table and we said okay there's so many applications of this technology how are we going to draw the line how are we going to set boundaries we came up with a set of core values that in the hardest of times we fell back on to determine how we make decisions and so i feel like just getting clarity on these core like for us it was respecting people's privacy only engaging with industries where it's clear opt-ins so for instance we don't do any work in security and surveillance um so things like that just getting we very big on you know one of our core values is human connection and empathy right and that is yes it's an AI company but it's about people well these are all they become encoded in how we act even even if you're a small tiny team of two or three or whatever um so i think that's another piece of advice so what about finding people hiring if you care about people as much as you do like and this it seems like such a difficult thing to to hire the right people i think early on to just start up you want people who have um who share the passion and the conviction because because it's going to be tough like i've yet to meet a startup where it was just a straight line to success right even even not to start up like even everyday people's lives right there you always like have run into obstacles and you run into naysayers and um so you need people who are believers whether they're people on your team or even your investors you need investors who are really believers in what you're doing because that means they will stick with you they won't they won't give up at the first obstacle yeah i think that's important what about raising money what about finding investors first of all raising raising money but also raising money from the right sources from that ultimately don't hinder you but you know help you empower you all that kind of stuff what a device would you give there you successfully raised money and many times in your life yeah again it's not just about the money um it's about finding the right investors who are going to be aligned in terms of what you want to build and believe in your core values like for example especially later on like i yeah in my latest like round of funding i try to bring in investors that um really care about like the ethics of AI right and they alignment of of vision and mission and core values is really important it's like you're picking a life partner right it's the same kind of so you take it that seriously for investors yeah because they're gonna have to stick with you you're stuck together for a while anyway yeah maybe not for life but for a while for sure yeah better or worse i forget what the the vows usually sound like for better or worse no that was sick sick it's through something yeah yeah oh boy um yeah anyway it's romantic and deep and you're in it for a while um so it's not just about the money you tweeted about going to your first capital camp investing get together and yeah and then you learned a lot so this is about investing so what what have you learned from that what what have you learned about investing in general from both because you've been on both ends of it i mean i try to use my experience as an operator now with my investor had on when i'm identifying companies to to invest in um first of all i i think the good news is because i have a technology background right and i really understand you know machine learning and computer vision and AI etc i can apply that level of understanding right because everybody says there an AI company or there an AI tech and i'm like no no no no no show me the technology so i can do that level of diligence which i actually love um and then i i have to do the litmus test of you know if i'm in a conversation with you am i excited to tell you about this new company that i just met right and and and if i if i'm an ambassador for that company and i'm passionate about what they're doing i i usually use that yeah that's important to me when i'm investing that means you actually can't explain what they're doing and and you're excited about it exactly exactly thank you for putting it so succinctly just like rambling but exactly that's it sometimes sometimes it's fun it's funny but sometimes it's unclear exactly you all hear people tell me you know i'm gonna talk for a while and it sounds cool like they paint a picture of a world but then when you try to summarize it you're not exactly clear of what uh maybe maybe what the core powerful idea is you can't just build another Facebook or um there has to be a there has to be a core simple to explain idea that yeah that then you can or can't get excited about it's there it's there it's right there yeah yeah what uh but how do you ultimately pick who you think will be successful it's not just about the thing you're excited about like there's other stuff right and then there's all the quest you know with early stage companies like pre-seed companies which is where i'm investing sometimes the the business model isn't clear yet or the go-to-market strategy isn't clear there's usually like it's very early on that some of these things haven't been hashed out which is okay so the way i like to think about it is like if this company's successful will this be a multi-billion slash trillion dollar market yeah you know our company and and so that's definitely a lens that i use um what's pre what's pre-seed what are the different stages and what's the most exciting stage and what's or not what's what's interesting about every stage i guess yeah so pre-seed is usually when you're just starting out you've maybe raised the friends and family around so you've raised some money from people you know and you're getting ready to for it to take your first institutional check-in like first check from an investor and um i love this stage there's a lot of uncertainty so some investors really don't like this stage because the financial models aren't there often the teams aren't even like formed really really early um but to me it's it's like a magical stage because it's it's the time when there's so much conviction so much belief almost delusional right yeah and there's a little bit of naivete around uh with with founders at the stage and i just love it it's contagious and um and i love i love that i can and often their first time founders not always but often their first time founders and i can share my experiences of founder myself and i can empathize right and i can almost i create a safe ground where because you know you have to be careful what you tell your investors right and i will i will often like say i've been in your shoes as a founder you can tell me if it's challenging you can tell me what you're struggling with it's okay to vent so i create that safe ground um and i think i think that's the superpower yeah i you have to uh what i guess you have to figure out if this kind of person is it going to able to ride the roller coaster uh like of many pivots and challenges and all that kind of stuff and if the space of ideas they're working in is interesting like the way they think about the world yeah because if it's successful the thing they end up with might be very different the reason it's successful for actually you you know i was going to say the third criteria so the technologies one aspect the market or the idea right as the second and the third is the founder right is this somebody who i believe has conviction is a hustler you know it's gonna overcome obstacles um yeah i think that it is gonna be a great leader right like as a startup as a founder you're often you are the first person and your role is to bring amazing people around you to build this thing and so you're in an evangelist right so how good are you gonna be at that so i try to evaluate that too you also in the tweet right about mention is this a known concept random rich dudes are rds and saying that there should be like random rich women i guess what's the dudes what's the dudes version of women the women version of dudes ladies i don't know what what's what's is this the technical term is this known random i didn't make that up but i was at this capital camp which is a get together for investors of all types and there must have been maybe 400 or so attendees maybe 20 were women it was just very disproportionately um yeah you know i'm a male i'm male dominated which i'm used to i think you're used to this kind of thing i'm used to it but it's still surprising yeah and as i'm raising money for this fund so my my fund partner uh it's a guy called rob may who's done this before so i'm new to the investing world but he's done this before most of our investors in the fund are these i mean awesome i'm super grateful to them random just rich guys i'm like where are the rich women so i'm really adamant in both investing in women led AI companies but i also would love to have women investors be part of my fund um because i think that's how we drive change yeah so the net you know that that takes time of course but there's been quite a quite a lot of progress but yeah for for the next mark zaka broke to be a woman and all that kind of stuff because that that's just like a huge number of wealth generated by right by a woman and then control by women then allocated by women and all the stuff and then beyond just women just broadly across all different measures of diversity and so on um let me ask you to put on your wise sage hat okay so we already we already gave advice on startups and just advice um for women but in general advice for folks in high school or college today how to have a career they can be proud of how to have a life they can be proud of i suppose you have to give this kind of advice to your kids well here's the number one advice that i give to my kids my daughter's now 19 by the way and my son's 13 and a half so they're not little kids anymore but but i break your heart it does like a girl but they're awesome they're my best friends but um yeah i think the number one advice i would share is embark on a journey without attaching to outcomes um and enjoy the journey right so you know we often were so obsessed with with the end goal a that doesn't allow us to be open to different endings of a of a journey or a story um so you become like so fixated on a particular path you don't see the beauty in the other alternative path um and then you forget to enjoy the journey because you're just so fixated on the goal and i've been guilty of that for many many years in my life and i've i've now i'm now trying to like make the shift of no no no i'm gonna again trust that things are gonna work out and it'll be amazing and maybe even exceed your dreams we have to be open to that yeah taking uh taking a leap into all kinds of things i think you you tweeted like you won a vacation by yourself or something like this or i know this and just just just just going just taking the leap doing it and enjoying it enjoying the enjoying the enjoying the moment enjoying the weeks enjoying not looking at the uh some kind of career ladder next step and so on yeah there's there's something to that like overplanning too i'm surrounded by a lot of people that kind of sorry i don't plan you don't know you do not do goal setting um my goal setting is very like i like the affirmations it's very it's almost uh i don't know how to put into words but it's it's a little bit like um what my heart yearns for kind of and i guess in the space of emotions more than in the space of like this would be like in the rational space i just tried to picture a world that i would like to be in and that world is not clearly pictured it's mostly in the emotional world i mean i think about that from from robots because you know i have this desire i've had it my whole life to to well it took different shapes but i think once i discovered a i the desire was to i think in this in the context of this conversation could be easily easier described as basically a social robotics company and that's something i dreamed of doing and um well there's a lot there's a lot of complexity to that story but that that's that's the that's the only thing honestly i dream of doing so i imagine a world that that i could help create but it's not um there's no steps along the way and i think i'm just kind of stumbling around and following happiness and working my ass off in almost random like an ant does in the right direction but a lot of people a lot of success will be around me say this you should have a plan you should have a clear goal you have a goal at the end of a month you have a goal at the end of the year i don't i don't i don't and um there's a balance to be struck of course but there's something to be said about really making sure that you're living life to the fullest that goals can actually get in the way of so one of the best like kind of most um what do you what do you call it when it's like challenges your brain what do you call it um uh uh uh the only thing that comes to mind and this is me saying is the mind fuck but yes okay okay okay something like that yes super inspiring talk kind of Stanley he was at open AI he just laughed and he has a book called why greatness can't be planned and it's actually an AI book so and he's done all these experiments that basically show that when you over optimize you you like the tradeoff is you're less creative right and to create true greatness and truly creative solutions to problems you can't overplan it you can't and i thought that was and so he generalizes it beyond AI and he talks about how we apply that in our personal life and in our organizations and our companies which are over kpi right like look at any company in the world and it's all like these are the goals these are the you know weekly goals and you know the sprints and then the quarterly goals blah blah blah and and he just shows with a lot of his AI experiments that that's not how you create truly game changing ideas so there you go yeah yeah play it there should can't he's awesome yeah there's a balance of course because that's yeah many moments of genius will not come from planning and goals but you still have to build factories and you still have to manufacture you still have to deliver and there's still deadlines and all that kind of stuff and that for that's good to have goals i do goal setting with my kids we all have our goals but but but i think we're starting to morph into more of these like bigger picture goals and not obsess about like i don't know it's hard well i honestly think with especially with kids it's better much much better to have a plan i have goals and so on because you have to you have to learn the muscle of like what it feels like to get stuff done yeah but i think once you learn that there's flexibility for me because i spent most of my life with goal setting and so on so like sure i've gotten good with grades in school i mean school if you want to be successful at school you have i mean the kind of stuff in high school and college the kids have to do in terms of managing their time getting so much stuff done it's like you know taking five six seven classes in college they're like that would break the the spirit of most humans if they took one of them later in life let's say really difficult stuff especially engineering curricula so i think you have to learn that skill but once you learn it you can maybe because you're you can be a little bit on autopilot and use that momentum and then allow yourself to be lost in the flow of life you know just kind of um or also give like i work pretty hard to allow myself to have the freedom to do that that's really right that's a tricky freedom to have yeah because like a lot of people get lost in the right race and they right and they also like like financially they whenever you get a raise they'll get like a bigger house right right right this i put it so like you there's you're always trapped in this race i put a lot of emphasis on um uh living like below my means always and so there's a lot of freedom to do whatever whatever the hard desires that yeah that's a really but everyone has to decide what's the right thing what's the right thing for them for some people having a lot of responsibilities like a house they can barely afford or having a lot of kids the responsibility side of that is really helps them get their shit together like all right i need to be really focused and get some of the most successful people i know have kids and the kids bring out the best in them they make them more productive right the accountability yeah accountability thing and and almost something to actually live and fight and work for like having a family yeah it's it's fascinating to see because you would think kids would be a hit on productivity but they're not for a lot of really successful people they really like they're like an engine of right efficiency oh my yeah yeah it's weird yeah i mean it's beautiful it's beautiful to see and also social happiness speaking of which what role do you think love plays in the human condition love uh i i think love is is um yeah i think i think it's why we're all here i think it would be very hard to live life without love in any of its forms right yeah that's the most beautiful of uh forms that human connection takes right yeah i feel like everybody wants to feel loved right and one way or another right and and to love yeah and to love to toly yeah i agree with that both of it i mean i can assure what feels better uh both both like that given to give love to yeah and and it is like we've been talking about an interesting question whether some of that whether one day will be able to love a toaster okay some small i wasn't quite thinking about that when i said like love yeah like we all love and give love okay i was thinking about Brad Pitt and toaster's great all right well uh i think we we started on love and ended on love um this was an incredible conversation around and thank you so much you're you're an incredible person thank you for everything you're doing in in in in AI in in the space of um just caring about humanity human emotion about love and being an inspiration to a huge number of people in robotics in AI in science in the world of general so thank you for talking to me it's an honor thank you for having me and you know i'm a big fan of yours as well so it's been a pleasure thanks for listening to this conversation with rana elka you be to support this podcast please check out our sponsors in the description and now let me leave you with some words from Helen Keller the best that most beautiful things in the world cannot be seen or even touched they must be felt with the heart thank you for listening and hope to see you next time