The only person who calls you more harm than a thief with a dagger is a journalist with a pen. The following is a conversation with Bill Ackman, a legendary activist investor who has been part of some of the biggest and at times controversial trades in history. Also, he is fearlessly vocal on X, FKA, Twitter, and uses the platform to fight for ideas he believes in. For example, he was a central figure in the resignation of the president of Harvard University, Claudine Gay, the saga of which we discuss in this episode. This is the Lex Friedman podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description and now to your friends, here's Bill Ackman. In your lecture on the basics of finance and investing, you mentioned a book, Intelligent Investor by Benjamin Graham, as being formative in your life. What key lesson do you take away from that book that informs your own investing? Sure. Actually, it was the first investment book I read and as such, it was kind of the inspiration for my career and a lot of my life. So, an important book, you know, Baron Mine, this is sort of after the Great Depression, people lost confidence in investing in markets, World War II, and then he writes his book, and it's for like the average man. And basically, he says that you have to understand the difference between price and value. Right? Price is what you pay. Value is what you get. And so the stock market is here to serve you. Right? And it's a bit like the neighbor that comes by every day and makes you an offer for your house, makes you a stupid offer you ignore it, makes you a great offer, you can take it. And that's the stock market. And the key is to figure out what something's worth and you have to kind of weigh it. He talked about the difference between, you know, the stock market in the short term is a voting machine. It represents speculative interests, you know, supply and demand of people in the short term. But in the long term, it's a stock market's a weighing machine, you know, much more accurate. It's going to tell you what something's worth. And so if you can divine what something's worth, then you can really take advantage of the market because it's really here to help you. And that's kind of the message of the book. In that same way, there's a kind of difference between speculation and investing. Yeah, speculation is just a bit like buying trading crypto, right? Your strong words. Well, short term trading crypto, maybe in the long run, there's intrinsic value, but the, you know, it's many investors, you know, in a bubble going into the, you know, the crash. We're really just pure speculators. They didn't know what things were worth. They just knew they were going up. Right? That's speculation. And investing is, you know, doing your homework, taking down understanding of business, understanding the competitive dynamics of an industry, understanding what management's going to do, understanding what price you're going to pay, you know, the value of anything, I would say, other than love, let's say, is the present value of the cash you can take out of it over its life. Now, some people think about love that way, but it's not. It's not the right way to think about love, but it's, yeah, so investing is about basically building a model of what this business is going to produce over its lifetime. So how do you get to that? This idea of called value investing. How do you get to the value of a thing, even like philosophically value of anything really, but we can just talk about the things that are on the stock market. Sure companies. The value of a security value is the present value of the cash. You can take out of it over its life. So if you think about a bond, you have bond pays a 5% coupon interest rate, you get that, you know, let's say every year or twice a year, split in half. And it's very predictable. And if it's a US government bond, you know, you're going to get it. So that's a pretty easy thing to value. A stock is an interest in a business. It's like owning a piece of a company. And a business, a profitable one is like a bond and that it generates these coupons or these earnings or cash flow, you know, every year. The difference with a stock and a bond is that the bond, it's a contract. You know what you're going to get as long as they don't go bankrupt and default. With a stock, you have to make predictions about the business. You know, how many widgets are going to sell this year? How many are going to sell next year? What are the costs going to be? How much of the money that they generate that they need to reinvest in the business to keep the business going? And that's more complicated. But, you know, what we do is we try to find businesses where with a very high degree of confidence, we know what those cash flows are going to be for a very long time. And there are a few businesses that you can have really high degree of certainty, but as a result, you know, many investments are speculations because it's really very difficult to predict the future. So we, what we do for a living, what I do for a living is find those rare companies that you can kind of predict what they're going to look like over a very long period of time. So what are the factors that indicate that a company is something is going to be something that's going to make a lot of money. It's going to have a lot of value and it's going to be reliable over a long period of time. And what is your process of figuring out whether a company is a reason for that? So every consumer has a view on different brands and different companies. And, you know, what we look for are sort of these non-disruptible businesses, a business where you can kind of close your eyes, stock market shuts for a decade. And you know that 10 years from now, it's going to be a more valuable, more profitable company. So we own a business called Universal Music Group. It's in the business of helping artists become global artists, sort of recorded music business. And it's in the business of, you know, owning rights to sort of the music publishing rights of songwriters. And, you know, I think music is forever. Music is a many thousand year old human, part of the human experience. And I think it will be, you know, thousands of years from now. And so that's a pretty good backdrop to invest in a company. And the company basically owns a third of the global recorded music. And that's, you know, the most dominant sort of market share in the business. They're the best at taking an artist who's 18 years old. He's got a great voice and has started to get a presence on YouTube and Instagram and helping that artist become superstar. And that's a unique talent. And the result is the best artists in the world want to come work for them. But they also have this incredible library of, you know, the Beatles, the Rolling Stone, you two, etc. So, and then if you think about what music has become used to be about records and CDs and, you know, eight track tapes for those of whom it was about a new format and that's how they drive sales. And it's become a business which is like the podcast business about streaming. And you can streaming is a lot more predictable than with then selling records. Right. You can sort of say, OK, how many people have smartphones? How many people going to have smartphones next year? There's a kind of global penetration over time of smartphones. You pay, you call it $10, 11 bucks a month for a subscription or last for a family plan. And you can kind of build a model what the world looks like and predict, you know, the growth of the streaming business predict what kind of market share universal is going to have over time. And you can't get to a precise view of value. You can get to an approximation. And the key is to buy at a price that represents a big discount to that approximation. And that gets back to Ben Graham. Ben Graham was about what he called invented this concept of margin of safety. Right. You want to buy a company at a price that if you're wrong about what you think it's worth and it turns out to be worth 30% less. You paid a deep enough discount to your estimate that you're still OK. It's about investing a big part of investing is not losing money. If you can avoid losing money and then have a few great hits, you can do very, very well over time. Well, music is interesting because yes, music's been around for a very long time, but the way to make money from music has been evolving. Like you mentioned streaming. There's a big transition initiated by I guess Napster then create a Spotify of how you make money on music with with Apple and with all of this. And the question is how well are companies like UMG able to adjust the transformation is one I could ask you about the future, which is artificial intelligence being able to generate music. For example, there been a lot of amazing advancements with so do you have to also think about that like when you close your eyes, all the things you think about are you imagining the possible ways that the future is completely different from the present. And how well this company will be able to like serve the wave of that sure and they've had to serve a lot of ways and actually the music business peaked the last time in like the late 90s 2000 timeframe. And that really innovation Napster digitization of music almost killed the industry and universal really led an effort to save the industry and actually made an early deal with Spotify that enabled. You know the industry to really recover and so by virtue of their market position and their credibility and their willingness to kind of adopt new technologies they've kept their position now that of course had this huge advantage because I think the Beatles are forever I think you two is forever I think Rolling Stones are forever. So they had a nice base of assets that were important and I think will forever be forever's long time but you know the. Again there's enormous they're all kinds of risks in every business this is one that I think is a very high degree of persistence and I can't envision a world where beyond streaming in a sense now you may have a neural link chip in your head that instead of a phone but the music coming to digitize you know kind of format you're going to want to have an infinite library that you can walk around in your pocket or in your brain. It's not going to matter that much of the form factor you know the device changes not really that important whether it's Spotify or Apple or Amazon that are the so called DSPs or the providers I think the values really can reside in the in the content owners and that's really the artists and the label. And actually think a is not going to be the primary creator of music I think we're going to actually face the reality that it's not that music has been around for a thousand years but musicians and music has been around like we actually care to know who's the musician that created it just like want to know that who's the artist human artist that created a piece of art. Totally agree and I think if you think about it there's other lots of other technologies and computers that have been used to generate music over time but no one wants to no one falls in love with a computer generated track right and you know Taylor Swift you know incredible music but it's also about the artist and her story and her physical presence and you know the the live experience I don't think you're going to sit there. And so it was going to put computer up on stage and then and it's going to play in people were going to get excited around it so I think a eyes really going to be a tool to make artists better artists and and you know the I think like a synthesizer right really created the opportunity for you know one man to have an orchestra. Maybe a bit of a threat to percussionist but maybe not maybe it drove even more demand for for the live experience unless that computer has human like sentience which I believe is a real possibility but then it's really from a business perspective no different than a human if it has an identity that's basically fame and influence and there'll be a robot Taylor Swift and it doesn't really be a readable asset I would think. Right yeah and then there'll be just a world of that's different the world is not going to ask permission to become what is becoming so. You can still make money on it presumably there be a capital system and there'll be some laws under which. I believe I systems will have rights that are can't human rights and we're going to have to contend with what that means. Well there's sort of name and likeness rights that have to be protected now can a name be attributed to a Tesla robot I don't know. I think so I think it's quite obvious. Okay so there's more more potential artists for us to represent at universe exactly. All right that's sort of one example another example could be just you know the restaurant industry right if you can look at businesses like a McDonald's right so whatever the company's like a 1950 vintage business and here we are. It's you know 75 years later and you can kind of predict what it's going to look like over time and the menu is going to you know just over time to consumer taste and I think the hamburger and fries is probably forever. The Beatles are rolling stones the hamburger and fries are forever. I was eating at Chipotle last night as I was playing these notes. Thank you. Yeah it is one of my favorite places to eat you said it is a place that you eat you obviously also invest in it. What do you get at Chipotle? I tend to get a double chicken bowl or burrito. I like the burrito but I generally try to order the bowl. Yeah cut the car for heart reasons. And double chicken, guac lettuce, black beans and I'm more of a steak guy just just putting that in the record. What's the actual process you go through like literally like the process of figuring out what the value of a company is like how do you do the research? Is it reading documents? Is it talking to people? How do you do it? It's all about Chipotle. What attracted us initially is a stock price dropped by about 50%. Great company, great concept. You know athletes love it, consumers love it. Healthy, sustainable, fresh food made in front of your eyes. And you know great Steve L's the founder did an amazing job. But ultimately the company is lacking some of the systems and had a food safety issue. Consumers got sick, almost killed the rent. But the reality of the fast food quick service industry is almost every fast food company has had a food safety issue over time. And the vast majority have survived. And we said look such a great concept. But they you know if their approach was not as far from ideal. But we start with usually reading the SEC violence. So companies file a 10k or an annual report. And they have a proxy statement which describes kind of the governance, the board structure. Conference call transcripts are publicly available. It's kind of very helpful to go back five years and kind of learn the story. You know here's how management describes their business. Here's what they say they're going to do. And then you can follow along to see what they do. It's like a historical record of you know of how competent and truthful they are. And then of course looking at competitors and thinking about you know who could what could dislodge this company. And then we'll talk to if it's an industry we don't know well we know the restaurant industry really well music industry we'll talk to people in the industry. We'll try to understand you know the difference publishing and recorded music will look at the competitors. We'll talk to we'll read books you know I read a book about the music industry or couple books about the industry. So it's it's a bit like a big research project. And you these so called expert networks now and you can get pretty much anyone on the phone. And they'll talk to you about an aspect of the industry that you don't understand want to learn more about. Try to get a sense you know public filings of companies generally give you a lot of information but not everything you want to know. And you can learn more by talking to experts about some of the industry dynamics the personalities you want to get a sense of management. I like watching you know podcasts of the CEO were to do a podcast or a YouTube interview you get a sense of the people. So in the case of Chipotle for example by the way I could talk about Chipotle all day I just love it I love it I wish George a sponsor. I mentioned it to the CEO don't make promises you can't keep bill I'm not making it. Brian Nichols a fantastic CEO he's not going to spend one dollar it doesn't think it's a company's best interest. All right all I want is free Chipotle come on now. So you look at a company like Chipotle and then you see there's a difficult moment in its history like you said that there was a food safety issue. And then you say okay well I see a path where we can fix this and therefore even though the price is low we can get it to where the price goes up to its value. So the kind of business we're looking for is sort of the kind of business everyone should be looking for right a great business. It's got a long term trajectory of growth out into the force you know even beyond the foreseeable distance right those are the kind of businesses you want to own you want businesses that generate a lot of cash. You want businesses you can easily understand my business is with these sort of huge barriers entry where it's difficult for others to compete. You want companies that don't have to constantly raise capital and these are some of the great business of the world. But people figured out that those are the great businesses so the problem is those companies tend to have very high stock prices and the value is generally built into the price you have to pay for the business. So we can't earn the kind of returns we want to earn for investors by paying a really high price price matters a lot. You can buy the best business in the world and if you overpay you're not going to earn particularly attractive returns. So we get involved in cases where a great business has kind of made a big mistake where they were you've a company that's kind of lost its way but it's recoverable and that's we buy from shareholders who are disappointed with lost confidence selling at a low price relative to what it's worth if fixed and then we try to be helpful in fixing the company. You said that barriers to entry you said a lot of really interesting qualities of companies very quickly in a sequence of statements that took like less than 10 seconds to say but some of them were faster all of them were fastening so you said barriers to entry. How do you know if there's a type of moat protecting the competitors from stepping up to the plate. The most difficult analysis to do as an investor is that it's kind of figuring out how wide is the moat how you know how much at risk is the business to disruption and we're I would say a period the greatest period of disruptability in history right technology. So many you know a couple of 19 year olds can you know leave whatever university or maybe they didn't go in the first place they can raise you know millions of dollars they can get access to infinite bandwidth storage they can contract with the engineers in low cost markets around the world they could build a virtual company and they can disrupt businesses that seem super established over time and then on top of that you have major companies with multi trillion dollar market caps. Working to find profits wherever they can and so that's a dangerous world in a way to be an investor and so you want to you have to find businesses that it's hard to foresee a world in which they get disrupted in the beauty of the restaurant business and we actually our best track record is in restaurants we've never lost money we've only made a fortune interestingly investing restaurants big part of it's a really simple business and if you get your politely right and you're at a hundred stores. You know it's not so hard to envision getting to 200 stores and then getting to 500 stores right and the key is maintaining the brand image growing intelligently having the right systems you know when you go from 100 stores to 3500 stores you have to know what you're doing there's a lot of complexity right you know if you think about your local restaurant. You know the family's working in the business they're watching the cash register and you can probably open another restaurant you know across town but there are very few restaurant operators I don't know more than a few restaurants and operate them successfully and the quick service business is about systems and building a model that a stranger who doesn't know the restaurant industry can come in and enter the business and build a successful. It's a successful franchise now police not a franchise company they actually own all their own stores but many of the most successful restaurant companies are franchise miles like a Burger King a McDonald's Tim Hortons you know these various brands pop eyes and there it's about systems but the same systems apply whether you own all the stores and it's run by big corporation whether the owners of the restaurants are our sort of franchise is you know local entrepreneurs. So the restaurant has scaled to a certain number that means they figured out some kind of system that works very difficult to develop that kind of system so that's a mode mode is you get to a certain scale and you do it successfully and the brands is now in the in the understood by the consumer and what's interesting about your potlay is. What they've achieved is difficult right they're not buying frozen hamburgers getting shipped in they're buying fresh. You know sustainably sourced ingredients the preparing food in the store that was a first right the quality the product is quite incredible the highest quality food you can get for you can get a serious dinner for under 20 bucks and eat really health you know healthily and very high quality ingredients and that's just not available anywhere else and it's very hard to replicate and to build those relationships with. You know farmers around the country it's a lot easier to make a deal with one of the big you know massive food producers buy your pork from them then to buy from a whole bunch of farmers around the country and so it's that is a big moat for Chipotle very difficult to replicate and by the way another company I think you have a stake is is McDonald's no we own a chemical restaurant brands restaurant brands owns a number of quick service companies one of which is Burger King. Burger. Okay well it's been a meme for a while but I've Burger King is great to win these whatever but usually it go McDonald's I'll just eat burger patties I don't know if you knew you could do this but a burger patty at Burger King can do this McDonald's it's actually way cheaper not just sell you the patty and this cheap it's like a dollar 50 or $2 for per patty and it's about to 150 calories and it's just me and despite like the criticism of memes out there that's pretty good. Pretty healthy stuff it's healthy stuff and so when I go my healthiest I feel is when I do carnivore. It doesn't sound healthy but if I eat only meat I feel really good I lose weight I have all this energy it's crazy and the when I'm traveling the easiest way to get me is that you're going to McDonald's order six patties. Exactly so there's a sad meme of me just sitting alone in a car when I'm traveling just eating beef patties I'm going down but I love it and you got to do it what you love what makes you happy and that's what makes me happy. Maybe Burger King featuring what about Flamethrower what's with these fried burgers we got to get you to Burger King you know grilled burgers. Wait this is like fast we trashed I didn't know I don't know the details of how they're made I'm not I don't have a legion. I think we got a chance to switch you to Burger King. Great we'll see I'm making so many deals today it's wonderful. Okay you were talking about most and this kind of remind me of alphabet the parent company. Sure we're making worse big position for us. So it's interesting that you're think that maybe alphabet fits some of these characteristics. It's tricky to know with everything that's happening in an AI and I'm interviewing Senator Parchae soon. It's interesting that you think there's a moat and it's also interesting to analyze it because the consumer is just a fan of technology. Why is Google still around like they've been it's not just the search engine is doing it all the basics of the business of search really well but they're doing all these other stuff. So what's your analysis of alphabet why are you still positive about it? Sure so it's a business we've admired as a firm for you know whatever 15 years but rarely got to a price that we felt we could own it because again the expectations were so high and price really matters. Really the sort of AI scare I would call it you know Microsoft comes out with chat GPT they do an amazing demonstration people like this most incredible product. And Google which had been working on AI even earlier obviously the Microsoft Microsoft was behind an AI that was really their chat GPT deal that gave them a kind of a market presence. And then Google does this fairly disastrous demonstration of Bart and the world says oh my god Google's fallen behind an AI is the future stockets crushed Google gets to a price around 15 times earnings. Which for a business of this quality is an extremely extremely low price and our view on Google and one way to think about it when a business becomes a verb. That's usually pretty good sign about the mode around the business so you open your computer and you open your search and very high percentage of the world starts with a Google page and one line. We type in your your search you know the Google advertising search YouTube franchise is one of the most dominant franchises in the world very difficult to disrupt extremely profitable the world is moving from offline advertising to online advertising. And that trend I think continues why because you can actually see with your ads work you know these to say about advertising you know spend a fortune and you just don't know which 50% of its works but you just sort of spend the money because you know ultimately that's going to bring in the customer and now with online advertising you can see with granularity. Which dollars I'm spending you know when people click on the search term and end up buying something and I pay you know the it's a very high return on investment for the advertiser and they really dominate that business now AI of course is a risk. They've all of a sudden people start searching or asking questions of chat GPT and don't start with the Google search bar that's a risk to the company and so our view based on work we had done and talked to industry experts is that Google if anything had a virtue of the the investment they've made the time the energy they people put into it we felt their AI capabilities were if anything potentially greater than Microsoft chat GPT and that the market had over reacted and I because Google you know is a big company global business regulators scrutinize it incredibly carefully they couldn't take some the same liberties start up like open AI did in releasing a product and I think Google took a more cautious approach in releasing not only version of barred in terms of its capabilities and that let the mark the world to believe that they were behind and we also make concluded if any they're tied or ahead and you're paying nothing for that potential business and they're going to and they also have huge advantages by virtue you think of all the data Google has like the search data all the various applications you know email and otherwise the kind of the Google suite of products it's an incredible data set so they have more training data pretty much any kind of a pretty much any company in the world they have incredible engineers they have enormous financial resources so that was kind of the bet and we still think it's probably the cheapest of the big seven companies in terms of price you're paying for the business relative to its current earnings it also is a business that has a lot of potential for efficiency you know sometimes we have this enormously profitable dominant company all of the technology companies in the post March 20 world grew enormously in terms of their teams and they probably over hired and so you've seen some you know the Facebooks of the world and now even Google starting to get a little more efficient in terms of their operation so we've had a low multiple for their the business one way to think about the value of the business is the price you pay for the earnings or alternatively what's the yield if you flip over the price over the earnings it gives you kind of the yield of the business so a 15 multiple is about a almost a seven and a half percent yield and the price is almost a $1.5 percent yield and that earnings yield is growing over time as the business grows that's a you know compared to what you can earn lending your money to the government you know 4% that's a very attractive going in yield and then there's all kinds of what we call optionality in all the various businesses and investments they've made that are losing money got a cloud business that's growing very rapidly but they're investing basically a hundred percent of the profits from that business and growth so you're in that earnings number you're not seeing any earnings from the cloud business and you know they're one of the top cloud player so very interesting generally well managed company with incredible assets and resources and dominance and you know and has no debt it's got a ton of cash and so pretty good story is there something fundamentally different about AI that makes all of this more complicated which is the sort of the exponential possibilities of the kinds of products and impact that AI could create when you're looking at meta Microsoft alphabet Google all these companies X AI or maybe startups like is there some more risk introduced by the possibilities of AI absolutely it's a great question you business investing about finding company that can't be disrupted a eyes the ultimate disruptable asset or technology and it that's what makes investing treacherous is that you want a business that's enormously profitable management gets if you will fat and happy and then a new technology emerges that just takes away all the profitability and a eyes is incredibly powerful tool which is why every business is saying how can I use AI and my business to make us more profitable more successful grow faster and also disrupt or protect ourself from the you know the incomings you know it's a bit like you know buff it talks about a great business like a castle surrounded by this really wide mode but you have all these barbarians trying to get in and steal the princess and it happens you know codec for example was an amazing incredibly dominant company until it disappeared polaroid you know this incredible technology and that's why we have tended to stay away from companies that are technology companies because technology companies generally the world is such a dynamic place that someone's always working on a better version and you know codec was caught up in the analog film world and then the world changed. Well Google is pretty fat and happy until tragedy came out yeah how would you rate their ability to wake up lose weight and be less happy and aggressively rediscover their search for happiness i think you see a lot of that in the last year and i would say some combination of embarrassment and pride are huge motivators for everyone from circuit brin you know to the management of the company. i'm a small stop is thrown in into the picture and all of deep mind teams and the unification teams and like all the shake up so it's interesting to watch the chaos i love it i love it when everybody freaks out like you said partly embarrassment and partly that competitive drive that drives engineers is great i can't wait to see what they've been just a lot of improvement in the product let's see let's see what it goes you mentioned management. How do you analyze the governor structure and the individual humans that are the managers of a company so as i like to say incentives drive all human behavior and that certainly applies in the business world. So understanding the people and what drives them and what the actual financial and other incentives of a business very important part of the analysis for investing in a company. And you can learn a lot you know i mentioned before one great way to learn about a business is go back a decade and read everything that management is written about the business and see what they've done over time see what they've said conference calls are actually relatively recent when i started in the business there weren't conference call transcripts now you have. You know a written record of everything management is said and response to questions from analysts at conferences and otherwise and so just you learn a lot about people by listening to what they say how they answer questions and ultimately they track record for doing what they say they're going to do are they do they under promise and over deliver do they over promise and under deliver. Do they say what they're going to do do they admit mistakes. Do they build great teams to people want to come work for them are they able to retain their talent. You know and then part of it is do they how much are they running the business for the benefit of the business how much they're running the business for the benefit of themselves. And you know that's kind of the analysis you do we are talking about CEO CEO what what what is management mean how deep does it go sure so. This very senior management matters enormously you know we use the chipotle example stevelle's great entrepreneur business got to a scale he really couldn't run it we recruit the guy named Brian helped a company recruit a guy named Brian nickel. And he was considered the best person in the quick service industry he came in and completely rebuild the company actually we move the company chipotle was moved to California. And sometimes one way to redo the culture of a company is just to move it geographically and then you can kind of reboot the business but a great leader has great followership you know well over the course of their career they'll have a team they built that will come follow them into the next opportunity. But the key is you know really the top person matters enormously because and then it's who they recruit. You know you recruit an a plus leader and they're going to recruit other a type people group be leader you're not going to recruit any great talent beneath them. You mentioned Warren Buffett you said you admire him as an investor what do you find most interesting and powerful about his approach. What aspects of his approach investing do you also practice sure so most of what I've learned in the investment business I've learned from Warren Buffett he's been my great professor of this business. I my first book I read in the business was the Ben Graham intelligent investor but fairly quickly you get to learn about Warren Buffett and I started by reading the Berkshire Hathaway and reports. And then I eventually got the Buffett partnership letters so you can see which are an amazing read to go back to the nineteen mid nineteen fifties and read what he wrote to his limited partners when he first started out and just follow that trajectory over a long period of time. So what's remarkable about him is one duration right you still out of the ninety three. You know two you know takes a very long term view but a big thing that you learn from him investing requires this incredible dispassionate on emotional quality you have to be extremely economically rational which is not a basic not something you learn in the jungle you know I don't think it's something that you if you think about the the you know surviving the jungle you know the lion shows up you know you and everyone starts running you run with them. That does not work well in markets in fact you generally have to do the opposite right when the lemmings are running over the cliff that's the time where you're facing the other direction and you're running the other direction i.e. you're stepping in you're buying stocks really low prices. You know buff has been great at that and great at teaching about what he calls temperament which is this sort of emotional kind of unemotional quality that you need to be able to dispassionate look at the world and say okay is it some real risk. Are people over reacting people tend to get excited about investments when stocks are going up and they get depressed when they're going down and that I think that's just inherently human you have to reverse that you have to get excited when things get cheaper. And you got to get concerned when things get more expensive. You've been a part of some big battles some big losses big wins this has been a roller coaster. So in terms of temperament psychologically how do you not let that break you how do you maintain a calm demeanor and avoid running with the lemmings. I think it's something you kind of learn over time a key success factor is you want to have enough money in the bank that you're going to survive. You know regardless of what's going on with volatility and markets you know people who one you shouldn't borrow money. So if you borrow money you own stocks on margin. Markers are going down and you have your livelihood at risk it's very difficult to be rational so key is getting yourself to a place where you're. Financially secure you're not going to lose your house right that's a kind of a key thing and then also doing your homework. Stock prices stocks and traded any price in the short term and if you know what a business is worth and you understand the management you know it extremely well. It's not nearly as it doesn't bother you when a stock price goes down or it has much less impact on you because you know you know again as a Mr. Graham said. The short term the market of voting machine you have a bunch of lambings voting one direction that's concerning but if it's a great business doesn't have a lot of debt and people are just listen to more music next year than this year you know you're going to do well. So it's a bit some combination of being personally secure and also just knowing what you own and over time you build. Calysis I would say so psychological just as a human being speaking of lines and gazelles and all this kind of stuff yeah is there some. Is it as simple as just being financially secure is there some just human qualities that you have to be born with slash develop I think so I think now I'm a pretty emotional person I would say or feel pretty strong emotions but not an investing I'm remarkably immune to kind of volatility. And that's a big advantage and it took some time for me to develop that so you want more day you think no so being emotional do you want to respond to volatility yeah and you just it's a bit again I you can learn a lot from other people's experience it's one of the few businesses where you can learn an enormous amount by reading about other periods in history. You know watch you know following Buffett's career the mistakes he made. If you're investing a lot of capital every one of your mistakes can be big right so we've made big mistakes the good news is that the vast majority of things we've done have worked out really well and so that also gives you. You know confidence over time but because we make very few investments you know we own eight things today or seven companies of that matter. If we get one wrong it's going to be big news and so the other nature of our business you have to be comfortable with is a lot of public scrutiny a lot of public criticism and that requires some. Experience I think we'll talk about some of that you know financially secure something you believe also recommend for even just everyday investors is there some general advice. From the things you've been talking about that applies to everyday investors sure so never invest money you can't afford to lose where it would if you lost this this money you know you lose your house you etc so having. Being in a place where you're investing money that you don't care about the price in the short term it's money for your retirement you take a really long term view I think that's key. Never investing we bar money against your securities you know the markets offer you the opportunity to leverage your investment and in most worlds you'll be okay. Accept if you know there's a financial crisis or you know a nuclear device gets detonated out for bid somewhere in the world or there's an unexpected war or someone kills a leader unexpectedly you know things happen. That can change the course of history and markets react very negatively to those kinds of events and you can know the greatest business in the world training for $100 to share and next moment it can be 50 so as long as you don't borrow against securities you own really high quality businesses and it's not money that you need in the short term. Then you can you can actually be thoughtful about it and that is a huge advantage the vast majority of investors it seems tend to be the ones that panic and the downturns get over related and when markets are doing well. So be able to think long term and be sufficiently financially secure such that you can afford to think long term. Buffett is the ultimate long term thinker and just the decisions he makes the consistency of the decisions he's made over time and fitting into that sort of long term framework it is a very very educational let's put it that way for the for learning about this business. So you mentioned eight companies but what do you think about mutual funds that for everyday investors that diversify across a larger number of companies. I think there are very few mutual funds there are thousands of mutual funds there very few that earn their keep in terms of the fees they charge they tend to be too diversified and you know two short term. And you're often much better off just buying an index fund and many of them perform that they look if you look carefully the portfolio is not so different from the underlying index itself and you tend to pay a much higher fee now all of the things that there's some very talented mutual fund managers. Guining will Danoff at Fidelity's had a great record over a long period of time in the famous Peter Lynch. Ron Baron another great long term growth stock investor so there's some great mutual funds but I put them in the handful versus the thousands and if you're in you know the thousands I'd rather someone bought just an index one basically. Yeah index funds but what what would be the leap for an everyday investor to go to investing in the small number of companies like two three four five companies. I even recommend for individual investors to invest in you know a dozen companies you don't get that much more benefit of diversification going from a dozen to 25 or even 50 you know most of the benefits of diversification come in the first you know call it 10 or 12. And if you're investing in businesses that don't have a lot of debt their businesses that you can understand yourself you understand you know it actually individual investors did a much better job analyzing Tesla. Then the professional professional investors are analysts the vast majority them so if it's a business you understand you are if you bought a Tesla you understand the product and it's appeal to consumers. You know it's a good place to start when you're analyzing a company. So I would invest in things you can understand that's kind of a key. You know you like Chipotle you understand why they're successful you can you go there every week and you can monitor. You know anything changing how these new kind of house chicken Alpastor is that is that a good upgrade from the basic chicken you know the drink offerings improving the stores clean. I think you should invest in companies you really understand simple businesses where you can predict with a high degree of confidence what's going to look like over time and if you do that. And I'm not particularly concentrated fashion and you don't borrow money against your securities you probably do much better than your typical mutual fund. Yeah, I think consumers that love a thing are actually good analysts of that thing I guess a good starting point. But there's much more information available today when I was first investing. Literally we had people faxing us documents from the SEC filings in Washington DC now everything's available online. Conference called transcripts are free. You know you have you have AI you know you have unlimited data and all kinds of message boards and reddit forums and things where people are you know sharing advice. And everyone has their own you know by virtue of their career or experience they'll they'll they'll know about an industry or a business and that gives them I would take advantage of your own competitive and issues. I'm just afraid to find investments you probably I'll be like analyzing every little change of menu from a financial perspective and just be very critical. If it's going to expect your sector experience I wouldn't buy the stock. Yeah, I mean I should also say that I am somebody that emotionally does respond to volatility which is why I've never about index funds and I just I just noticed myself psychologically being affected by the ups and downs of the market I want to do now. Because if I'm at all tuned in it has a negative impact on my life. Yeah, that's really important. Can you explain what activist investing is you've been talking about investing and then looking at companies when they're struggling stepping in and reconfiguring things within that company and helping it become great. So that's part of it but let's just sum up what what's this idea of activist investing. I think recently in the last couple of days I read an article saying that more than 50% of the capital in the world today invest in stock markets passive index money that's the most passive form right so if you think about index fund. A machine buys a fixed set of securities. In certain proportion. There's no human judgment at all and there's no real person behind it in a way. They never take steps to improve a business they just quietly own securities. What we do is we invest our capital in a handful of things. We get to know them really really well because you're going to put 20% of your assets in something you need to know it really well. But once you become a big holder and if you've got some thoughts on how to make a business more valuable you can do more than just be a passive investor. So our strategy is built upon finding great companies in some cases that have lost their way and then helping them succeed. And we can do that with ideas from outside the boardroom. Sometimes we take a seed on a board or more than one. And we work with the best management teams in the world to help these businesses succeed. So when I first went into this business, no one knew who we were. And we didn't have that much money. And so to influence what was to us a big company, we had to make a fair bit more noise. So we would buy a stake. We'd announce it publicly. We'd attempt to engage with management. The first activist investment we made at Pershing Square was Wendy's. I couldn't get the CEO to ever return my call. I didn't return my call. So we actually in that case our idea was Wendy's own company called Tim Hortons, which was this coffee donut chain. And you could buy Wendy's for basically $5 billion. And they owned 100% of Tim Hortons, which itself was worth more than $5 billion. You could literally buy Wendy's separate Tim Hortons and get Wendy's for negative value. That seemed like a pretty good opportunity. Even though the business wasn't doing that well. So we bought the stake, called the CEO, couldn't get a meeting, nothing. So we hired actually Blackstone, which was at that time, had investment bank. And we hired them to do what's called a fairness opinion of what Wendy's would be worth if they followed our advice. And they agreed to do it. Payed them a fee for it. And then we'd meld in a letter with a copy of the fairness opinion saying, Wendy's would basically be worth 80% more if they did what we said. And six weeks later they did what we said. So that's activism, at least an early form of activism. With that kind of under our belt, we had a more credibility. And now we started to take things and stakes and companies. The media would pay attention. So the media became kind of an important partner. And you know, some combination of shame, embarrassment, and opportunity, motivated management teams to do the right thing. And then, you know, beyond that, there are certain steps you can take if management is recalcitrant and the shareholders are on your side. But it's a bit like running for office. You've got to get all the constituents to support you and your ideas. And if they support you and your ideas, you can overthrow, if you will, the board of a company. I bring a new talent and then take over the management of a business. And that's the most extreme form of activism. So that's kind of the early days and what we did. And a lot of the early things that we did were, you know, call it, what we call sort of like investment banking activism. Where we'd go in and recommend something, a good investment bank would have recommended. And if they do it, we make a bunch of money. And then we moved on to the next one. And then we realized an investment, a company called General Growth, was the first time we took a board seat down a company. And there was some financial restructuring and also an opportunity to improve the operations of the business, sit on the board of a company. And that was one of the best investments we ever made. And we said, okay, we can do more than just be an outside the board from investor. And we can get involved in helping select the right management teams and helping guide the right management teams. And then we've done that over years. And then I would say the last seven years, we haven't had to be an activist. An activist is generally someone who's outside banging on the door trying to get in. We're sort of built enough credibility that they open the door. And they say, hey, Bill, what ideas do you have? So welcome. Would you like to join the board? We're treated differently today than we were in the beginning. And that is, I would say some people might just call it being an engaged owner. By the way, that's the way investing was done in the Andrew Carnegie, JP Morgan Days, 150 years ago. You had these iconic business leaders that would own 20% of US steel. And when things would go wrong, they'd replace the board and the management and fix them. And over time, we went to a world where mutual funds were created like in the 1920s, 30s, index funds with Vanguard and others. And that all these controlling shareholders would kind of gave their stock to society or the children and multiple generations. And there were no longer kind of controlling owners of businesses or very few. And that led to underperformance and the opportunity for activists over time. And what activism has done, and I think we've helped lead this movement, is it restored kind of the balance of power between the owners of the business and the management of the company. And that's been a very good thing for the performance of the US stock market, actually. So the owners meaning the shareholders? Yes. And so there's a more direct channel communication with activists investing between the shareholders and the people running in the company. Yes. So activists generally never own more than 5% or 10% of a business, so they don't have control. So the way they get influence is they have to convince the other, you know, they have to get to the sort of majority of the other shareholders to support them. And if they can get that kind of support, they can behave almost like a controlling shareholder. And that's how it works. So the running of companies, according to Bill Akman, is more democratic now. It is. It is. But you need some thought leaders. So activists are kind of thought leaders, because they can spend the time and the money. You know, a retail investor that owns 1,000 shares doesn't have the resources of the time. They got a day job, whereas an activist day job is finding the handful of things where there are opportunities. So on average is a good to have such an engaged, powerful, influential investor helping control direct the direction of a company. It depends whether that investor is, but generally I think it's a good thing. And that's why, you know, one of the problems with being CEO of a company today and having a very diversified shareholder base is the kind of short-term, long-term balance. And you have investors that have all different interests in terms of what they want to achieve and when they wanted to achieve. And CEO of a new company, let's say, has not had the chance to develop the credibility to make the kind of longer-term decisions and can be stuck in a cycle of being judged on a quarterly basis. And a business, the best businesses are forever assets. And decisions you make now have impact three, four, five years from now. In order to make, and sometimes there are decisions you make that have the effect of reducing the earnings of a company in the short term. Because in the long term, it's going to make the business much more valuable. But sometimes it's hard to have that kind of credibility when you're a new CEO of a company. So when you have a major owner that's respected by other shareholders sitting on the board saying, hey, the CEO is doing the right thing and making this expensive investment in a new factory or spending more money on R&D because we're developing something that's going to pay off over time. That large owner on the board can help by the time necessary for management to behave in a longer-term way. And that's, I think, good for all the shareholders. So that's the good story, but can it get bad? Can you have a CEO who is a visionary and sees the long-term future of a company and then investor come in and have very selfish interest in just making more money in the short term and therefore destroy and manipulate the opinions of the shareholders and other people on the board in order to sink the company, to be increased the price, but destroy the possibility of long-term value? Could theoretically happen. But again, the activist in your example, generally doesn't own a lot of stock. The shareholder bases today, the biggest shareholders are these index funds that are forever. The BlackRock Vanguard State Street, their ownership stakes are just at this point only growing because of the inflows of capital they have from shareholders. So they have to think or they should think very long-term and they're going to be very skeptical of someone coming in with a short-term idea that drives this stock price up in the next six months, but impairs the company's long-term ability to compete. And basically that ownership group prevents this kind of activity from really happening. So people are generally skeptical of short-term activists and investors. Yes, and they're very few. I don't really know any short-term activists and investors. Not ones with credibility. You mentioned General Growth. I read somewhere called arguably one of the best hedge fund trades of all time. So I guess it went from $60 million to over $3 billion. It was a good one. But it wasn't a trade. I wouldn't describe it as a trade. It was a trade as something you buy and you flip. This is something where we made the investment initially in November of 2008. And we still own a company we spun off of General Growth and it's now 15 years later. So can you describe what went into making that decision to actually increase the value of the company? Sure. So this was at the time of the financial crisis circa November 2008. What real estate has always been a sector that I've been interested in. I began my career in the real estate business working for my dad actually. Ranging mortgages for real estate developer site. I have deep ties and interest in the business. And General Growth was the second largest shopping mall company in the country. Simon Properties, many people have heard of General Growth at number two. They own some of the best malls in the country. And at that time people thought of shopping malls as these non-disruptible things. Again, we talk about disruption malls have been disrupted in many ways. And General Growth stock, General Growth the company, the CFO in particular was very aggressive in the way that he borrowed money. And he borrowed money from a kind of Wall Street, not long-term mortgages, but generally relatively short-term mortgages. It was pretty aggressive as the value went up. You'd borrow more and more against the assets and that helped the short-term results of the business. The problem was during the financial crisis the market for what's called CNBS, commercial mortgage-backed securities basically shut. And the company because its debt was relatively short-term had a lot of big maturities coming up that they had no ability to refinance. And the market said, oh my god, the lenders are going to foreclose and the shareholders are going to get bankrupt and get wiped out. The stock went from $63 to $34. There was a family, the Bucksbound family owned, I think about 25% of the company. They had a $5 billion stock that was worth $25 billion or something by the time we bought a stake in the business. What interested me was I thought the assets were worth substantially more than the liabilities. The company had $27 billion of debt and had $100 million value of the equity down from like $20 billion. And one, that sort of an interesting place to start with a stock down 99%. But the fundamental drivers, the mall business are occupancy, how occupied are the malls? Occupancy was up year on year between 07 and 08, interestingly. Net operating income, which is kind of a measure of cash flow from the malls, that was up year on year. So kind of the underlying fundamentals were doing fine. The only problem they had is they had billions of dollars of debt that they had to repay, they couldn't repay. And if you kind of examine the bankruptcy code, it's precisely designed for a situation like this, where it's kind of this resting place you can go to kind of re-restructure your business. Now, the problem was that every other company that had gone bankrupt, the shareholders got wiped out. And so the market seeing every previous example, the shareholders got wiped out, the assumptions the stock is going to go to zero. But that's not what the bankruptcy code says. The bankruptcy code says is that the value gets apportioned based on value. And if you could prove to a judge that there was the assets worth more than the liabilities, then the shareholders actually get to keep their investment in the company. And that was the bet we made. And so we stepped into the market, we bought 25% of the company in the open market for, we had to pay up, it started at 34 cents. I think that we're 300 million shares. So it was at a hundred million dollar value. By the time we were done, we paid an average of, we paid 60 million for 25% of the business. So about 240 million dollars for the equity of the company. And then we had to get on the board to convince the directors the right thing to do. And the board was incomplete panic, didn't know what to do, spending a ton of money on advisors. And, you know, I was a shareholder activist, you know, four years into Pershing Square. And no one had any idea what we were doing. I thought we were crazy every day stock. Every day we'd go into the market, we'd buy this penny stock. And we'd file what's called a 13D every 1% increase in our stake. And people just thought we were crazy. We're buying stock and the company is going to go bankrupt. Bill, you're going to lose all your money. You know, run. Okay. And I said, well, you know, bankruptcy code says that it was more asset value than liabilities. We should be fine. And the key moment, if you're looking for fun moments, is there's a woman named Maddie Bucksbaum, who was from the Bucksbaum family. And her cousin, John, was chairman of the board CEO of the company. And I said, as she calls me after we disclose our stake in the company, she's like, Billy, I'm really glad to see you here. And I met her like, I don't think it was a date, but I kind of met her in a social context when I was like 25 or something. And she said, look, I'm really glad to see you here. And it's just anything I can do to help you call me. I said, sure. We kept trying to get on the board of the company that wouldn't invite us on. I couldn't really run a proxy contest. You know, not with a company going bankrupt. And their advisor is actually we're Goldman Sachs and like, you don't want the Fox in the hen house. And they were listening to their advisors. So I called Maddie up and I said, Maddie, I need to get on the board of the company to help. And she says, you know what? I will call my cousin, and I'll get a ton. Like, you know, she calls back a few hours later, you'll be going on to the board. I don't know what she said to her cousin. What's she was convincing? Next thing you know, I'm invited to on the board of the company. And the board is talking about the old equity of general growth. Old equity is what you talk about. The shareholders are getting wiped out. I said, no, no, no. This board represents the current equity of the company. And I'm a major shareholder. John's a major for shareholder. There's plenty of asset value here. This company should be able to restructure for the benefit of shareholders. And we let a restructuring for the benefit of shareholders. And it took let's say eight months and the company emerged from chapter 11. We made an incremental investment into the company. And the shareholders kept the vast majority of their investment. All the creditors got their face amount of their investment, par plus a cute crude interest. And it was a great outcome. All the employees kept their jobs. The mall stayed open. There's no liquidation in the bankruptcy system worked the way it should. You know, I was in court, you know, all the time. And the first meeting with the judge, the judges like, look, this would never have happened where it not for a financial crisis. And once the judge said, I knew we were going to be fine because the company really not done anything fundamentally wrong. Maybe a little too aggressive and how they borrowed money. And stock went from 34 cents to 31 dollars a share. And actually fun little anecdote. We made a lot of people a lot of money who followed us into it. I got a lot of nice thank you notes, which you get on occasion in this business, believe it or not. And then one day I get a voicemail. This is when there was something called voicemail. Probably a few years later. And it's a guy with a very thick Jamaican accent, living a message for Bill Ackman. So, you know, I returned all my calls call the guy back. It's like, hi, it's Bill Ackman, I just returned your call. He says, Oh, Mr. Ackman. Thank you so much for calling me. I said, Oh, how can I help? He says, I wanted to thank you. I said, what do you mean? He said, I saw you on CNBC, you know, a couple years ago. And you were talking about this general growth and the stock. I said, where was the stock at the time? He said, it's 60 cents or something like this. And I bought a lot of stock. And I'm like, well, how much did you invest? I invest all of my money in the company. And he was a New York City tax driver. And he invested like $50,000 or something like this at 60 cents a share. And he was still holding it. And he went into retirement. And he made, you know, 50 times his money. And, you know, those are the moments that you feel pretty good about investing. Well, gave you confidence through that once a penny stock. And I'm sure you were getting a lot of nasares and people saying that this is crazy. It's the same thing. You just do the work. Like we got a lot of pushback for our investors actually because we had never invested in a bankrupt company before. It's a field called distressed investing. And they're dedicated distressed investors. We weren't considered one of them. So Bill, what are you doing? You don't know anything about distressed investing. You don't know anything about bankruptcy investing. But I can read. I can be learned. And I learned. And it sometimes is very helpful not to be a practitioner, an expert in something because you get used to the conventional wisdom. And so we just, you know, abstractly read the step back and look at the facts. And it was just a really interesting setup for one of the best investments we ever made. How hard is it to learn some of the legal aspects of this? Like you mentioned bankruptcy code. Like I imagine is very sort of dense language and dense ideas and will dilute holes and all that kind of stuff. Like if you're just stepping in and you've never done distressed investing, how hard is it to figure out? It's not that hard. No, it's not that hard. Okay. I literally read a book on distressed investing. Okay. Ben branch or something. Something on distressed investors. So you were able to pick up the intuition from that just all the basic skills involved, the basic facts to know all that kind of stuff. Most of the world's knowledge is already been written somewhere. You just got to read the right books. And also had great lawyers, you know, built up some great relationships. We worked with Selvin and Cromwell and the lawyer there named Joe Shanker who I met earlier in my career Persian Square is actually my second act in the hedge fund business. I started a fun call Gotham Partners when I was 26. One of my early investments was a company called Rock Felt Center properties that was heading for bankruptcy. And the lawyer on the other side representing Goldman Sachs was a guy named Joe Shanker. So he was like an obvious phone call because we had yet another real estate bankruptcy. And that one we did very well, but I missed the big opportunity. And I suffered severe psychological torture every time I walked by Rock Felt Center because we could have made we knew more about that property anyone else, but I knew less about deal making and didn't have the resources and I was 28 years old or 27. And they hired a better lawyer than we did. And they outsmarted us on that one in a way. So I said, okay, I'm going to go hire this guy the next time. Okay, we'll probably talk about Rockefeller Center and some failures. But first you said Fox in the henhouse. Yes, something that the board and the chairman were worried about. What would they call you a fox? So you keep saying activist investing is not in the worry about. It's always good. Sure. Mostly good. But you know, that expression applied in this context. You know, there was still worried about that. Sure. And so maybe there's a million questions here. But first of all, what is the process of getting on the board look like? So a board can always admit a member at any time in their discretion for a US company. In that maybe there's some jurisdiction where you need to share older vote. But in most cases, a board can vote on any director that they want. If the board doesn't invite you to the party, you have to apply to be a member and affect. And that process is called, you know, basically, is this the process of ultimately running a slate for a meeting where you propose a number every any shareholder can propose to be on a board of a company if they own one share of stock in the business. And getting your name in the companies. You know, the materials they sent to shareholders, those rules were written in a way they were very unfavorable and very difficult to get in the door. Those rules have been changed very recently. The company now has to include a candidate really all the candidates in the materials they sent to shareholders to the shareholders picked the best ones when we applied or we applied when we ran proxy contest in the past. That was not the case. And so you have to spend a lot of money, mostly mailing fees and all kinds of other legal and other expenses to let everyone know you're running like running a political campaign. And then you got to run around with the big shareholders. You know, fly around the country, explain your case to them. And then there's a shareholder meeting. And if you get a majority of votes, you get on. What's this proxy contest slash battle idea? What's what's the battle comes when they don't want you down? Okay. And a lot of that has to do with I would say pride. Normal human kind of stuff. You know, a lot of times a board of an underperforming company doesn't want to admit that they've underperformed. And boards of directors 20 years ago when we started Persian Square, we're pretty cushy jobs. Sit on board of a company. You play golf at the CEO, you know, at nice golf courses. You make a few hundred thousand dollars a year to go to four meetings. It was kind of a rubber stamp world where boards, you know, at the end of the day, they, the CEO really ran the show. Once shareholders could actually dislodge board members and they could lose their seats. And that's really the rise of shareholder activism board started taking their responsibilities much more seriously because directors are typically, you know, there are many cases they're retired CEOs. This is kind of how they're making a living in the later part of their career. They're sit on four boards. They collect a million, a million half dollars a year and directors fees. If they get thrown off the board by the shareholders, that's embarrassing obviously. And it affects their ability to get on other boards. So, you know, again, incentives as I said earlier, drive all human behavior at the incentives directors, they want to preserve their board seats. So if you have a director, now the directors on board serve in various roles. The most vulnerable ones are ones who, for example, chair a compensation committee. And if they put in a bad plan or they overpaid management, you know, they're subject to attack by shareholders. But, you know, these contests are not to similar to political contests, whereas mudslinging and other side puts out false information about you, you have to respond. And they're spending the shareholders money. So they have sort of unlimited resources. And you're spending your and your investors money. You know, when you're a small firm, finite resources so they can outspend you, they can sue you. They can try to, you know, jigger the mechanics in such a way that you're going to lose. And there's some unfortunate stuff that's happened in the past, you know, some manipulative stuff. So also some stuff that's public, like in the press and all this kind of stuff. Oh, of course, you know, there'd be, you know, articles about Campbell, you know, the dirty days where they would go through your trash and, you know, make sure that, you know, you're not sleeping around and things like this. But that's okay. I can, I'm subject to, I can survive extreme scrutiny because I've been through this for a long time. So you're saying the fat and happy hands can get very wolf-like when the fox is trying to break in. Is this how we extend the foxes a threat to the hands. Yeah. Yeah. But, but you're, you've just cares. The charismatic fox just explained to me why the fox is good for everybody in the handhalls. At the end of the day, it's actually very good on a board to have someone, you know, if you, there are many examples over time and some handful of high profile ones for the board fought tooth and nail to keep the activists off the board. And then once the activists got on the board and they said, you know, the guy's not so bad after all, the shareholders voted them on. It's got some decent ideas and let's all work together to have this workout. And so there are very few cases where after the contest when the, in other words, sometimes you have to replace the entire board. We've done that. But some, in most cases, you, you got a couple of seats on the board and it's just, you know, you, you want to build a board comprised of diverse points of view. And that's how you get to the truth. What was the most dramatic battle for the board that you have been a part of? The Canadian Pacific proxy contest. So Canadian Pacific was like it considered the most iconic company in Canada. It literally built the country because the rail that got built over the over Canada is what united the various provinces into a country. And, and then over time, because the railroad business, pretty good business, they built a ton of hotels. They owned a lot of real estate and it became this massive conglomerate. But it was horribly mismanaged for decades. But time we got involved, it was by far the worst for Unreal Road in North America. They had the lowest profit margins. They had the lowest growth rate. Every quarter management would make excuses. Generally about the weather as to why they underperform versus. And there there's a direct competitor, a company called Canadian National, as the rail goes right across the country. The Pacific would constantly be complaining about the weather. Basically, same country, same regions, the tracks weren't that far apart. But it was a really important company. And being on this board was like an honorary thing. And everyone on the board was an icon of Canada. The chairman of the Royal Bank of Canada, the head of the most important green, privately held grain company. It was sort of an important collection of big time Canadian executives. Here we were, this is probably about 13 years ago. And still maybe 44 years old from New York, not Canadian. But basically saying this is the worst for Unreal Road in North America. And we bought 12% of the railroad at a really low price. And we brought with us to our first meeting the greatest railroader ever. I got him Hunter Harrison who had turned around Canadian National. So we'd like, okay, we've got a great asset. We've got the greatest railroad CEO of all time. He's come out of retirement to step in and run the railroad. And we brought him to the first meeting and they wouldn't even meet with him. And they wouldn't certainly want to consider hiring him. And that led us to a proxy contest. And this is where the engine starts churning to figure out how this contest can be won. So what's involved in... Okay, we had to one come up with a group of directors who would be willing to step into a battle. And we didn't want a bunch of New York directors or even American directors. We wanted Canadians. The problem was this was the most iconic company in Canada. And we wanted to high profile people. So we talked to all the high profile people in Canada. Every one of them would say, Bill, you're entirely right. This thing is the worst route. It needs to be fixed. But I see John at the club. I see him at the Toronto club. I can't do this, but you're totally right. And that was the concern. You have to follow your materials by a certain day. You've got to put together a slate. We needed a big slate because we knew that we had to replace basically all the directors. And then I spoke to a guy who was one of the wealthiest guys in Canada who was on the board at one point in time. And he said, Bill, I have an idea for you. There's this woman, Rebecca McDonald's. What did you give her a call? And I called Rebecca. And she was the first woman to take a company public in Canada as CEO. And she was a kind of anti-establishment, not afraid to take on anything kind of person. And I called her. We had a great conversation. And she was in the Dominican Republic at her house. And I flew down to see her. And she said, yeah, I'm all in. And actually once we got her that enabled us to get others. And then we put together our slate. And we had some pretty interesting dialogue with the company. They tried to embarrass us all the time. In the press, publicly, what are we? Press, publicly. You know, at one point I wrote an email saying, look, let's come to a piece on this thing. But if we don't, we were really forcing my hand. And we're going to have to rent the largest hall in Toronto. And invite all the shareholders and it's going to be embarrassing for management. And I made reference to some nuclear winter. Let's not have it be a nuclear winter. And they thought they'd embarrass me by releasing the email. But it only inspired us. And we rented the largest hall in Canada. And we put up a presentation walking through, you know, here's Canadian National. Here's Canadian Pacific. Here's what they said. Here's what they did. And we had Hunter get up. It was this incredibly charismatic guy from Tennessee. That amazing. You know, he's like a lion. Credibly deep voice. Unbelieveable track record. Incredibly respected guy. It's like getting Michael Jordan to come out of retirement and come and run the company. And he Hunter was incredible. And other Paul Laugh, other members of my team were, you know, super engaged. And the board, you know, Canadians are known to be nice. So one of the problems we had is shareholders would never tell management or the board that they were losing. It was not until the night before the meeting when the boat came in, the management realized that they lost. We got 99% of the boat. And they offered us a deal when they begged us to take a deal. They said, look, we'll resign tonight so that we don't have to come to the meeting tomorrow. That's how embarrassed they were. That was kind of an interesting one. So in both this proxy battle and the company itself, this was one of your more successful investments. It was. I mean, the stock is up about 10 times. And it's an industrial company. It's a railroad. It's not like a growth, like it's not Google. So it's a great story. And the company's now run by a guy named Keith Creel. And Keith, it was Hunter's protege. And in some many ways, he's actually better than Hunter. He's doing an incredible job. And we're the sad part here is we made it. We did very well. We tripled our money over several years. And then I went through a very challenging period because of a couple of bad investments. And we had to sell our Canadian Pacific to pay to raise capital to pay for investors who were who were leaving. But we had another opportunity to buy it back last in the last couple of years. And so we're we now again a major owner of the company, but have we held on to original stock? It would have been epic if you will. So on this one, you were right. Yes. And I read an article by you. There's many articles about you. I read an article that said, Bill is often right, but you approach it with a scorched earth approach that can often do more. Sort of can do damage. I haven't read the often right article. But the good news is we are often right. And I say we because we're a team. A small team, but a but a fortunately very successful one. You know, so our batting average as investors is extremely high. And the good news is our records totally public. You can see everything we've ever done. But the press doesn't rely generally right about the success stories. They write about the failures. And so we've had some epic failures. You know, big losses. Good news is they've been a tiny minority of the cases. Now, no one likes to lose money. It's even worse to lose other people's money. And I've done that occasionally. The good news is if you stuck with us, you've done very well. You know, for a long time. On a small tangents, this is what we're talking about boards. Did you get a chance to see what happened with the OpenAI board? Because I'm talking to Sam Altman soon. Is there any insight you have? Just maybe lessons you draw from this kind of these kinds of events, especially with the AI technology companies, such dramatic things happening? Yeah, that was an incredible story. The governance really matters. And the governance structure of OpenAI, I think, leaves something to be desired. You know, I think Sam's point was this, and maybe Elon Musk's point, originally set up as a nonprofit. It reminds me, actually, I invested in a nonprofit run by a former Facebook founder. He's going to create a Facebook-like entity for nonprofits to promote goodness in the world. And the problem was you couldn't hire the talent you wanted because you couldn't grand stock options. You couldn't pay market salaries. And ultimately, he ended up selling the business to a for-profit. So it taught me for-profit solutions to problems are much better than nonprofits. And here you had kind of a blend, right? It was set up as a nonprofit. But I think they found the same thing. They couldn't hire the talent they wanted without having a for-profit subsidiary. But the nonprofit entity, as I understand it, owns a big chunk of OpenAI. And the investor's own sort of a cap to interest where their upside is capped. And they don't have representation on the board. And I think that was a set up for a problem. And that's clearly what happened here. And there's, I guess, some kind of complexity in the governance. I mean, because of this nonprofit and cap-profit thing, it seems like there's a much complexity and non-standard aspects to it that perhaps also contributed to the problem. Yeah. Governance really matters. Boards of directors really matter. Giving the shareholders the right to have input at least once a year on the structure of the governance of companies is really important. And private venture-backed boards are also not ideal. I'm an active investor in ventures. And there are some complicated issues that emerge in private as sort of venture-stage companies. Where board members have somewhat divergent incentives from the long-term owners of a business. And what you see a lot in venture boards is they're presided over generally by venture capital investors who are big investors in the company. And oftentimes it's more important to them to have the public perception that they're good directors. So they get the next best deal. If they have a reputation for kind of taking on management to aggressively, word will get out in the small community of founders and they'll miss the next Google. And so their interests are not just in that particular company. That's also one of the problems. Again, it all comes back to incentives. Can you explain to me the difference between a venture-backed VCs and shareholders? So this means before the company goes public? Yeah. In private venture-backed companies, the boards tend to be very small. Could be a handful of the venture investors in management. They're often very rarely independent directors. It's just not an ideal structure. Oh, I see. You want independent. It's beneficial to have people who have an economic interest in the business. And they care only about the success of that company. As opposed to someone who, you know, if you think about the venture business, getting into the best deals is more important than any one deal. And you see cases where, you know, the boards go along with, in some sense, cases bad behavior in the part of management, because they want a reputation for being kind of a founder-friendly director. You know, that's kind of problematic. You don't have the same issue in public company boards. So we talked about some of the big wins and you're a track record. But you said there were some big losses. So what's the biggest loss of your career? The biggest loss of my career is a company called Value and Pharmaceuticals. We made an investment in a business that didn't meet our core principles. The problem in the pharmaceutical industry and there are many problems as I've learned, is it's a very volatile business, right? It's based on drug discovery. It's based on, you know, predicting kind of the future revenues of a drug before it goes off patent. You know, lots of complexities. And we thought we had founded a pharmaceutical company we could own, because of a very unusual founder in the way he approached this business. It was a company where another activist was on the board of directors of the company, and kind of governing and overseeing the day-to-day decisions. And we ended up making a passive investment in the company. And up until this point in time, we really didn't make passive investments. And the company made a series of decisions that were, you know, disastrous. And then we stepped in to try to solve the problem. It was first time I ever joined a board, and the mess was much larger than I realized from the outside. And then I was kind of stuck. And it was very much a confidence-sensitive strategy, because they built their business by acquiring pharmaceutical assets. And they often issued stock when they acquired targets. And so once the market lost confidence in management, the stock price got crushed and it impaired their ability to continue to acquire low costs, you know, drugs. And we lost $4 billion. $4 billion. Yeah. How's that for a big loss? That's up there. So I'm sweating this whole conversation, both the wins and the losses and the stakes involved. And by the way, that loss catalyzed other, what I call, market to market losses. So very high profile, huge number, disastrous press. Then people said, OK, Bill's going to go out of business. So we're going to bet against everything he's doing. And we know this entire portfolio because we only own 10 things. And we were short a company called Urban Life. Very famously, we've only really shorted two companies. The first one, there's a book, the second one, there's a movie. We no longer short companies. But so people pushed up the price of Urban Life, which is when you're a short seller, that's catastrophic. I can explain that. And then they also shorted the other stocks that we own. And so that valiant loss led to an overall more than 30% loss in the value of our portfolio. The valiant loss was real and we was crystallized. We are selling the position, taking that loss. Most of the other losses were what I would call, market.
