 The following is a conversation with Liv Burry, formerly one of the best poker players in the world trained as a natural physicist and is now a philanthropist and an educator on topics of game theory, physics, complexity, and life. And now onto the full ad reads. As always, no ads in the middle. I tried to make this interesting, but if you skipped them, please still check out our sponsors I enjoy this stuff. Maybe you will too. I just forgot audible. It's an audiobook service that gives me thousands of hours. I don't think I'm exaggerating when I say that of educational material. I've been running every single day almost with no exception, at least eight miles. That's often anywhere from one to two and a half hours depending on the distance I'm doing. And my trusted companion through that is either brown noise, which I just listened to YouTube videos or brown noise. If I'm not listening to brown noise when I'm running and focusing on my thoughts, I am listening to audiobooks. And that's usually the source of fun, the source of intense thinking for me, exploration, it's a journey into another world, into another time. And an audiobook reading of a book can really take you to that place. It can really transport you there. New members can try the thing free for 30 days at audible.com slash Lex or text, Lex to 500, 500. This show is brought to you by Give Well, a research charitable organizations and only recommend the highest impact evidence backed charities. It may be counterintuitive, but giving money or helping others is actually a really difficult process. It's not as simple as throwing cash up in the air and hoping to win catches it and redistributes it somehow optimally to the people who need it most. It really is a complicated process. Obviously, you have to avoid corruption, you have to avoid bureaucracy, although overhead that has to do with the giving process, you know, if you build too big of an organization, you're going to spend more money on running the organization than you are and actually giving money directly to people or helping people directly in some way. And that's what Give Well optimizes and really understands and helps you figure out which are the good charities to give money to. Researchers have used Give Well to donate more than $750 million. Go to givewell.org, pick podcast and select Lex Friedman podcast, head check out. This episode is also brought to you by Linode, Linux virtual machines. I literally smile every time I say Linux. It must be genetic. I think the first time I interacted the Linux terminal, could have any Unix terminal. So basically the command line where you could do have access to bash and purl. Anyway, all of that was in Linux and it opened up to me the world of power at the fingertips of a programmer. I mean, Linux really makes that clear to you. Much, much, much more than does Windows. Anyway, I'm a huge fan of computer infrastructures like Linode, my favorite one, that makes all that power available to you in the cloud has a million things you could do. Small projects, huge systems, all of it. I use Linode for all kinds of stuff and it really, really, really is a great computer infrastructure and made super simple and easy to access and monitor and all that kind of stuff. Visit Linode.com slash Lex for free credit. This show is also brought to you by indeed a hiring website. I've used them for many hiring efforts I've done for the teams I've led in the past. It really is the most important thing you could do in your life, which is optimize the inner circle, the folks you surround yourself with. Of course, you could do that with family, you could do that with friends, but because a lot of us spend such a large percentage of our time at work, we should also do that with the people who work with. And if you're in the position of a manager or like a hiring manager and you get to optimize the inner circle, this isn't just about productivity. It's not just about kind of filling a gap in the team. It's about bringing meaning and happiness to everybody involved. Companies come and go, but a deep, meaningful life journey is something bigger than all of that. So yeah, use the best tools for the job. I like indeed. They do a really great job. They have a special offer only available for a limited time. So go check it out at indeed.com slash Lex. This shows also about Dubai ExpressVPN. I use them to protect my privacy on the interwebs. It protects you a bit more from ISPs, Internet service providers from being able to collect your data, even when you navigate to shady websites, which I know you do in incognito mode in Chrome. You can watch shows that are geographically restricted, especially VPN as a VPN. So it should do the VPN thing well. It should be fast. It should work anywhere like on any device. Again, anywhere, everywhere, at least anywhere I can think of. It works. It works fast. It's very intuitive. It's very simple. It does the thing it's supposed to do and does it well. In terms of execution, I mean, there's very few things I admire than software systems that do the job they're supposed to do and do it well. And all the improvements, all the version updates that they do just push further the ability to do the thing well. They don't shove all the kind of weird features into it. It just does the thing it's supposed to do and does it well. Go to expressvpn.com slash Lex. pod for an extra three months free. This is the Lex Friedman podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's LivBury. What role do you think luck plays in poker and in life? You can pick whichever one you want. Poker or life and or life. The longer you play, the less influenced luck has. Like with all things, the bigger your sample size, the more the quality of your decisions or your strategies matter. So to answer that question, yeah, in poker, it really depends. If you and I sat and played 10 hands right now, I might only win 52% of the time, 53% maybe. But if we played 10,000 hands, then I'll probably win like over 98, 99% of the time. So it's a question of sample sizes. And what are you figuring out over time? The betting strategy that this individual does or it literally doesn't matter against any individual over time. Against any individual over time, the better player, because they're making better decisions. So what does that mean to make a better decision? Well, to get into the realness of Christie already, basically poker is the game of math. There are these strategies familiar with like Nash Equilibria, that's right. So there are these game theory optimal strategies that you can adopt. And the closer you play to them, the less exploitable you are. So because I've studied the game a bunch, although admittedly not for a few years, but back in, you know, when I was playing all the time, I would study these game theory optimal solutions and try and then adopt those strategies when I go and play. So I'd play against you and I would do that. Because the objective when you're playing game theory optimal, it's actually, it's a loss minimization thing that you're trying to do. Your best bet is to try and play a similar style. You also need to try and adopt this loss minimization. But because I've been playing much longer than you, I'll be better at that. So first of all, you're not taking advantage of my mistakes. But then on top of that, I'll be better at recognizing when you are playing suboptimally and then deviating from this game theory optimal strategy to exploit your bad plays. Can you define game theory and Nash Equilibria? Can we try to sneak up to it in a bunch of ways? Like, what's the game theory framework of analyzing poker, analyzing any kind of situation? So game theory is just basically the study of decisions within a competitive situation. I mean, it's technically a branch of economics, but it also applies to like wider decision theory. And usually when you see it, it's these little payoff matrices and so on, that's how it's depicted. But it's essentially just like study of strategies under different competitive situations. And as it happens, certain games, in fact, many, many games, have these things called Nash Equilibria. And what that means is when you're in a Nash Equilibrium, basically, it is not, there is no strategy that you can take that would be more beneficial than the one you're currently taking, assuming your opponent is also doing the same thing. So it would be a bad idea, if we're both playing a game theory optimal strategy, if either we're giving us DV8 from that, now we're putting ourselves at a disadvantage. RockPapyr says this is actually a really great example of this. Like if we were to start playing rockPapyrs, you know, nothing about me, and we're going to play for all our money, let's play 10 rounds of it, what would your sort of optimal strategy be, do you think? What would you do? Let's see, I would probably try to be as random as possible. Exactly. You want to, because you don't know anything about me, you don't want to give anything about a way about yourself. So ideally, you'd have like a little dice or somewhat, you know, a perfect randomizer that makes you randomize 33% of the time each of the three different things. And in response to that, well, actually, I can kind of do anything, but I would probably just randomize back too. But actually, it wouldn't matter, because I know that you're playing randomly. So that would be us in a Nash equilibrium where we're both playing this like unexploidable strategy. However, if after a while you then notice that I'm playing rock a little bit more often than I should. Yeah, you're the kind of person that would do that, wouldn't you? Sure, yes, yes, yes, more of a sister's girl. But anyway, no, I'm a, as I said, randomizer. So you notice I'm throwing rock too much, or something like that. Right. So that's basically an example of where, you know, what, what game three optimal strategy is in terms of loss minimization, but it's not always the maximally profitable thing if you're opponent is doing stupid things, but it's not a good thing to do. So I'm going to say that I'm not doing it, but I'm going to say that I'm not doing it, but I'm going to say that I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it. I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it. I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, but I'm not doing it, It's billions of fake hands and then it will converge upon what the game theory optimal strategies are. And then you want to try and memorize what these are. Basically, they're like ratios of how often, what types of hands you want to bluff and what percentage of the time. So then there's this additional layer of inbuilt randomization built in. Yeah, those kind of simulations incorporate all the betting strategies and everything else like that. So they're supposed to some kind of very crude mathematical model of what's the probability you win just based on the quality of the card. It's including everything else to the game theory of it. Yes, essentially. And what's interesting is that nowadays if you want to be a top pro and you go and play and he's really like the super high stakes tournaments or tough cash games. If you don't know this stuff, you're going to get eaten alive in the long run. Yeah. But of course you could get lucky over the short run. And that's where this like luck factor comes in because luck is both a blessing in a curse. If luck didn't, you know, if there wasn't this random element and there wasn't the ability for worse players to win sometimes, then poker would fall apart. You know, the same reason people don't play chess professionally for money against you don't see people going and hustling chess, like not knowing. Trying to make a living from it because you know there's very little luck in chess, but there's quite a lot of luck in poker. Have you seen a beautiful mind that movie years ago? Well, what do you think about the game theoretic formulation of what is it the hot blonde at the bar? Do you remember the way they illustrated it is they're trying to pick up a girl at a bar and there's multiple girls. They're like friend. It's like a friend group when you're trying to approach. I don't remember the details, but I remember don't you like then speak to her friends? Yeah, yeah, like that. Fame disinterest. I mean, it's classic pickup artists stuff. Right. We're trying to correlate that somehow that being an optimal strategy game theoretically. Why? What? Like, I don't think I remember. I want to imagine that they're I mean, it's probably an optimal strategy. Is it does that mean that there's an actual Nash equilibrium of like picking up girls? Do you know the the marriage problem? It's optimal stopping. Yes. So where it's a optimal dating strategy where you do remember. Yeah, I think it's like something like you you know you've got like a set of a hundred people you're going to look through and after how many? Do you now after that after going on this many dates out of a hundred. What point do you then go? Okay, the next best person I see is that the right one? And I think it's like something like 37% one over E whatever that is right, which I think is. Yeah, yeah. I'm going to fact check that. Yeah, so but it's funny under those strict constraints. Then yes, after that many people as long as you have a fixed size pool, then you just picked the the next person that is better than anyone else before. Yeah. Have you tried this? Have you incorporated it? I'm one of those people. I'm a we're and we're going to discuss this. I and what do you mean those people? I try not to optimize stuff. I try to listen to the heart. I don't think I like my mind immediately is attracted to optimizing everything. And I think that if you really give into that kind of addiction that you lose the joy of the small things, the minutia of life, I think. I don't know. I'm concerned about the addictive nature of my personality in that regard. In some ways, while I think the on average people under try and quantify things or try under optimize, there are some people who, you know, it's like with all these things. It's a balancing act. I've been a dating house, but I've never used them. I'm sure they have data on this because they probably have the optimal stopping control problem. There aren't a lot of people that use social like dating apps are on there for a long time. So the interesting aspect is like, all right, how long before you stop looking before it actually starts affecting your mind negatively such that you see dating as a kind of game. Versus an actual process of finding somebody that's going to make you happy for the rest of your life. It's really interesting. They have the data. I wish they would be able to release that data. And I do want to help you. It's OK, keep it right. I think they ran a huge study on all of that. Yeah, there are more data driven. I think they keep it folks out. I think there's a lot of opportunity for dating apps and you know, even bigger than dating apps, people connecting on the internet. I just hope they're more data driven and it doesn't seem that way. I think like I've always thought that good reads should be a dating app. I've never used it. The good reads is just lists like books that you've read. OK. And allows you comment on the books you read and what books you're currently reading. It's the giant social networks of people reading books. And that seems to be a much better database of interest. Of course, it constrains you to the books you're reading. But that really reveals so much more about the person. It allows you to discover shared interests because books are kind of windowed into the way you see the world. Also, like the kind of places people you're curious about, the kind of ideas you're curious about, are you romantic? Are you cold calculating rationalists? Are you into iron rand? Are you into Bernie Sanders? Are you into whatever? Right. And I feel like that reveals so much more than like a person trying to look hot from a certain angle in the tender profile. Well, and it would also be a really great filter in the first place for people, it's the likes of people who read books and are willing to go and rape them and give feedback on them and so on. So that's already a really strong filter. Probably the type of people you'd be looking for. Well, at least be able to fake reading books. I mean, the thing about books, you don't really need to read it. You can just look at books. Game the dating app via fainting intellectualism. Can I admit something very horrible about myself? Go on. The things that, you know, I don't know how many things in my closet, but this is one of them. I've never actually read Shakespeare. I've only read Cliff Notes. And I got a five in the AP English exam. Which books? Which books have I read? Well, yeah, which was the exam on? Oh, no, they include a lot of them. But Hamlet, I don't even know if you read Romeo and Juliet, Macbeth. I don't remember, but I don't understand it. It's like really cryptic. It's hard. It's really, I don't, and it's not that pleasant to read. It's like ancient speak. I don't understand it. Anyway, maybe I was too dumb. I'm still too dumb, but I did. But you got a five, which is. Yeah, yeah. I don't know how the US grading system is. Oh, no. So AP English is a, there's kind of this advanced versions of courses. And high school, and you take a test that is like a broad test for that subject and includes a lot. It wasn't obviously just Shakespeare. I think a lot of it was also writing written. You have like AP Physics, AP Computer Science, AP Biology, AP Chemistry, and then AP English, or AP Literature. I forget what it was. But I think Shakespeare was a part of that. And you, and you game, the point is you game a fight it. Game a fight. Well, entirety, I was into getting A's. I saw it as a game. I don't think any. I don't think all the learning I've done has been outside of the, outside of school. The deepest learning I've done has been outside of school. Well, the few exceptions, especially in grad school, like deep computer science courses. But that was still outside of school because it was outside of getting, it was outside of getting the A for the course. The best stuff I've ever done is when you read the chapter and you do many of the problems at the end of the year, which is usually not what's required for the course, like the hardest stuff. In fact, textbooks are freaking incredible. If you go back now and you look at like Biology textbook or, or any of the computer science textbooks on algorithms and data structures, those things are incredibly, they have the best summary of a subject. Plus they have practice problems of increasing difficulty that allows you to truly master the basic, the fundamental idea behind that. I got to remind Tire physics degree with one textbook that was just this really comprehensive one that they told us at the beginning of the first year, by this, but you're going to have to buy 15 other books for all your supplementary courses. And I was like every time I was just checked to see whether this book covered it and it did. And I think I only bought like two or three extra than thank God because they're so expensive textbooks. It's a whole racket they've got going on. Yeah, they are. They could just, you get the right one. It's just like a manual for, but what's interesting though is, this is the tyranny of having exams and metrics. The tyranny of exams and metrics. Yes. I loved them because I loved, I'm very competitive and I liked, I liked finding ways to game or find things and then like sort of dust off my shoulders after when I get, go to good grade or be annoyed at myself when I didn't. But yeah, you're absolutely right in that the actual, you know, how much of that physics knowledge I've retained like I've, I learned how to cram and study and please an examiner. But did that give me the deep lasting knowledge that I needed? I mean, yes, yes and no. But really like nothing makes you learn a topic better than when you actually didn't have to teach it yourself. You know, like I'm trying to wrap my teeth around this like game theory mollock stuff right now and there's no exam at the end of it. I can gamify there's no way to gamify and sort of like shortcut my way through it. I have to understand it so deeply from like deep foundational levels to them to build upon it and then try and explain it to other people. And like, you know, you're about to go and do some lectures right you you can't you can't sort of just like. You probably presumably can't rely on the knowledge that you got through when you were studying for an exam. Yeah, to reteach that. Yeah, and especially high level lectures, especially the kind of stuff you do on YouTube, you're not just regurgitating material. You have to think through what is the core idea here and when you do the lectures live, especially you have to there's no second takes. That is a luxury you get if you're recording a video for YouTube or something like that. But it definitely is a luxury shouldn't lean on. I've gotten to interact with a few YouTubers that lean on that too much and you realize, oh, you're you've gamified this system because you're not really thinking deeply about stuff. You're through the edit both written and spoken. You're crafting an amazing video, but you yourself as a human being have not really deeply understood it. So live teaching or least recording video with very few takes is a different beast. I think it's the most honest way of doing it like as few takes as possible. That's what I'm nervous about this. Don't go back to it. Like, let's do that. Don't fuck this up, Liv. The tyranny of exams. I do think people talk about high school and college as a time to do drugs and drink and have fun and all this kind of stuff. But looking back, of course, I did a lot of those things. No, yes. It's also a time when you get to like read textbooks or read books or learn with all the time in the world. Like you don't have these responsibilities of like laundry and having to sort of pay for mortgage or all that kind of stuff, pay taxes, all this kind of stuff. In most cases, there's just so much time in the day for learning. And you don't realize at the time because at the time it seems like a chore. Like, why the hell does there so much homework? But you never get a chance to do this kind of learning, this kind of homework ever again in life. Unless later in life you really make a big effort out of it. You get like your basically your knowledge gets solidified. You don't get to have fun and learn. Learning is really fulfilling and really fun. If you're that kind of person, like some people like knowledge is not something that they think is fun. But if that's the kind of thing that you think is fun, that's the time to have fun and do the drugs and drink and all that kind of stuff. But the learning just going back to those textbooks that I was spent with the textbooks is really, really rewarding. Do people even use textbooks anymore? Do you think? Because is these days with their tech talk and that? Well, not even that, but just like so much information, really high quality information. You know, it's now in digital format online. Yeah, but they're not, they're using that. But you know, college is still very, there's a curriculum. I mean, so much of school is about rigorous study of a subject and still on YouTube that's not there. YouTube has Grand Sanderson talks about this. He's this math. That's basically one brown. Yeah, three blue one brown. He says like, I'm not a math teacher. I just take really cool concepts and I inspire people. But if you want to really learn calculus, if you want to really learn linear algebra, you should do the textbook. You should do that. And there's still the textbook industrial complex that like charges like $200 for textbooks and some how. I don't know. It's ridiculous. There's. Well, they're like, oh, I'm sorry, new addition, addition 14.6. Sorry, you can't use 14.5 anymore. It's like, what's different? We've got one paragraph different. So we mentioned offline, Daniel Nagarano. I'm going to get a chance to talk to him on this podcast. And he's somebody that I was a font fascinating in terms of the way he thinks about poker. Verbalizes the way he thinks about poker, the way he plays poker. So and he's still pretty damn good. He's been good for a long time. So you mentioned that people are running these kinds of simulations and the game of poker has changed. Do you think he's adapting in this way? Do you think like the top pros? Do they have to adopt this way? Or is there, is there still like over the years you basically developed this gut feeling about? Like you get to be like good the way like alpha zero is good. You look at the board and somehow from the fog comes out the right answer. Like this is likely what they have. This is likely the best way to move. And you don't really, you can't really put a finger on exactly why. But it just comes from your gut feeling or no. Yes and no. So gut feelings are definitely very important. You know, they've got our two mobile. You can distill it down to two modes of decision making, right? You've got your sort of logical linear voice in your head system to, as it's often called in your system on your gut intuition. And historically in poker, the very best players were playing almost entirely by their gut. You know, you often they do some kind of inspired play and you'd ask them why they do it. And they wouldn't really be able to explain it. And that's not so much because their process was unintelligible, but it was more just because no one. No one had the language with which to describe what optimal strategies were because no one really understood how poker worked. This was before, you know, we had analysis software. You know, no one was writing, you know, if I guess some people would write down their hands in a little notebook. But there was no way to assimilate all this data and analyze it. But then, you know, with when computers became cheaper and software started emerging and then obviously online poker. Where we would like automatically save your hand histories. Now all of a sudden you kind of had this, this body of data that you could run analysis on. And so that's when people started to see, you know, these mathematical solutions. And so what that meant is the, the role of intuition essentially became smaller. And it went more into as we talked before about, you know, this game theory optimal style. But as also as I said, like game theory optimal is about loss minimization and being unexploitable. But if you're playing against people who aren't because no one person, no human being can play perfectly game theory optimal in poker. Not even the best AIs, they're still like, they're 99.99% of the way there or whatever. But it's kind of like the speed of light you can't reach it perfectly. So there's still a role for intuition? Yes. So when, yeah, when your plane is unexploitable style, but when your opponents start doing something, you know, suboptimal that you want to exploit. Well, now that's where not only your like logical brain, we'll need to be thinking, well, okay, I know I have this, I mean, the sort of top end of my range here with this, with this hand. So that means I need to be calling x% of the time. And I put them on this range, et cetera. But then sometimes you'll have this gut feeling that will tell you, you know, you know what this time I know, I know mathematically I meant to call now, you know, I've got, I mean, the sort of top end of my range and this is the odds I'm getting. So the math says I should call, but there's something in your gut saying they've got it this time. They've got it like, they're beating you. Your hand is worse. So then the real art, this is where the last remaining art in poker, the fuzziness is like, do you listen to your gut? How do you quantify the strength of it? Or can you even quantify the strength of it? And I think that's what Daniel has. I mean, I can't speak for how much he's studying with with the simulators and that kind of thing. I think he has like he must be to still be keeping up. But he has an incredible intuition for just he's seen so many hands of poker in the flesh. He's seen so many people the way they behave when the chips are, you know, when the money's on the line and he's got him staring you down in the eye. You know, he's intimidating. He's got this like kind of X factor vibe that he gives out. And he talks a lot, which is an interactive element, which is he's getting stuff from other people. Yes. Yeah. And just like the subtleties. So he's like, he's probing constantly. Yeah, he's probing and he's getting this extra layer of information that others can't. Now that said though, he's good online as well. You know, I don't know how again, would he be beating the top cash game players online? Probably not. No. But when he's in in person and he's got that additional layer of information, he can not only extract it, but he knows what to do with it. Still so well. There's one player who I would say is the exception to all of this. And he's one of my favorite people to talk about in terms of. I think he might have cracked the simulation is Phil Helmuth. He's more than one. He's cracked the simulation, I think. Yeah. He somehow to this day is still, and I love you Phil, don't I'm not in any way knocking you. He's still winning so much at the World Series of Pokers specifically. He's now on 16 bracelets. The next nearest person I think is 110. And he is consistently year in year out going deep or winning these huge field tournaments, you know, with like 2000 people, which statistically he should not be doing. And yet you watch some of the place he makes and they make no sense like mathematically they are so far from Game Theory optimal. And the thing is if you want to stuck him in one of these high like high stakes cash games with a bunch of like GTO people, he's going to get ripped apart. But there's something that he has that when he's in the halls of the World Series of Pokers specifically amongst sort of amateurish players, he gets them to do crazy shit like that. But my little theory is that also he just the car he's like a wizard and he gets the cards to do what he needs them to. Because he he just expects to win and he expects to receive you know to get flopper set with a frequency far beyond what this you know the real percentages are. And I don't even know if he knows what the real percentages are he doesn't need to because he gets that he has found the cheatbook is when I've seen them play he seems to be like annoyed that the long shot thing didn't happen. Yes, he's like annoyed and it's almost like everybody else is stupid because he was obviously going to win with this. And it's like you understand the silly thing happens 99% of the time and it's 1% not the other way around but genuinely for his lived experience at the world's only at the water of the poker it is like that. So I don't blame him for feeling that way. But he does he has this he has this X factor and the poker community has tried for years to rip him down saying like you know he does he's no good but he's clearly good because he's still winning or there's something going on. Whether that's he's figured out how to mess with the fabric of reality and how all cards. Or you know a randomly shuffled deck of cards come out I don't know what it is but he's doing it right still. Who do you think is the greatest of all time would you put hell me. Not he's definitely he seems like the kind of person when mentioned he would actually watch this so you might want to be careful. As I said I love Phil and I have I would say this to his face I'm not saying anything I don't he's got he truly I mean he is one of the greatest. I don't know if he's the greatest he's certainly the greatest at the world series of poker and he is the greatest at despite the game switching into a pure game almost an entire game of math. I want to keep the magic alive and this like the just through sheer force of will making the game work for him and that is incredible and I think it's something that should be studied because it's an example. Yeah there might be some actual game theoretical wisdom there might be something to be said about optimality from studying him. What do you mean by optimality meaning or rather game design perhaps meaning if what he is doing is working maybe poker is more complicated than we're currently modeling it as. So like or there's an extra layer and I don't need to get too weird and will we but or there's an extra layer of ability to manipulate the things the way you want them to go that we don't understand yet. Do you think Phil how many of them is he just generally I positivity. Well I was a book on positivity and he has did not like the trolling book no I serious straight up yeah. I can tell me a throw to book about positivity yes. Okay not I think and I think it's about sort of manifesting what you want. And getting the outcomes that you want by believing so much in yourself and in your ability to win like eyes on the prize. And I mean it's working the man's delivered where would he put like Phil ivy and all those kinds of people. I mean I'm too I've been to be honest too much out of the scene for the last few years to really. I mean Phil ivy's clearly got again he's got that X factor. He's so incredibly intimidating to play against I've only played against him a couple of times but when he like looks you in the eye and you're trying to run a bluff on him. No one's made me sweat harder than Phil ivy just my blood my blood got through actually that was actually one of the most thrilling moments I've ever had in poker was it was in a Monte Carlo in a high roller. I can't remember exactly what the hand was but I you know I three bit and then like just barrelled all the way through. He just like put his laser eyes into me and I felt like he was just scouring my soul and I was just like hold it together live hold it together and he's like you need your hand with weaker. Yeah I mean I was bluffing I I presume which you know there's a chance I was bluffing with the best hand but I'm pretty sure my hand was worse. And and he folded. I was truly one of my one of the deep highlights of my career because you show the cards are you. You should you should never show in game like because especially as I felt like I was one of the worst players at the table in that tournament so giving that information unless I had a really solid plan that I was now like advertising all look I'm capable of bluffing Phil ivy but like why I would I it's much more valuable to take advantage of the impression that they have of me which is like I'm a scared girl playing a high roller for the first time. Keep that going you know. Interesting but is there a layers to this like psychological warfare that the scare girl. Might be way smart and then like to flip the tables do you think about that kind of stuff or definitely I mean you know I'm not reveal information I mean generally speaking you want to not reveal information you know the goal of poker is to be as deceptive as possible about your own strategies while elucidating as much out of your opponent about their own so giving them free information particularly if they're people who you consider very good players any information I give them is going into their little database and being ca I assume it's going to be calculated and used well. So I have to really confident that my like matter gaming that I'm going to then do all they've seen this so therefore that I'm going to be on the right level. So it's better just to keep that little secret to myself in the moment so how much is bluffing part of the game huge amount. So yeah I mean maybe actually let me ask like what did it feel like with the live or anyone else wants a high stake when it's a big. It's a big bluff. So a lot of money in the table and maybe I mean what defines a big bluff maybe a lot of money in the table but also someone certain junior mind and heart about. Like self doubt well maybe I miscalculated what's going on here with the best said all that kind of stuff like what does that feel like. I mean it's I imagine comparable to you know running a I mean any kind of big bluff where you have a lot of something that you care about on the line you know so if you're bluffing in a courtroom not that anyone to do that or you know something equatable to that it's it's in. You know in that scenario you know it was I think it was the first time I'd ever played a 20 I'd won my way into this 25 K tournament so that was the buy in 25,000 euros and I sat lighted my way in because it was much bigger than I would never ever normally play. And you know I hadn't I wasn't that experienced at the time and now I was sitting there against all the big boys you know the grand news the Phil IVs and so on. And then to like each time you put the bets out you know you put another bet out your car I was on a what's called a semi bluff so there was some cards that could come that would make my hand very very strong and therefore win but most of the time those cards don't come so that is a semi bluff because you're representing what are you representing that you already have something. So I think in this scenario I had a flush draw to to so I had to clubs to to clubs came out on the flop and then I'm hoping that on the turn and the river one will come so I have some future equity I could hit a club and then I'll have the best and in which case great. And so I can keep betting and I want them to call but I'm also got the other way of winning the hand where if my card doesn't come I can keep betting and get them to fold their hand. And I'm pretty sure that's what the scenario was so I had some future equity but it's still you know most of the time I don't hit that club and so I would rather him just fold because I'm you know the pot is now getting bigger and bigger and in the end like I jam all jam all in on the river that's my entire tournament on the line as far as I'm aware this might be the one time I ever get to play a big 25 K you know this is the first time I played once so it was. It felt like the most momentous thing and this is also when I was trying to build myself up at you know build my name a name for myself in poker I want to get respect destroy everything for you. It felt like it in the moment like I mean it literally does feel like a form of life and death like your body physiologically is having that flight or fight response what are you doing with your body what are you doing with your face are you just like what are you thinking about. What are you thinking about. Well a mixture of like okay what are the cards so in theory I'm thinking about like okay what are what are cards that look make my hand look stronger which you know which cards hit my perceived range from his perspective which cards don't what's the right amount of bet size to you know maximize my fold equity in this situation you know that's the logical stuff that I should be thinking about but I think in reality because I was so scared because there's this at least for me there's a certain threshold of like nervousness or stress. Beyond which the like logical brain shuts off and now it just gets into this like. It just like it feels like a game of wit space it is like of nerve can you hold your hold your resolve and it certainly got by that like by the river at this I think by that point I was like I don't even know if this is a good bluff anymore but fuck it let's do it. Your mind is almost numb from the intensity of that feeling I call it the white noise and and that's this and it happens in all kinds of decision making I think any way I can do it. I think anything that's really really stressful I can imagine someone in like an important job interview if it's like a job they've always wanted and they get in grilled. You know like bridge water style where they asked these really like really hard like mathematical questions. You know that's it's a really learned skill to be able to like. Subdue your flight or fight response you know what I think get from the sympathetic into the parasympathetic so you can. You know engage the that voice in your head and do those slow logical calculations because evolutionarily we you know if we see a lion running at us we didn't have time to sort of. Calculate the lion's kinetic energy and you know is it optimal to go this way all that way you just reacted and physically our bodies are well attuned to actually make right decisions but when you're playing a game like poker this is not something that you ever you know evolved to do and yet you're in that same flight or fight response. And so that's a really important skill to be able to develop to basically learn how to like. Meditate in the moment and calm yourself so that you can think clearly. But as you were searching for a comparable thing it's interesting because I you just made me realize that bluffing is. Like an incredibly high stakes form of lying you're lying. And I don't think you telling a story. It's straight up lying in the context of game it's not a negative kind of lying. But it is yeah, it's like you are you're representing something that you don't have and I was thinking like how often in life do we have such high stakes of lying because I was thinking. Certainly in high level military strategy I was thinking when Hitler was lying to Stalin about his plans to invade the Soviet Union. And so you're you're talking to a person like your friends and you're fighting against the enemy whatever the formulation of that enemy is. But meanwhile whole time you building up troops on the border. That's extremely. So Hitler and Stalin were like pretending to be friends from my history knowledge is terrible. Oh yeah, yeah, that there were. Yeah. And they worked because Stalin until the troops crossed the border and invaded in Operation Barbarossa where they. And this storm of Nazi troops invaded large parts of the Soviet Union and hence one of the biggest wars in human history began. Stalin for sure was thought that this was never going to be that Hitler is not crazy enough to invade the Soviet Union that they it and it makes geopolitically makes total sense to be collaborators and ideologically. Even though there's a tension between communism and fascism or national socialism however you formulated it still feels like this is the right way to battle the west. Right. They were more ideologically aligned you know they they in theory had a common enemy which is the west. So made a total sense and in terms of negotiations and the way things were communicated it it seemed to Stalin that for sure that they would remain at least for a while. Peaceful collaborators and that and everybody everybody because of that in the Soviet Union believe that it was a huge shock when Kiev was invaded and you hear echoes of that one I want to travel to Ukraine sort of the shock of the invasion. It's not just the invasion on one particular border but the invasion of the capital city and just like holy shit. Especially at that time when you thought world war one you realize that that was the word and all wars you would never have this kind of war and holy shit this this person is mad enough to try to take on this monster in the Soviet Union. So it's not no longer going to be a war of hundreds of thousands dead it'll be a war of tens of millions dead and yeah but that like you know that's a very large scale kind of lie. But I'm sure there's in politics and geopolitics that kind of lying happening all the time and a lot of people pay financially and with their lives for that kind of lying but in our personal lives I don't know how often we maybe we I think people do I mean like think of spouses cheating on their partners right and then like having to lie like where were you last night stuff like that. Yeah, like that's I think you know I mean I'm fortunate that stuff happens all the time right so or having like multiple families that one is great when when each family doesn't know the other about the other one and like maintaining that life. There's probably a sense of excitement about that too. It seems unnecessary yeah but well just lying like like you know the truth finds a way of coming out you know yes but hence that's the thrill. Yeah perhaps yeah people I mean I know you know that's what I think actually like poker was was was interesting about poker is most of the best players I know they're always exceptions you know they're always bad eggs. But actually poker players are very honest people I would say they are more honest than the average you know if you just a random random population sample because. A you know I think you know humans like to have that most people like to have some kind of you know mysterious or you know an opportunity to do something like a little edgy so we get to sort of scratch that it's being edgy at the table where it's like it's part of the game everyone knows everyone knows what they're in for and that's allowed and you get to like really get that out of your system. And then also like poker players learned that you know I would play in a huge game against some of my friends even my partner ego where we will be you know absolutely going at each other's throats trying to draw blood in terms of winning each money off each other and like get under each other skin winning each other up. During the craftiest moves we can but then once the games done the you know the winners and the losers will go off and get a drink together and have a fun time and like talk about it in this like weird academic way afterwards because that that's why games are so great because you get to like live out. Or like this competitive urge that you know most people have. What's the feel like to lose like we talked about bluffing when worked out what about on you where you go broke. So like in a game I'm you know I've never gone broke for life. No I know plenty of people who have and I don't think you would mind me saying he went you know he went broke once in poker bowl you know early on when we were together. I feel like you haven't lived unless you got broke. Yeah I I some sense right I mean I'm happy I've sort of lived through it by caracy through him when he did it at the time. But yeah what is it like to lose what it depends so it depends on the amount it depends what percentage of your net worth you've just lost. It depends on your brain chemistry really you know very from person. It's a very cold calculating way of thinking about this so it depends what percentage you. What it is really does right and yeah that's I mean that's another thing poker trains you to do you see you see you see everything in percentages. Or you see everything in like ROI or expected hourly or cost benefit etc. You know so that's I I one of the things I've tried to do is calibrate the strength of my emotional response to the to the win or loss that I've received. Because it's it's no good if you like you know you have a huge emotional dramatic response to a tiny loss. Or on the flip side you have a huge win and you're so dead inside that you don't even feel it well that's you know that's a shame I want my emotions to calibrate with reality as much as possible. So yeah what's it like to lose I mean I've had times where I've lost you know busted out of a tournament that I thought I was going to win in is you know especially if I got really unlucky or. Or I make a dumb play where I've gone away and like you know kicked kicked the wall punched a wall I like nearly broke my hand one time like i'm a lot less competitive than I used to be like I was like pathologically competitive in my like late teens early 20s I just had to win everything. And I think that's sort of slowly waned as I've gone older according to you yeah according to me I don't know for others would say the same way. I feel like ultra competitive people like I've heard your own say this to me is like I think he's a lot less competitive than you used to be I don't know what that. Oh I believe it no I totally believe it like I because as you get you can still be like I care about winning like when you know I play a game with my bodies online or you know whatever it is polypollytopias my current obsession like. Thank you for passing on your obsession to me are you playing now yeah I'm playing now we got to have a game but I'm terrible and I enjoy playing terribly. I don't want to have a game because that's going to pull me into your monster of like competitive play. It's important I'm enjoying playing on the I can't I you just do that you just do the points thing of you know against the bots yeah against the bots and I can't even do the. There's like a hard one and there's a very crazy yeah it's crazy I can't I don't even enjoy the hard one the crazy I really don't enjoy because it's intense you have to constantly try to win as opposed to enjoy building a little world that you. Yeah no there's no time for exploration of polypollytopias you got to get well when once you graduate from the crazies then you can come play the. Graduate from the crazy yeah so in order to be able to play a decent game against like you know our group you'll need to be. You'll need to be consistently winning in like 90% of games against 15 crazy bots yeah and you'll be able to like it there be I could I could teach you it within a day honestly. How how to be the crazy how to be the crazy is and then and then you'll be ready for the week generalizes to more than just polytopia but okay why were we talking about polytopia losing hurts losing hers oh yeah yes competitiveness over time oh yeah I think it's more that at least for me I still care about playing about winning when I choose to play something it's just that I don't see the world as zero summer's I used to you know I think as you one gets older and wiser you start to see the world more as a positive something and or at least you're more aware of externalities of scenarios of competitive interactions and so yeah I just like I'm more and I'm more aware of my own you know like. If I have a really strong emotional response to losing and that makes me then feel shitty for the rest of the day and then I beat myself up mentally for it like I'm now more aware that that that's unnecessary negative externality so I'm like okay I need to find a way to turn this down you know dial this down a bit was poker the thing that has if you think back of your life and think about some the lower points of your life like the darker places you've gone in your mind did I have to do something with poker like what did losing spark. The the descent into darkness or is it something else I think my darkest points in poker when I was wanting to quit and move on to other things but I felt like I hadn't. Tick to all the boxes I wanted to tick like I wanted to be the most winningest pop female player which is by itself a bad goal. You know that was one of my initial goals and I was like well I haven't you know I wanted to win a WPT event I want one of these I want one of these but I want one of those as well and that. So again I it's a drive of like over optimization to random metrics that I decided were important. Without much wisdom at the time but then I carried on. That made me continue chasing it longer than I still actually had the passion to chase it for and I don't I don't have any regrets that. You know I played for as long as I did because who knows you know I would I wouldn't be sitting here I wouldn't be living this incredible life that I'm living now. This is this is the height of your life right now is it is it. Absolute pinnacle here and your robot land. Yeah. The creepy light. No it is I mean I wouldn't change a thing about my life right now and I feel very blessed to say that. So but the dark times were in the sort of like 2016 to 18 even soon I really where I was like I'd stopped loving the game and I was going through the motions and I would. And then I was like you know I would take the losses harder than I needed to because I'm like it's another one and it was I was aware that like I felt like my life was ticking away and I was like is this going to be what's on my tombstone. Oh yeah she played the game of you know there's zero some game of poker slightly more optimally than her next opponent. Like cool great legacy you know so I just want to you know I there was something in me that knew I needed to be doing something more directly impactful and just meaningful it was like a search for meaning and I think it's a thing a lot of poker players even a lot of I imagine any. Games players who sort of love intellectual pursuits. Um you know I think you should ask Magnus Kelsen this question yeah walking away from chess right yeah like it must be so hard for him you know he's been on the top for so long and it's like well now what he's got this incredible brain like what to put it to. Um and yeah it's it's this weird moment where I was just spoken with people that won multiple gold medals at the Olympics and the depression is hard after you win. Don't mean crash because it's a kind of a goodbye saying goodbye to that person to all the dreams you had that thought you thought would give meaning to your life but in fact life is full of constant pursuits of meaning it doesn't you don't like arrive and figure it all out and there's endless bliss now it continues going on and on you constantly have to figure out to rediscover yourself and so for you like that struggle to say goodbye to poker. You have to find the next there's always a bigger game that's the thing that's my like motto is like what's the next game and more importantly because obviously game usually implies zero sum like what what's the game which is like Omni win. Look what you win. Omni win. Why is Omni win is so so important because if everyone plays zero sum games that's a fast track to either completely stagnate as a civilization but more actually. Far more likely to extinguish ourselves you know like the playing field is finite. Yeah you know you know nuclear powers of playing you know game of poker with the with you know but their chips of nuclear weapons right. And the stakes have gotten so large that if anyone makes a single bet you know fires some weapons the playing field breaks made a video on this like. You know the the the the the playing field is finite and if we keep playing these adverse adversarial zero sum games. Thinking that we you know in order for us to win someone else has to lose or if we lose that you know someone else wins that that will extend us. So it's a matter of when what do you think about that mutually sure destruction that very simple almost to the point of character in game theory idea that does seem to be. At the core of why we haven't blown each other up yet when you clear weapons do you think there's some truth to that this kind of stabilizing force of mutually sure destruction and do you think that's going to. Hold up to the 21st century. I mean it's it has it has held yes there's definitely truth to it that it was a you know it's an ass like equilibrium yeah you surprised it held this long. I think crazy it is crazy when you factor in all the like near miss accidental firings yes that makes me wonder like you know you know that you're familiar with the like quantum suicide thought experiment where it's basically like you have a. You know like a Russian roulette type scenario set hooked up to some kind of quantum event you know the particles splitting. And if it you know if it goes a then the gun doesn't go off and it goes b then it does go off and kills you. Because you can only ever be in the universe you know assuming like the ever branch you know multiverse theory you'll always only end up in the in the branch where you continually make you know option a comes in. But you run that experiment enough times it kept starts getting pretty damn you know out of the the tree gets huge there's a million different scenarios and but you'll always find yourself in this in the one where it didn't go off. And and so from that perspective you you you are essentially a mortal. Because someone and you will only find yourself in the set of observers that make it down that path yeah it's it's it's it doesn't mean. That does that does does mean you're still not going to be fucked at some point in your life. No, I'm not advocating like that we're all in a mortal because of this it's just like a fun thought experiment. And the point is it like raises this thing of like these things called observer selection effects which bostrom and Nick bostrom talks about a lot and I think people should go read. It's really powerful, but I think it could be overextended that logic I'm not sure. Exactly how it can be I just feel like you can get you can or generalize that logic somehow. Well, no, I mean it leads you into like solipsism which is a very dangerous mindset again if everyone like falls into solipsism of like well I'll be fine. That's a great way of creating a very you know self-terminating environment. But my point is is that with the nuclear weapons thing. There have been at least I think it's 12 or 11. Neumiss is what of like just stupid things like there was moon rise over Norway and it made weird reflections of some glaciers in the mountains which set off. I think the alarms of a norad norad radar and that put them on high alert nearly ready to shoot and it was only because. The head of Russian military happened to be at the UN in New York at the time that they go like well wait a second why would. Why would they fire now when their guys there and it was only that lucky happens dance which doesn't happen very often where they didn't then escalate it into firing and is a bunch of these different ones. Stan is left petro of like saved the person who should be the most famous person on earth because he's probably on expectations saved the most human lives of anyone like billions of people by. Ignoring Russian orders to fire because he felt in his gut that actually this was a false alarm and it turned out to be you know very hard thing to do. And there's so many of those scenarios that I can't help but wonder at this point that we aren't having this kind of like selection effect thing going on. Because you look back and you're like geez that's a lot of near misses but well of course we don't know the actual probabilities that they would have lent each one would have ended up in nuclear war. Maybe they were not that likely but still the point is it's a very dark stupid game that we're playing. And it is an absolute moral imperative if you ask me to get as many people thinking about ways to make this like very precarious because we're in a Nash equilibrium but it's not like we're in the bottom of a pit you know if you would like map it topographically. It's not like a stable ball at the bottom of a thing we're not an equilibrium because that we're on the top of a hill with the ball balanced on top and just at any little nudge could send it flying down and you know nuclear war pops off and hellfire and bad times. On the positive side life on earth to probably still continue and another intelligence civilization might still pop up maybe. Yeah. It would depend pick your ex-risk depends on the ex-risk nuclear war sure that's one of the perhaps less bad ones green goo through synthetic biology very bad will turn you know destroy all. You know organic matter through you know it's basically like a biological paper clip maximizer also bad or AI type you know mass extinction thing as well would also be. Shhh that wassing. Shhh there's a robot right behind you okay wait so let me ask you about this from a game theory perspective do you think we're living in a simulation. Do you think we're listening and living inside the video game created by somebody else. Well so what was the second part of the question do I think we're living in a simulation and a simulation that is observed by somebody for purpose of entertainment so like a video game are we listening how we because there's a creed is like Phil Helmuth type of situation right like. There's a creepy level of like this is kind of fun and interesting like there's a lot of interesting stuff going on maybe that could be somehow integrated into the evolutionary process where. The way we perceive and are you asking me if I believe in God. Sounds like it. Kind of but God seems to be not optimizing in the different formulations of God that we can see well he doesn't seem to be or she optimizing for like personal entertainment. Maybe the older gods did but the the you know just like the basically a teenager in their mom's basement watching create a fun universe to observe. So kind of crazy ship might happen. Okay so to try and ask this do I think there is some kind of. Ex extraneous intelligence to like art. You know classic measurable universe that we you know can measure with convert you know through all current physics and instruments I think so yes. Partly because I've had just small little bits of evidence in my own in my own life which have made me question like so I was a die hard atheist. Even five years ago you know I got into like the rationality community big fan of less wrong continue to be incredible resource. But I've just started to have too many little snippets of experience which. Don't make sense with the current sort of purely materialistic explanation of how reality works. Isn't that just like a humbling practical realization that we don't know how reality works. Isn't that just a reminder to yourself yeah no it's a reminder of epistemic humility because I felt too hard you know same same as people like I think you know many people who are just like my religion is the way this is the correct way this is the work this is the law. You are immoral if you don't follow this but I think they are lacking epistemic humility they're a little too much hubris there. But similarly I think the sort of the Richard Dawkins brand of atheism is too is too rigid as well and doesn't. You know there's a way to try and navigate these questions which still honors the scientific method which I still think is our best sort of realm of like reasonable inquiry you know method of inquiry. So an example I have to kind of notable examples that like really rattled my my my cage the first one was actually in 2010 early on in quite early on in my poker career and I. The I remember the I stand in volcano that erupted that like shut down kind of all Atlantic airspace and I meant I got stuck down in the south of France I was there for something else and I couldn't get home and someone said well there's a big poker tournament happening in Italy maybe do you want to go I was like alright sure like let's you know got trained across found a way to get there. And it the buy-in was 5000 euros which was much bigger than my bankroll would normally allow and so I played a feeder tournament one my way in kind of like I did with the Monte Carlo big one. So then I won my way you know from 500 years into 5000 euros to play this thing and on day one of the big tournament which turned out to have it was the biggest tournament ever held in Europe at the time it got over like 1200 people absolutely huge. And I remember they dimmed the lights for before you know the normal shuffle up and deal to tell everyone to start playing and they played chemical brothers hey boy hey girl. Which I don't know why it's notable but it was just like a really it was a song I always liked it was like one of these like pump me up songs and I'll sit there thinking yeah yeah it's exciting I'm playing this really big tournament and out of nowhere just suddenly this voice in my head. Just and it sounded like my own sort of you know when you say you think in your mind you hear a voice kind of right and you say do. And so it sounded like my own voice and it said you were going to win this tournament. And it was so powerful that I got this like wave of like you know the sort of goosebumps down my body and I even I remember looking around being like did anyone else hear that and obviously people are in their phones like no one else heard it and I was like okay. Six days later I win the fucking tournament out of 1200 people. And I said I don't know how to explain it. Okay yes maybe I have that feeling before every time I play and it's just that I happen to you know because I won the tournament I retroactively remembered it but that's just. Or the feeling gave you a kind of now from the film hell museum well exactly like you gave you a confidence a deep confidence and it did it definitely did like I remember then feeling this like sort of well although I remember then on day one I then went and lost half my stack quite early on and I remember thinking like all that was bullshit you know what kind of premonition is this thinking I'm out but you know I managed to like keep it together and recover and then and then just went like pretty perfectly from then on. And either way it definitely instilled me with this confidence and I don't want to put I don't I can't put an explanation like you know was it some you know huge extra extra you know supernatural thing driving me or was it just my own self confidence and someone that just made me make the right decisions I don't know and I'm not going to put a frame on it and I think I know a good explanation so we're a bunch of NPCs living in this world created by in the simulation. And then people not people creatures from outside of the simulation sort of continue and play your character and that feeling you got is somebody just like they got to play a poker tournament through you honestly it felt like that it did actually feel a little bit like that but it's been 12 years now I've retold the story many times like I don't know how much I can trust my memory. You're just an NPC retelling the same story because they just played the tournament left. Yeah they're like that was fun cool next time it and now you're for the rest of your life left as a boring NPC retelling this. Well and it was and what was interesting was that after that then I didn't obviously when but made major tournament for quite a long time and it left that was that was actually another sort of dark period because I had this incredible like the highs of winning that you know just on a like material level we're insane winning the money I was on the front page. I was on the front page of newspapers because it was like this girl that came out of nowhere and one this big thing and so again like sort of chasing that feeling was was difficult but then on top of that that was this feeling of like almost being touched by something bigger that was like. So maybe did you have a sense that I might be somebody special like this kind of I think that's the confidence thing that maybe you could do something special in this world after all kind of feeling. Stephanie I mean this is a thing I think everybody wrestles with to an extent right we all we are truly the protagonist in our own lives and so it's a natural bias human bias to feel to feel special and I think and in some ways we are special every single person is special because you are that the universe does the world literally does revolve around you that's the thing in in some respect. But of course if you then zoom out and take the amalgam of everyone's experiences then no it doesn't so there is this shared sort of objective reality but this objective reality that is shared but then there's also this objective reality which is truly unique to you and I think both of those things coexist and it's not like one is correct and one isn't and again anyone who's like oh no you're lived experiences everything versus your lived experiences nothing no it's it's a blend between these two things they can exist concurrently but there's a certain kind of sense that at least I've had my whole life and I think a lot of people have this is like well. I'm just like this little person surely I can't be one of those people that do the big thing right there's all these big people doing big things there's big actors and actresses big musicians there's big business owners and all that kind of stuff scientists and so on I you know I have my own subject experience that I enjoy and so on but there's like a different layer like surely I can't do those great things. I mean one of the things just having interacted with a lot of great people I realize no they're like just the same the same the same humans as me and that realization I think is really empowering and to remind you. What are they are they well depends on some yeah they're like a bag of insecurities and yes peculiar sort of like they're all little weirdnesses and so on I should say also not they have the capacity for brilliance but they're not generically brilliant like you know we would have to say this person or that person is brilliant but really no they're just like sitting there and thinking through stuff just like the rest of us. I think they're in the habit of thinking through stuff seriously and they've built up a habit of not allowing them their mind to get trapped in a bunch of bullshit and minutia of day to day life they really think big ideas but those big ideas. It's like allowing yourself the freedom to think big to realize that you you you can be one that actually solve this particular big problem first identify a big problem that you care about then like I can actually be the one that solves this problem. And like allowing yourself to believe that I think sometimes you do need to have like that shock go to your body and a voice tells you you're going to win this tournament. Well exactly and whether it was it's it's this idea of useful fictions so again like going through the all like the rap the classic rationalist training of less wrong where it's like you want your map you know the image you have of the world in your head to as accurately match up with how the world actually is. You want the map and the territory to perfectly align as you know you want it to be as an accurate representation as possible. I don't know if I fully subscribed to that anymore having now had these moments of like feeling of something either bigger or just actually just being overconfident like there is value in overconfidence sometimes I do if you take you know take Magnus Carlson right if he I'm sure from an a young age he knew he was very talented. But I wouldn't be surprised if he was also had something in him to actually maybe he's a bad example because he truly is the world's greatest. But someone who exactly whether they were going to be the world's greatest but end up doing extremely well because they had this innate deep self confidence this like even overblown idea of how good their relative skill level is. That gave them the confidence to then pursue this thing in the like. With the kind of focus and dedication that it requires to excel in whatever it is you're trying to do you know and so there are these useful fictions and that's where I think I diverge slightly with the classic. The classic sort of rationalist community because. That's a field that is worth studying of like how the stories we tell what the stories we tell to ourselves even if they are actually false and even if we suspect they might be false. How it's better to sort of have that like little bit of faith. The like value in faith I think actually and that's partly one other thing that's like now led me to explore. You know the concept of God whether you want to call it a simulator. The classic theoretical thing I think we're all like elucidating to the same thing now I don't know I'm not saying you know because obviously the Christian God is like all benevolent. Endless love the simulation one of at least one of the simulation hypothesis is like as you said like a teenager in its bedroom who doesn't really care doesn't give a shit about the individuals within there just like wants to see how the thing plays out because it's curious and it could turn it off like that. You know where on the you know where on the sort of psychopathy to benevolence spectrum God is I don't know. But having having this having a little bit of faith that there is something else out there that might be interested in our outcome is I think an essential thing actually for people to find a because it creates commonality between is something we can all share and like it is uniquely humbling of all of us to an extent it's like a common objective. But be it gives people that little bit of like reserve you know when things get really dark and I do think things are going to get pretty dark over the next few years. But it gives that like to think that there's something out there that actually wants our game to keep going I keep calling it the game you know it's a thing see and I recall it the game. You and see is a car grind call what the game every the whole thing yeah we don't we joke about like everything is a game not what the universe like what if. What if it's a game and the goal of the game is to figure out like what either how to beat it how to get out of it you know maybe maybe that maybe this universe is an escape room. Like a giant escape room and the goal is to figure out put all the pieces of puzzle figure out how it works in order to like unlock this like hyper dimensional key and get out beyond what it is that's not worth it then the so you're saying it's like different levels and it's like a cage within a cage within a cage you never locate one cage at a time you figure out how to see that. Like a new level up you know like us becoming multi planetary would be a level up or us you know find figuring out how to upload our consciousnesses to the thing that would probably be a leveling up or spiritually you know humanity becoming more combined and less adversarial and blood thirsty and us becoming a little bit more enlightened that would be a leveling up you know there's many different frames to it yeah whether it's physical you know digital or like metaphors level I think I think level one for earth is probably. The biological evolutionary process going from single cell organisms to early humans there may be level two is whatever is happening that our minds and creating ideas and creating technologies that's like evolutionary process of ideas mm hmm and then multi planetary is interesting. Is that fundamentally different from what we're doing here on earth probably because it allows us to like exponentially scale it delays the mouth is in trap right it it's a way to keep the playing field get you know to make the playing field get larger so that we can accommodate more of our stuff more of us and that's a good thing but I don't know if it like fully solves this issue of of while this thing called mollock which we haven't talked about yet but which is basically I call it the God of unhealthy competition yeah let's go let's go to mark what's mark you did a great video on mollock one aspect of it the application of it to Instagram beauty filters through very niche I wanted to start off small so mollock was originally coined as well so apparently back in the like. Canaanite times it was a saint ancient carthane a ginny and I can ever say carthane some around the 300 BC or two hundred eighty I don't know there was supposedly this death cult who. Would sacrifice their children to this awful demon god think what they called mollock in order to get power to win wars so really dark horrible things and it was literally like about child sacrifice whether they actually is a lot we don't know but in mythology they they did and this god that they worship to us this thing called mollock. And then I don't know it seemed like it was kind of quiet throughout history in terms of mythology beyond that until this movie metropolis i'm in nineteen twenty seven talked about this you see that there was this incredible futuristic city that everyone was living great in but then the protagonist goes underground into the sewers and sees that the city is run by this machine. And this machine basically would just like kill the workers all the time because it was just so hard to keep it running they always dying so is all this suffering that was required in order to keep the city going and then the protagonist has this vision that this machine is actually this demon mollock so again it's like the sort of like mechanistic consumption of humans in order to get more power and then alan ginsburg wrote a poem in the sixties which incredible poem called how about this thing mollock. And a lot of people sort of quite understandably take the interpretation of that he's that he's talking about capitalism. But then the bet like the sort of piece to resistance that's moved mollock into this idea of game theory was a Scott Alexander of slate cell codex wrote this incredible one literally I think it might be my favorite piece of writing of all time it's called meditations on mollock everyone must go read it. And it's a blog it's a blog yes we can link to it in the show notes or something right no I yes yes but I like how you how you assume I have a professional operation going on. I shall try to remember what do you want to what do you want to what you're giving the impression of it. Yeah I'll look please if I don't please somebody in the comments remind me. I'll help you don't know this blog it's one of the best blogs ever probably you should probably be following it. Yes our blog still a thing I think they are still a thing yeah he's migrated on to substag but yeah it's still a blog. But enough fuck things up. I hope not yeah I hope they don't I hope they don't turn mollocky which will mean something to be more we continue. When it's up interrupting for. So anyway so he writes he writes this this piece meditations on mollock and basically he analyzes the poem and he's like okay so it seems to be something relating to where competition goes wrong. And you know mollock was historically this thing of like where people would sacrifice a thing that they care about in this case children their own children in order to gain power competitive advantage. And if you look at almost everything that sort of goes wrong in our society it's that same process so with the Instagram beauty filters thing. You know if you're trying to become a famous into Instagram model. You are incentivized to post the hottest pictures of yourself that you can you know you're trying to play that game. There's a lot of hot women on Instagram how do you compete against them you post really hot pictures and that's how you get more likes. As technology gets better you know more make up techniques come along. And then more recently these beauty filters were like at the touch of a button it makes your face look absolutely incredible compared to your natural natural natural face. These these technologies come along it's everyone is incentivized to do that short term strategy. But over on net it's bad for everyone because now everyone is kind of like feeling like they have to use these things and these things like they make you like the reason why I talked about them in this video is because I noticed it myself you know like. I was trying to grow my Instagram for a while I've given up on it now but yeah and I noticed these filters how good they made me look and I'm like well. I know that everyone else is kind of doing it subscribe to live Instagram please. So I don't have to use the filters. Post a bunch of yeah make make it blow up. So yeah it's it's with those you thought the pressure actually exactly you that these short term incentives to do this like. This thing that like either sacrifices your integrity or something else in order to like stay competitive. Which on aggregate turns like to create this like sort of race to the bottom spiral where everyone else ends up in a situation which is worse off than if they hadn't start you know than it were before kind of like if. Like it a football stadium. Like the system is so badly designed a competitive system of like everyone sitting and having a view that if someone at the very front stands up to get an even better view it forces everyone else behind like adopt that same strategy just to get to where they were before but now everyone stuck standing up like so you need this like top down gods like coordination to make it go back to the better state. But from within the system you can't actually do that so that's kind of what this malloc thing is it's this thing that makes people sacrifice. Values in order to optimize for the winning the game in question the short term game but this this malloc. Can you attribute it to anyone centralized source or is it an emergent phenomenon from a large collection of people. Exactly that it's it's an emergent phenomena it's it's a force of game theory. It's a force of bad incentives on a multi agent system where you've got more you know prisoners dilemma is technically a kind of malloc. You sit you know system as well but it's just a two player thing but another word for malloc is it multipolar trap. Basically you just got a lot of different people or competing for some kind of prize and it would be better if everyone didn't do this one city strategy. But because that strategy gives you a short term advantage everyone's incentivized to do it and so everyone ends up doing it. So their responsibility for I mean social media is a really nice place for a large number of people to play game theory. And so they also have the ability to then design the rules of the game. And is it on them to try to anticipate what kind of like to do the thing that poker players are doing to to run simulation. Ideally that would have been great if you know Mark Zuckerberg and Jack and all the you know the Twitter founders and everyone if they had at least just run a few simulations of how. Their algorithms with you know different types of algorithms would turn out for society that would have been great that's really difficult to do that kind of deep philosophical think about thinking about humanity actually so not. Not not kind of this level of how do we optimize engagement or what brings people join the short term but how is this thing going to change the way people see the world. How's it going to get morphed an iterative game is played into something that will change society forever that requires some deep thinking that's. I hope there's meetings like that inside companies but I have. There aren't that's the problem and and it's difficult because like when you're starting up a social media company you know you're aware that you've got investors to please. There's you bills to pay you know there's only so much R&D you can afford to do you got all these like incredible pressures in bat in a bad incentives to get on and just build your thing as quickly as possible and start making money. And you know I don't think anyone intended when they built these social social media platforms and just to like prefaces so the reason why you know social media is relevant because it's a very good example of like everyone these days is optimizing for you know clicks. Whether it's a social media platforms themselves because you know every click gets more you know impressions and impressions pay for ever you know they get advertising dollars or whether it's individual influences or you know whether it's a New York Times or. Whoever they're trying to get their story to go viral so everyone's got this bad incentive of using click you know as you called it the clickbait industrial complex that's a very molecule system because everyone is now using worse and worse tactics in order to like try and win this attention game and yeah so. Ideally these companies would have had enough slack in the beginning in order to run these experiments to see okay what are the ways this could possibly go wrong for people what are the ways that malloc they should be aware of this concept of malloc and realize it it's. And whenever you have a highly competitive multi agent system which social media is a classic example of millions of agents all trying to compete for likes and so on and you try and. Bring all this complexity down into like very small metrics such as number of likes number of retweets whatever the algorithm optimizes for that is a like guaranteed recipe for this stuff to go wrong and become a race to the bottom. Yeah I think there should be an honesty when founders I think there's a hunger for that kind of transparency of like we don't know what the fuck we're doing this is a fascinating experiment we're all running as a human as a human civilization let's try this out and like actually just be honest about this the wall like these weird rats and amaze not none of us are controlling it there's this kind of sense like the founders the CEO of Instagram or whatever Mark Zuckerberg has a control and he's like like we're stringing. Things playing people no there is that the most of this is like everyone else he's just like trying to do his best and like I think putting on a smile and doing over polished videos about how Instagram and Facebook are good for you I think it's not the right way to to actually ask some of the deepest questions we get to ask as a society how do we design the game such that we build about a world I think a big part of this as well is. People there's this there's this philosophy particularly in Silicon Valley of well techno optimism technology will solve all our issues and there's a steel man argument to that where yes technology has solved a lot of problems and can potentially solve a lot future ones but it can also it's always a double edge sword and particularly as you know technology gets more and more powerful we've now got like big data and we're able to do all kinds of like psychological manipulation with it and so on. It's technology is not a value neutral thing people think I used to always think this myself it's like this naive view that oh technology is completely neutral it's just it's the humans that either make it good or bad no tech but but the point we're at now the technology they we are creating they are social technologies they literally dictate how humans now form social groups and so on beyond that and beyond that it also then that gives rise to like the memes that. We then like coalesce around and that we you know we if you have the stack that way where it's technology driving social interaction which then drives like mimetic mimetic culture and like which ideas become popular that's more and the we need the other way around we need it so we need to figure out what are the good memes what are the good. We need to optimize for the like makes people happy and healthy and like keeps society is robust and safe as possible then figure out what the social structure around those should be and only then do we figure out technology but we're doing the other way around and you know like as much as I love in many ways the culture of Silicon Valley and like you know I do think that technology has it you know I don't want to knock it it's done so many wonderful things for it same as capitalism. There are we have to like be honest with ourselves we're getting to a point where we are losing control of this very powerful machine that we have created can you redesign the machine within the game can you just have can you understand the game enough okay this is the game and this is how we start to re emphasize the memes that matter the memes them bring out the best in us. You know like the way I try to be in real life in the way I try to be online is to be about kindness and love and I feel like I'm sometimes get like criticized for being naive and all those kinds of things but I feel like I'm just trying to live within this game I'm trying to be authentic yeah but also like hey it's kind of fun to do this like you guys should try this too you know that and that's like trying to redesign. Some aspects of the game within the game is that possible. I don't know but I think we should try. I don't think we have an option but to try well the other option is to create new companies or to pressure companies that or anyone who has control of the rules of the game. I think we need to be doing all of the above I think we need to be thinking hard about what are the kind of positive healthy memes. You know as Elon said he who controls the memes controls the universe. I think he did yeah but there's truth to that it's very there is wisdom in that because. Memes have driven history you know we are we are cultural species that's what sets us apart from chimpanzees and everything else we have the ability to learn and evolve through culture as opposed to biology or like you know classic physical constraints and that means culture is incredibly powerful and we can create and become victim to very bad memes or very good ones but we do have some agency over which memes you know what I mean. We we but not only put out there but we also like subscribe to. So I think we need to take that approach we also need to you know because I don't want the the the the making this video right now called the attention was which is about like how mollock it like the media machine is this mollock machine. Well is this is this kind of like blind dumb thing that where everyone is optimizing for engagement in order to win their share of the attention pie and then if you zoom out it's really like mollock that's pulling the strings because the only thing that benefits from this in the end you know like our information ecosystem is breaking down like we have you look at the state of the US it's in we're in a civil war it's just not a physical war it's it's it's a it's an information war and people people becoming more fractured in terms of what their actual shared reality is like. Truly like an extreme left person an extreme right person like they they they literally live in different worlds and they're in their in their minds at this point and it's getting more and more amplified and this this force is like a like razor blade pushing through everything it doesn't matter how innocuous a topic is it will find a way to split into this you know bifurcated culture or it's fucking terrifying because that maximize the tension that's like an emergent mollock type force right that takes any anything any topic. And cuts through it so they can split nicely into two groups one that's what is it's whatever yeah is it. All everyone is trying to do within the system is just maximize whatever gets them the most attention because they're just trying to make money so they can keep their thing going right. And the way the best emotion for getting attention in what because it's not just about attention on the internet engagement that's the key thing right in order for something to go viral you need people to actually engage with it they need to like comment. Or retweet or whatever and of all the emotions that you know there's like seven classic shared emotions that studies are found at all humans even from like on on previously uncontacted tribes have some of those are negative you know like sadness. Disgust anger etc some positive happiness. Excitement and so on the one that happens to be the most useful for the internet is anger because anger is it's such an active emotion if you want people to engage if someone's scared that and I'm not just like talking out my ass here there are studies here that looked into this. Where it's like if someone's like disgusted or fearful they actually tend to them be like I don't want to deal with this so they're less like to do actually engage and share it and so on they're just going to be like whereas if they're enraged by a thing or now they're like that triggers all the like the old tribalism emotions and so that's how then things get sort of spread you know much more easily they they out compete all the other memes in the ecosystem and so this like. The attention economy that the wheels that make it go around our is rage i did a you know the problem with raising against the machine is that the machine is learned to feed off rage because it is feeding off our rage that's the thing that's now keeping it going so the more we get angry the worst it gets. So the malloc in this attention in the war of attention is constantly maximizing rage what it is optimizing for is engagement and it happens to be the. Engagement is will propaganda you know it's not I mean it just sounds like everything is putting is more more things being put through this like propaganda slence of winning whatever the war is in question like it's the cultural or the Ukraine war yeah. Well I think the silver lining of this do you think it's possible that in the long arc of this process you actually do arrive at greater wisdom and more progress it just in the moment it feels like people. Be turning each other to shreds over ideas but if you think about one of the magic things about democracy and so on is you have the blue versus red constantly fighting it's almost like they're in this course creating devil's advocate making devil's out of each other and through that process. Discussing ideas like almost really embodying different ideas just the yell at each other and through the yelling over the period of decades maybe centuries figuring out a better system like in the moment it feels fucked up right in the long arc it actually is productive. I hope so. That said we are now in the era of just as we have weapons of mass destruction with nuclear weapons. You know that can break the whole playing field. We now are developing weapons of informational mass destruction information weapons you know WMDs that basically can be used for propaganda or just manipulating people however they you know is needed whether that's through dumb tick tock videos or you know there are significant. Resources being put in I don't mean to sound like you. To do me and loom but there are bad actors out there that's a thing there are plenty of good actors within the system who are just trying to stay afloat in the game so effectively doing more than he thinks but then on top of that we have actual bad actors. Who are intentionally trying to like manipulate the other side into doing things and using so because of the digital space they're able to use. Artificial actors mean bots exactly botnets you know and this is a whole new. Situation that we've never had before it's exciting you know you don't want to want to do you know what I want to do that because there is you know people talking about bots manipulating and Like malicious bots that are basically spreading propaganda I want to create like a bot army for like that like fights that yeah exactly for love that fights though that I mean you know there's that I mean there's truth to fight fire with fire it's like but how. You always have to be careful whenever you create again like the mollock is very tricky yeah Hitler was trying to spread the love to. Well yeah sorry thought but I you know I agree with you that like that is a thing that should be considered but there is again everyone the road to hell is paid in good intentions and this is. There's there's always on for seems so comes you know outcomes externalities if you trying to adopt a thing even if you do it in the very best of faith. But you can learn lessons of his you can run some sims on it first absolutely let's but but also there's certain aspects of a system as we've learned through history that do better than others like for example don't have a dictator so. Like if I were to create this bot army it's not good for me to have full control over it because in the beginning I might have a good understanding of what's good and not. But over time that starts to get deviated because I'll get annoyed at some assholes and I'll think okay wouldn't it be nice to get rid of those assholes but then that power starts getting to your head you. Don't corrupt it that's basic human nature so distribute the power so we need we need a a love botnet on a dow. A dow love botnet yeah but and without a leader like without was actually distributed right well yeah without any kind of centralized. Yeah without even you know basically is the more control the more you can decentralize the control of a thing to people. You know but the the the the the the the ability to coordinate because that's the issue when you if something is too you know that's really to me like the culture was is the bigger war we're dealing with is actually between the pet like the sort of the. I don't know what even the term is for it but like centralization versus decentralization that's the tension we're seeing power in control by a few versus completely distributed and the trouble is if you have a fully centralized thing then you're at risk of tyranny you know Stalin type things can happen or completely distributed now you're at risk of complete anarchy and chaos where you can't even coordinate to like on you know when there's like a pandemic or anything like that so it's like what is the right balance to strike between these two. Well structures can't malloc really take hold in fully decentralized system that's the one of the dangers to the very vulnerable to more so the dictator can commit huge atrocities but they can also make sure the infrastructure works and. They have that God's I view at least they have the ability to create like laws and rules that like force coordination which stops malloc but then you're vulnerable to that dictator getting infected with like this with some kind of psychopathy type thing what's what's reverse malloc. So great question so that's where I've been working on this series it's been driving me insane for the last year and a half I did the first one a year ago I can't believe it's nearly many years. The second one hopefully we're coming out in like a month and my goal at the end of the series is to like present because basically I'm painting the picture of like what malloc is and how it's affecting almost all these issues in our in our society and how it's you know driving it's like kind of the generator function as people describe it of existential risk and then at the end of the way the generator function of existential is you're saying malloc is sort of the engine that creates a bunch of a bunch of X risks. Yes not all of them like like a you know a cool phrase generator function. It's Daniel Schmackttenberger. Oh, I got that from him. All things it's like all roads lead back to Daniel Schmackttenberger. The dude is the dude is brilliant. That's that is Mark Twain. Anyway, sorry. Totally really interrupted for me. No, it's fine. So not all likes risks. So like an asteroid technically isn't because it's you know it's just like this one big external thing it's not like a competition thing going on but you know synthetic bioweapons that's one because everyone's incentivized to build even for defense you know bad bad viruses you know just threaten someone else etc or AI technically the race to AGI is kind of potentially a molecule situation. But yeah, so if malloc is this like generator function that's driving all of these issues over the coming century that might wipe us out what's the inverse and so far what I've gotten to is this character that I want to put out there called win win. Because malloc is the god of lose lose ultimately it masquerades is the god of win lose but in reality it's lose lose everyone ends up worse off. So I was like what's the opposite of that it's win win and I was thinking for ages like what's a good name for this character. And then the more I was like okay well don't try and you know think through it logically what's the vibe of win win and to me like in my mind malloc is like and I address as it in the video like it's red and black it's kind of like very. You know my focus on its one goal you must win. So win win is kind of actually like these colors it's like purple turquoise. It's loves games to it loves a little bit of healthy competition but constrained like kind of like before like right knows how to ring fence zero some competition into like just the right amount whereby it's externalities can be controlled and kept positive. And then beyond that it also loves cooperation coordination love all these other things but it's also kind of like mischievous like you know it will have a good time it's not like kind of like boring you know like oh god it's it's it's it's it's it's how to have fun. Yeah you can get like it can get down but ultimately it's like unbelievably wise and it just wants the game to keep going and I call it win win. That's a good like pet name. Yes. The I think the win win right and I think it's formal name and it has to do like official functions is omnia. Omnia yeah from like I'm omniscience kind of what's with why I'm yeah you just like I'm yeah I'm new when I'm new when I'm open to suggestions I will like you know and this is I like I'm yeah yeah yeah like there's an angelic kind of sense to omnia though. So win win is more fun so it's more like it embraces the fun aspect I mean there is something about sort of the some aspect to win win interactions that requires embracing the chaos of the game and enjoying the game itself. I don't know I don't know what that is that's almost like a zen like appreciation of of the game itself not optimizing for the consequences of the game. Right well it's it's recognizing the value of competition in of itself about it's not like about winning it's about you enjoying the process of having a competition and not knowing whether you're going to win or lose this little thing. But then also being aware that you know what's the boundary how big do I want competition to be because one of the reason why molluck is doing so well now and also in our civilization is because we haven't been able to ring fence competition. And so it's just having all these negative externalities and it's we've completely lost control of it. You know it's I think my guess is and now we're getting really like you know metaphysical technically but I think we'll be we'll be in a more interesting universe if we have one that has both pure cooperation you know lots of cooperation and some pockets of competition and one that's purely competition cooperation entirely like it's good to have some little zero sum this bits. But I don't know that fully and I'm not qualified as a philosopher to know that and that's what reverse mallets so this kind of win win creature is an system is an antidote to the mallet system. Yes and I don't know how it's going to do that. But it's good to kind of try to start to formulate different ideas different frameworks of how we think about that. Exactly. At the small scale of a collection of individuals or our scale of a society. Exactly. It's a meme. I think it's I think it's an example of a good meme and I'm open. I'd love to hear feedback from people if they think it's at you know they have a better idea or it's not you know but it's the direction of memes that we need to spread this idea of like look for the win wins in life. Well on the topic of beauty filters so in that particular context where mallet creates negative consequences. What do you know the St. Aski said beauty will save the world. What is beauty anyway? What it would be nice to just try to discuss what kind of thing we would like to converge towards in our understanding of what is beautiful. So to me I think something is beautiful when it can't be reduced down to easy metrics. Like if you think of a tree. What is it about a tree like a big ancient beautiful tree right what is it about it that we find so beautiful. It's not you know the you know what the sweetness of its fruit or the value of its lumber. It's it's this entirety of it that is there there's these immeasurable qualities is like almost like a qualia of it. That's both like it walks this fine line between pattern what it's got lots of patonicity but it's not overly predictable. Again it walks this fine line between order and chaos it's a very highly complex system. And the you know you can't it's evolving over time you know the definition of a complex versus and this is another shmack the thing you know a complex versus a complicated system. A complicated system can be sort of broken down into bits understood and then put that together a complex system it's kind of like a black box. It does all this crazy stuff but if you take it apart you can't put it back together again because it's there's all these intricacies and also very importantly like the some of the parts sorry the some of the whole is much greater than the some of the parts. And that's where the beauty lies I think and I think that extends to things like art as well like there's something there's something immeasurable about it. There's something we can't break down to a narrow metric. Does that extend to humans you think yeah absolutely. So how can Instagram reveal that kind of beauty the complexity of the human being. Good question. And this takes us back to dating sites and good reads I think. Very good question I mean well I know what it shouldn't do it shouldn't try and like right now you know one of the I was talking to like a social media expert recently because I was like. There's such a things the social media expert oh yeah you there are like agencies out there that you can like outsource because I'm thinking about working with one to like. So I want to start a podcast yeah you should you should have done it a long time ago working on it going to be called win win. And it's going to be about this like positive some stuff and the thing that you know they all come back and say is like well you need to like figure out what your thing is you know you need to narrow down. What your thing is and then just follow that have a like a sort of a formula because that's what people want they want to know that they're coming back to the same thing. And that's the advice on YouTube Twitter you name it and that's why and and the trouble with that is it's it's a complexity reduction and generally speaking complex you know complexity reduction is bad it's making things more it's an over simplification not that simplification is always a bad thing. When you're trying to. Take you know what is social media doing is trying to like encapsulate the human experience and put it into digital form and and commodify it to an extent that you so you do that you compress people down into these like narrow things and that's why I think it's it's kind of ultimately fundamentally incompatible with at least my definition of beauty is interesting because there is some sense in which. A simplification sort of in the in the Einstein kind of sense of a really complex idea simplification in a way that still captures some core power of an idea of a person is also beautiful. And so maybe it's possible for social media to do that a presentation a sort of a slither a slice a look into a person's life. That reveal something real about them but in a simple way in a way that can be displayed graphically or through words some way I mean in some way Twitter can do that kind of thing a very few set of words can reveal the intricacies of a person. Of course the the viral machine that spreads those words. Often results in people taking the thing out of context not. People often don't retweets in the context of the human being that wrote them the fools the full history of the tweets they've written the education level the humor level the world view they're playing around with all that context is forgotten and people just see the different words. So that can lead to trouble but in a certain sense if you do take it in context it reveals some kind of quirky little beautiful idea or profound little idea from that particular person that shows something about that person so in that sense Twitter can be more successful if we talk about mollocks is driving a better kind of incentive. Yeah I mean how they can like if we were to rewrite it is there a way to rewrite the Twitter algorithm so that it stops being the like the fertile breeding ground of the culture was because that's really what it is it's. I mean maybe I'm giving it you know Twitter too much power power but just the more I looked into it and I had conversations with Tristan Harris from center of human technology and he explained it as like. Twitter is where you have this amalgam of human culture and then this terribly designed algorithm that amplifies the craziest people. And the angriest the angriest most divisive takes and amplifies them and then the media the mainstream media because all the journalists are also on Twitter they then are informed by that and so they draw out the stories they can from this already like very boiling lava of rage and then spread that you know to their millions and millions of people who aren't even on Twitter. And so I honestly I think if I could press a button turn them off probably would at this point because I just don't see a way at being compatible with healthiness but that's not going to happen. And so at least one way to like stem the tide and make it less molecule would be to. Change. At least if like it was on a subscription model then it's now not optimizing for in you know. Impressions because basically what it wants is for people to keep coming back as often as possible that's how they get paid right every time an ad gets shown to someone in the way is to get people constantly refreshing their feed so you're trying to encourage addictive behaviors whereas if someone. If they moved on to at least a subscription model then they're getting the money either way whether someone comes back to the site once a month or 500 times a month they get the same amount of money so now that takes away that incentive you know to use technology you know to build to design an algorithm that is maximally addictive. That would be one way for example. Yeah, but you still want people to yeah I just feel like they just slows down creates friction in the virality of things but that's good. We slow down virality is good it's one way. Virality is mollock to be clear. So mollock is always negative then. Yes. By definition. Yes, but then I disagree with you. Competition is not always negative. Competition is neutral. I disagree with you that all virality is negative then as mollock them because I it's a good intuition because we have a lot of data on virality being negative. But I happen to believe that the core of human beings so most human beings want to be good more than they want to be bad to each other. And so I think it's possible it might be just harder to engineer systems that enable virality but it's possible to engineer systems that are viral that enable virality and the kind of stuff that rises to the top is things that are positive and positive not like La La positive is more like win-win meaning a lot of people need to be challenged like why things. Yes, you grow from it to my challenge you might not like it but you often grow from it. And ultimately bring people together as opposed to tell them apart. I deeply want that to be true and I very much agree with you that people at their core are on average good as opposed you know care for each other as opposed to not like. I think it's actually a very small percentage of people are truly like wanting to do just like destructive malicious things. Most people are just trying to win their own little game and they don't mean to be you know they're just stuck in this badly designed system. That said the current structure yes is the current structure means that virality is optimized towards molloc. That doesn't mean that on exceptions you know sometimes positive stories do go viral and I think we should study them. I think there should be a whole field of study into understanding you know identifying memes that you know above a certain threshold of the population agree as a positive happy bringing people together meme the kind of thing that you know brings families together that would normally argue about cultural stuff at the table at the dinner table. Identify those memes and figure out what it was what was the ingredient that made them spread that day. And also like not just like happiness and connection between humans but connection between humans in other ways that enables like productivity like cooperation. Yeah solving difficult problems and all those kinds of stuff you know this is not just about let's let's be happy and have a fulfilling lives it's also like let's build cool shit. Yeah which is the spirit of collaboration which is deeply anti molloc. Right that's that's it's not using competition it's like you know molloc hates collaboration and coordination and people working together and that's you know again like the internet started out as that and it and it could have been that but because of the way it was sort of structured in terms of you know very lofty ideal they wanted everything to be open source or so open source and also free. And but they needed to find a way to pay the bills anyway because they were still building this on top of our old economics system and so the way they did that was through third party advertisement but that meant the things were very decoupled you know the what this third party interest which means that you're then like people having to optimize for that and that is the you know the actual consumer is actually the product. Not the not the the the person you're making the thing for you're in in the end you stop making the thing for the advertiser and so that's why it then like breaks down. Yeah like it's there's no clean solution to this and I it's a really good suggestion by you actually to like figure out how we can optimize virality for positive some topics. I shall be the general of the love bot army distributed distributed distributed okay yeah the power just even insane at the power already went to my head no okay you've talked about quantifying your thinking we've been talking about this sort of a game through our view on life and putting probabilities behind estimates like if you think about different trajectories you can take through life just actually analyzing life and game through our way like your own life like personal life you I think you've given an example that you had an honest conversation with the go about like how long is this relationship going to last. Similar to our sort of marriage problem kind of discussion having an honest conversation about the probability of things that we sometimes are a little bit too shy or scared to think of in a probabilistic terms can you speak to that kind of way of reasoning. The good and the bad of that can you can you do this kind of thing with human relations. Yeah so the the scenario you're talking about it was like yeah tell me what that's in it yeah I think it was about a year into our relationship and we were having a fairly heavy conversation because we were trying to figure out whether or not I was going to sell my apartment well you know he had already moved in but I think we were just figuring out what like our long term plans would be should be should be by a place together etc. When you guys are having that conversation are you like drunk out of your mind on wine or is it sobering you're actually having a serious like cyber how do you get to that conversation because most people are kind of afraid to have that kind of serious conversation. Well so you know our relationship was very well first of all we were good friends for a couple of years before we even you know got you know in romantic and when we did get romantic it was very clear that this was a big deal. It wasn't just like another like you know wasn't around and thing and so the probability of it being a big deal was high was already very high and then we've been together for a year and it had been pretty golden and wonderful so you know there's a lot of foundation already where we felt very comfortable having a lot of frank conversations but egos M.O. has always been much more than mine he was always from the outset like just in a relationship radical transparency and honesty is the way. Because the truth is the truth whether you want to hide it on you know where it will come out eventually and if you aren't able to accept difficult things yourself then how could you possibly expect to be like the most integral version you can't you can't you the relationship needs this bedrock of like honesty as a foundation more than anything. Yeah it's really interesting but I would like to push against some of those ideas but but let's don't don't align your throw up and just really interrupt. That's fine and so you know we we've been about together for a year things were good and we've having this hard conversation and and then he's like well okay what's the likelihood that we're going to be together in three years then because I think it was roughly a three year time horizon. And I was like oh interesting and then we were like actually wait before you say that let's both write down our predictions formally because we've been like we were just getting into like effective altruism and rationality at the time which is all about making formal predictions as a means of measuring your own well your own four site essentially in a quantified way. So we like both wrote down all percentages and we also did a one year prediction and a ten year one as well so we got percentages for all three and then we showed each other and I remember like having this moment of like oh because I was for the ten year one I was like oh well I mean. I love him a lot but like a lot can happen in ten years you know and I've only been together for you know so I was like I think it's over 50% but it's definitely not 90% and I remember like wrestling I was like oh but I don't want him to be hurt I don't want him to you know I don't want to give a number lower than his and I remember thinking. I was like don't game it. This is an exercise in radical honesty so just give your real percentage and I think mine was like 75% and then we showed each other and luckily we were fairly well aligned. But honestly if we weren't 20% I definitely it definitely would have I if his had been consistently lower than mine that would have rattled me for sure. Whereas if it had been the other way around I think he would he's just kind of like a water of the ducts back type of guy. We're like okay well all right we'll figure this out. Well did you guys provide air bars on the estimate like the level on they came built in we didn't give formal plus or minus air bars I didn't draw any or anything like that. I guess that's the question I have is did you feel informed enough to make such decisions because I feel like if you were if I were to do this kind of thing rigorously. I would want some data I would want to say one of these assumptions you have is you're not that different from other relationships right. And so I want to I want to have some data about the base rights yeah and and also actual trajectories of relationships I would love to have. Like time series data about the ways the relationships fall apart or prosper how they collide with different life events losses job changes moving. Both partners find jobs on what the only one has a job I want that kind of data and how often the different trajectories change in life like how. How informative is your past to your future that's a whole thing I got can you look at my life and have a good prediction about in terms of my characteristics of my relationships with what that's going to look like in the future or not I don't even know the answer that question I'll be very ill informed in terms of making. The probability I would be far. Yeah I just would be under informed I would be under informed I'll be over biasing to my prior experiences I think. Right but as long as you're aware of that and you're honest with yourself I still and you're honest with the other person say look I have really wide air bars on this for the following reasons that's okay I still think it's better than not trying to quantify it at all if you're trying to make really major. In a very much a major irreversible life decisions and I feel also the romantic nature of that question for me personally I would. I try to live my life thinking it's very close to 100% like allowing myself actually the this is this is a difficulty of this is allowing myself to think differently. Like has a psychological consequence that's worth it. What's one of my pushbacks against radical honesty is this one one particular perspective on. So you're saying you would you would rather give a falsely high percentage to your partner going back to off the why say it's a traditional optimism. Home youth. Yes. Of fake it till you make it the positive the positive. Yeah hashtag. Um well so that and this comes back to this idea of useful fictions. Right and I agree I don't think there's a clear answer to this and I think it's actually quite subjective some people just works better for than others. Um you know to be clear ego and I weren't doing this formal prediction in it like we we did it with very much tongue in cheek. It wasn't like we were going to make I don't think it even would have met drastically changed what we decided to do even we kind of just did it more as a fun exercise. For the consequence of that fun exercise you really actually kind of there was a deep honesty to exactly it was a deep and it was just like this moment of reflection I'm like oh wow I actually have to think like through this quite critically. And so on and and it's also what was interesting was I you know I got to like check in with what why what my what my desires were. So there was one thing of like what my actual prediction is but what are my desires and could these desires be affecting my predictions and so on. And you know that's a that's a method of rationality and I personally don't think it loses anything in terms of I didn't take any of the magic away from our relationship quite the opposite like it brought us closer together because it was like we did this weird fun thing. That I appreciate a lot of people find quite strange and I think it was somewhat you know I unique in our relationship that both of us are very you know we both love numbers we both love statistics we both poker players. So this this was kind of like our safe space anyway for others you know one part of one partner like really might not like that kind of stuff at all in which cases it's not a good exercise to do you know I don't recommend it to everybody. But I do think there's you know it's interesting sometimes to poke holes in the you know probe at these things that we consider so sacred that we can't try to quantify them. But which is interesting because that's intention with like the idea of what we just talked about with beauty and like what makes something beautiful the fact that you can't measure everything about it. And perhaps something shouldn't be tried to make you know maybe it's wrong to completely try and value the utilitarian you know put a utilitarian frame of measuring the the utility of a tree in its entirety I don't know maybe we should maybe we shouldn't I'm I'm ambivalent on that but overall people have too many biases that people are overly biased against trying to do like a quantified cost benefit analysis on really tough life decisions. They're like I'll just go with your gut it's like well sure but guts are our intuitions are best suited for things that we've got tons of experience in. Then we can really you know trust on it if it's a decision we've made many times but if it's like should I marry this person or should I buy this house over that house you only make those decisions a couple of times in your life maybe well I would love to know this balance is probably a personal balance strike is the amount of rationality you apply to a question versus. The useful fiction the fake until you make it for example just talking to soldiers in Ukraine you ask them what's the probability of. You winning Ukraine winning. Almost everybody I talk to is a hundred percent. And you listen to the experts right they say all kinds of stuff right they are they first of all the morale there is higher than probably I've never been to a war zone before this but I've read about many wars and I think the morale in Ukraine is higher than almost anywhere I've read about it's every single person in the country is proud to fight for their country. Everybody not just soldiers not everybody why do you think that is specifically more than you know in other wars. I think because there's a perhaps a dormant desire for the citizens of this country to find the identity of this country because it's been going through this 30 year process of different factions and political bickering and they haven't had as they talk about they have. They haven't had their independence war they say all great nations have had an independence war they had to fight for their independence for the discovery of the identity of the core the ideals that unify us and they haven't had that this constantly been factions it's been divisions there's been pressures from empires from United States and from Russia from NATO in Europe everybody telling them what to do now they want to discover who they are and there's that kind of sense that. We're going to fight for the safety of our homeland but we're also going to fight for our identity and that. On top of the fact that there's just if you look at the history of Ukraine and there's certain other countries like this there are certain cultures are feisty in their pride of being part of being the citizens of that nation Ukraine is that Poland was that there's you just look at history. And you're not going to fight for the country's you do not want to occupy right. I mean both Stalin Hitler talked about Poland in this way they're like this is this is a big problem if we occupy this land for prolonged periods of time they're going to be a pain in their ass like they're not going to be want to be occupied and certain other countries are like pragmatic they're like well you know leaders come and go I guess this is good you know there. It doesn't have Ukrainians those seem throughout the 20th century don't seem to be the kind of people that just like sit calmly and let the quote unquote occupiers in impose their that's interesting though because you said it's you know it's always been under conflict and leaders have come and gone yeah yeah so you would expect them to actually be the opposite under that. Yeah because well because they're it's a very fertile land it's great for agriculture so a lot of people want to I mean I think they've developed this culture because they've constantly been occupied by different people for the different peoples. And so maybe there is something to that where you've constantly had to feel like within the blood of the generations there's the struggle for against the man against the imposition of rules against oppression and all that kind of stuff and that stays with them so there's a there's a will there. But you know a lot of other aspects are also part of the that has to do with the reverse mallet kind of situation where social media has definitely played a part of it also different charismatic individuals have had to play a part the fact that the president of the nation Zalinsky stating key of during the the invasion was is a huge inspiration to them because most leaders as you could imagine when the capital of the nation. The nation is under attack the wise thing the smart thing that the United States advised the Zalinsky to do is to flee and to be the leader of the nation from a from a distant place right he said fuck that I'm think put you know everyone around him there's a pressure to leave and he didn't and that that in you know those singular acts really can unify nation there's a lot of people that criticize the Lensky within Ukraine before the nation. The war is very unpopular even still but they put that aside for the for the especially that singular act of staying in the capital. Yeah a lot of those kinds of things come together to to create something well within people. These things always of course though like the person you know which. How zoomed out of a view do you want to take. Because yeah you describe it is like an anti malloc thing happened within Ukraine because it brought the Ukrainian people together in order to fight a common enemy. Maybe that's a good thing maybe that's a bad thing in the end we don't know how this is all going to play out right. But if you zoom it out from the level you know on a global level they're coming together to you know fight. That could you know that that could make a conflict larger you know what I mean I don't know what the right answer is here yeah it seems like a good thing that they came together I but I like we don't know how this is all going to play out if this all turns into nuclear war will be like OK that was the bad that was the. Oh yeah so I was describing the reverse malloc for the local level exactly now this is where the experts come in and they say well if you channel most of the resources the nation and the nation supporting Ukraine into the war effort are you not beating the drums of war that is much bigger than Ukraine in fact. Even the Ukrainian leaders are speaking of it this way this is not a war between two nations this is this is the early days of a world war if we don't play this correctly yes and they we need cool heads from all leaders so you from your friends perspective we need to win Ukraine needs to win the war. Because what is winning the war mean is coming up coming to peace negotiations and agreement that guarantees no more invasions and you make an agreement about what land belongs to who right and that that's you stop that and and to basically from their perspective is you want to demonstrate to the rest of the world who's watching careful including Russia and China and different players on the geopolitical stage. That this kind of conflict is not going to be productive right if you engage in it so you want to teach everybody lesson that's not do world war three it's not going to be bad for everybody so it's a loose lose the. So but they you know but it and I think that's actually a correct. When I zoom out I mean 99% of what I think about is just individual human beings and human lives and just that war is horrible but when you zoom out I think from a geopolitics perspective we should realize that it's entirely possible that we will see a world war three in the 21st century. And this is like a dress rehearsal for that so the way we play this as a human civilization will define whether we do or don't have a world war three. You know how we discuss war how we discuss nuclear war the kind of leaders we we elect and prop up the kind of memes we circulate because you have to be very careful when you're being pro Ukraine for example you have to realize that you're being you are also in direct war. So you're directly feeding the ever increasing military industrial complex so it'd be extremely careful that when you say pro Ukraine or pro anybody you're your pro human beings not pro the machine. That creates narratives that says it's pro human beings but it's actually if you look at the raw use of funds and resources it's actually prob making weapons and shooting bullets and dropping bombs right the real we have to just somehow get the meme into everyone's heads that the real enemy is war itself that's the enemy we need to defeat and that doesn't mean to say that they you know there isn't just a few. So you know there's a lot of communication for small local. Scenario you know adversarial adversarial conflicts you know if you have a leader who is starting wars. You know they're on the side of team war basically not that they're on the side of team country whatever that country is it's they're on the side of team war. So that needs to be stopped and put down but you also have to find a ways that your. Measure doesn't actually then end up being co-opted by the war machine and creating greater war again the playing field is fight finite the scale of. In conflict is now getting so big that the you know the weapons that can be used are so mass destructive. That we can't afford another giant conflict we just we won't make it what existential threat in terms of us not making it are you most worried about what existential threat to human civilization we got like that. This is good. Well no it's a dark. No I think well we're in the summer place we might as well. Some of my best friends are dark pass. What what worries you most we mentioned asteroids we mentioned AGI nuclear weapons. The one that's on my mind the most mostly because I think it's the one where we have actually a real chance to move the needle on in a positive direction or more specifically stop some really bad things from happening really dumb avoidable things is. So in terms of so many of our so many so of course like we have natural risks from natural pandemics you know naturally occurring viruses or pathogens. And then also as time and technology goes on and technology becomes more and more democratized into the hands of more and more people the risk of synthetic pathogens. You know and whether or not you fall into the camp of covid was you know gain a function accidental lab leak or whether it was purely naturally occurring either way we are facing a future where synthetic pathogens or like human human meddled with pathogens either accidentally get out or get into the hands of bad actors who you know whether they're on the side or maniacs you know. Either way and so that means we need more robustness for that and you would think that us having this nice little dry run which is what as awful as covid was. You know and all those poor people that died it was still like like child's play compared to what a future one could be in terms of fatality rate. And so you think that we would then be coming we'd be much more robust in our pandemic preparedness and meanwhile the budget in the last two years for the US. Sorry they just did this. I can't remember the name of what the actual budget was but it was like a multi trillion dollar budget that the US just set aside. And so it was originally in that you know considering that covid cost multiple trillions to the economy right. The original allocation in this this new budget for future pandemic preparedness was 60 billion so tiny proportion of it. That proceeded to get whittled down to like 30 billion to 15 billion all the way down to two billion out of multiple trillions for a thing that has just cost us multiple trillions we've just finished we barely even we're not even really out of it. We barely got whittled down to nothing because for some reason people think that all right we've got the pandemic out the way that was that one. And the reason for that is that people are and and I say this with all due respect to a lot of the science community but they are there's an immense amount of naivety about. They think that nature is the main risk moving forward and it really isn't. And I think nothing demonstrates this more than this this project that I was just reading about that's sort of being proposed right now called deep vision. And the idea is to go out into the wild and we're not talking about us like you know within cities like deep into like caves that people don't go to deep into the Arctic wherever. Scour the earth for whatever the most dangerous possible pathogens could be that they can find. And then not only do you know try and find these bring samples of them back to laboratories. And again whether you think covid was a lab leak or not I'm not going to get into that but we have historically had so many as a civilization we've had so many lab leaks from even like the highest level security things like it is it's it's it's the people to go and just read it's like it's like a comedy show of just how many they are how leaky these these labs are even when they do their best efforts. So bring these things then back to civilization that's step one of the badness the next plan the next step would be to then categorize them do experiments on them and categorize them by their level of potential pandemic let's. And then the piece of resistance on this plan is to then publish that information freely on the internet about all these pathogens including their genome which is literally like the building instructions of how to do them on the internet. And this is something that genuinely a pocket of the like bio so the scientific community thinks is a good idea. And I think on expectation like the and that argument is is that oh this is good because you know it might buy us some time to buy to develop vaccines which okay sure maybe would have made sense prior to mRNA technology but you know like they. And we can think we can develop a vaccine now when we find a new pathogen within a couple of days now then there's all the trials and so on but it those trials would have to happen anyway in the case of a brand new thing so you're saving maybe a couple of days so that's the upside meanwhile the downside is you're not only giving. You're bringing the risk of these pathogens of like getting leaked but you're literally handing it out to every bad actor on earth who would be doing car so I'm talking about like Kim Jong Un ISIS people who like want they think the rest of the world is their enemy and in some cases they think that killing themselves is is like a noble cause. And you're literally giving them the building blocks of how to do this it's the most batch it I don't ever heard like on expectation it's probably like minus EV of like multiple billions of lives if they actually succeeded in doing this certainly certainly the tens or hundreds of millions so the cost benefits so unbelievably it makes no sense and I was trying to like try to wrap my head around like why why like what's going wrong in people's minds to think that this is a good idea. And it's not that it's malice or anything like that it's I think it's that people don't you know the proponents they don't it they're actually overly naive about the interactions of humanity and what like that that that are bad actors who will use this for bad things because not only will it. If you publish this information even if a bad actor couldn't physically make it themselves which give him you know in 10 years time like the technology is getting cheaper and easier to use but even if they couldn't make it they could now bluff it like what would you do if there's like some deadly new virus that we were published on the internet in terms of its building blocks. Kim Jong Un could be like hey if you don't you know let me build my nuclear weapons I'm going to release this I've managed to build it well now he's actually got incredible bluff we don't know. You know and so that's it's just like handing the keys the sending weapons of mass destruction to people the makes no sense the possible I agree with you but the possible world in which you might make sense is if the good guys which is a whole another problem defining who the good guys are but the good guys are like an order of magnitude higher confidence. And so they can stay ahead of the bad actors by just being very good at the defense by very good not meaning like a little bit better but an order of magnitude better but of course the question is in each of those individual disciplines is that feasible can you can the bad actors even if they don't have the confidence leap frog to the place where. The good guys are yeah I mean I would agree in principle with pertaining to this like particular plan of like that you know with the thing I described this deep vision thing where at least then that would maybe make sense for steps one and step two of like getting the information but then why would you release it the information to your literal enemies you know that's that makes that that doesn't fit at all in that. Effective like trying to be ahead of them you're literally handing them the weapon but there's different levels of release right so. There's a kind of secrecy where you don't give it to anybody but there's a release where you incrementally give it to like major labs does not public release but it's like you're giving it to. Yes there's different layers of reasonability but but the problem there is it's going to if you go anywhere beyond like complete secrecy it's going to leak. That's the thing it's very hard to keep secrets and so that's the nation is so you might as well release it to the public is that argument so you either go complete secrecy. Or you release it to the public so which is essentially the same thing it's going to leak anyway if you don't do complete secrecy right which is why you shouldn't get the information in the first place yeah I mean what in that I think. Well that's a solution yeah if the solution is either don't get the information in the first place or be keep keep it incredibly incredibly contained. See I think I think it really matters which discipline we're talking about so in the case of biology I do think you're a very right we shouldn't even be it should be forbidden to even like. Think about that meaning don't collect don't just even collect the information but like don't do I mean gain a function research is a really if the area like you start I mean it's all about cost benefits right there are some scenarios where I can imagine the cost benefit of a gain a function research is very very clear. Where you've evaluated all the potential risks factored in the probability that things can go wrong and like you know not only known unknowns but unknown unknowns as well tried to quantify that. And then even then it's like orders of magnitude better to do that I'm behind that argument but the point is that there's this like naivety that's preventing people from even doing the cost benefit properly on a lot of the things because you know the side I get it the science community there like again I don't want to. Bucket the science community but like some people within the science community just think that everyone's everyone's good and everyone just cares about getting knowledge and doing the best for the world and unfortunately that's not the case I wish we lived in that world but we don't. Yeah I mean there's a lot of listen I've been criticizing the science community broadly quite a bit there's so many brilliant people that brilliant somehow I hinder it sometimes because it has a bunch of blind spots and then you start to look at a history of science how easily it's been used by dictators to any conclusion they want and it's it's dark how you can use brilliant people that like playing the little game of science because it is a fun game. You know you're building you're going to conferences you're building atop of each other's ideas is breakthroughs high I think I've realized how this particular molecule works and I could do this kind of experiment and everyone else is impressed cool. No I think you're wrong let me show you why you're wrong and that little game everyone gets really excited and they get excited all came up with a pill that solves this problem it's going to help a bunch of people and I came up with a giant study that shows the exact probability it's going to help or not and you get lost in this game and you forget to realize. This game just like mullick can have like unintended consequences that might destroy human civilization right or or divide human civilization or have. I'm not going to die or geopolitical consequences I mean the effects of I mean it's just so the most destructive effects of covid have nothing to do with the with the biology of the virus it seems like it's I mean I can just list them but like one of them is the complete distrust of public institutions. The other one is because of that public distrust I feel like if a much worse pandemic came along we as a world have not cried wolf. And when it an actual wolf now comes people will be like fuck masks fuck fuck vaccines fuck everything and they won't be they'll distrust every single thing that any major institutions going to tell them and because that's the thing like that. There was certain actions made by certain you know health public figures where they told they very knowingly told it was a white lie it was intended in the best possible way such as you know early on when there were there was clearly a shortage of masks. And so they said to the public don't get masks they don't there's no evidence that they work there or the you know don't get them they don't work in fact it might even make it worse you might even spread it more like that was the real like stinker. Yeah no no there's a list you know I did probably you're going to make that you're going to get sicker or you're more likely to get the catch the virus which is just absolute crap. And they put that out there and it's pretty clear the reason why they did that was because there was actually a shortage of masks and they really needed it for health workers which makes sense like I agree like it you know but the cost of lying to the public to the public when that then comes out. People aren't as stupid as they think they are as you know and that's I think where this distrust of experts experts is largely come from a they've lied to people overtly but be. People have been treated like idiots now let's not to say that there are a lot of stupid people who have a lot of wacky ideas around covid and all sorts of things but if you treat the general public like children. They're going to see that they're going to notice that and that is going to just like absolutely decimate the trust in the public institutions that we depend upon and honestly the best thing that could happen. I wish like if like Fauci you know and these other like leaders who I mean I would I can't imagine how nightmare his job has been for the last few years hell on earth like so you know I you know I have a lot of sympathy for the position he's been in but like if he could just come out and be like okay look guys. Hands up we didn't handle this as well as we could have. These are all the things I would have done differently in hindsight I apologize for this and this and this and this that would go so far. And maybe I'm being naive maybe this would back for I don't think it would like to someone like me even because I like I've lost trust in a lot of these things I'm. Unfortunately that at least know people who I can go to who I think a good like have good epistemics on this stuff. But you know if they if they could sort of put the hands on me go okay these are the spots will be screwed up this this this this was our reasons yeah we actually told a little white light here we did it for this reason we're really sorry where they just did the radical honesty thing the radical transparency thing that would go so far to build rebuilding public trust and I think that's what needs to happen. I know I totally agree with you unfortunately. The job was very tough and all those kinds of things but I see arrogance and arrogance prevent him from being honest in that way previously and I think arrogance will prevent him from being honest in that way now when he leaders I think young people are seeing that that kind of. Talking down to people from a position of power I hope is the way of the past people really like authenticity and they they like leaders that are like a man and a woman of the people and I think that just I mean he still has a chance to do that I think I mean I sure I'm just I don't think you know if I doubt he's listening but if he is like hey I I think you know I don't think he's irredeemable anyway I think this you know. I don't have an opinion of whether there was arrogance or there or not just know that I think like coming clean on the you know it's understandable to have fucked up during this pandemic like I won't expect any government to handle it well because it was so difficult like so many moving pieces so much like lack of information and so on but the step to rebuilding trust is to go okay look we're doing it scrutiny of where we went wrong and I and for my part I did this wrong in this part and that would be huge. All of us can do that I mean I was struggling for a while with that I want to talk to him or not I talked to his boss Francis Collins another person that's got a screwed up in terms of trust loss a little bit of my respect to there seems to have been a kind of dishonesty in the in the back rooms in that they didn't trust people to be intelligent like we need to tell them what's going on. We know what's good for them that kind of idea to be fair the thing that's what's it called her the phrase today not picking social media does that so you got like nitpicking not picking is where the the craziest stupidest you know if you have a group of people let's call you know let's say people who are vaccine I don't like the time anti-vaccine people who are vaccine hesitant vaccine speculative you know what social media is. The media did or the media or anyone you know their opponents would do is pick the craziest example so the ones who are like I think I need to inject myself with like motor oil at my ass or something you know select the craziest ones and then have that beamed to you know so from like someone like Fauci or Francis's perspective that's what they get because they're getting the same social media stuff as well so they get the same media reports I mean they might get some more information but they're they too are going to get these the nuts perpetrated them. So they probably have a misrepresentation of what the actual public's intelligence is with that that just yes and that just means they're not social media savvy so one of the skills of being on social media is to be able to filter that in your mind like to understand to put into proper content realize that what you are seeing social media is not anywhere near an accurate representation of humanity not picking on the and there's nothing wrong with putting motor oil up your ass is just one is one of the what you want to do. I do this every weekend okay. What would that analogy come from in my mind like what I don't know I think we need to do some Freudian thing would need to deeply investigate with the therapist okay what about AI are you worried about AGI super intelligent systems or paper clip maximized type of type of situation. Yes, I'm definitely worried about it but I feel kind of bipolar in the some days I wake up and I'm like you're excited about the future well exactly I'm like wow we can unlock the mysteries of the universe you know escape the game. And this this you know if I spend all my time thinking about these molecule problems that you know what what is the solution to them what you know in some ways you need this like omnibenevolent omniscient omnibwise coordination mechanism that can like make us all not do the the molecule thing or like provide the infrastructure would redesign the system so that it's not vulnerable to this molecule process. And in some ways you know that's that's the strongest argument to me food like the race to build AGI is that maybe you know we can't survive without it. But the flip side to that is the the unfortunately now that there's multiple actors trying to build AI AGI you know this is this is fine 10 years ago when it was just deep mind but then other company started up and now it created a race dynamic now it's like that's the whole thing is it the same. It's got the same problem is like whichever company is the one that like optimizes for speed at the cost of safety will get the competitive advantage and so we're more likely the ones to build the AGI you know and that's the same cycle that you're in and there's no clear solution to that because you can't just go like. Slapping you if you go and try and like stop all the different companies then it will you know the good ones will stop because they're the ones you know within you know within the West's reach but then that leaves all the other ones to continue and then they're even more likely so it's like it's a very difficult problem with no clean solution and you know at the same time. You know I know the at least some of the folks at deep mind and they're incredible and they're thinking about this the very aware of this problem and they like you know. I think some of the smartest people on earth yeah the culture is important there because they are thinking about that there. Some of the best machine learning engineers so it's possible to have a company or community of people that are both great engineers and are thinking about the philosophical topics exactly and importantly there are also game theorists. You know and because this is ultimately a game theory problem the thing is this small look mechanism and like you know what this rate how do we voice rate arms race scenarios you need people who aren't naive to be thinking about this and again like luckily there's a lot of smart non naive game theorists within within that group yes I'm concerned about it and I I think it's again a thing that we need. People to be thinking about in terms of like how do we create how do we mitigate the arms race dynamics and how do we solve the thing of it is got boston calls it the orthogonality problem whereby. Because obviously there's a chance you know that the belief that the hope is is that you build something that's super intelligent and by definition of being super intelligent it will also become super wise and have the wisdom to know what the right goals are and. Hopefully those goals include keeping humanity alive right but boston says that actually those two things you know on super intelligence and super wisdom aren't necessarily correlated they're actually kind of orthogonal things and how do we make it so that they are correlated how do we guarantee it because we need it to be guaranteed really to know that we're doing the thing safely but I think that like. Emerging of intelligence and wisdom at least my hope is that this whole process happens sufficiently slowly that we are constantly having these kinds of debates that we have enough time to. To figure out how to modify each version of the system is because more and more intelligent yes buying time is is a good thing definitely anything that slows everything down we just have one used to chill out we've got. Millenia to figure this out yeah. Or at least at least well it depends again it's some people think that you know we can't even make it through the next few decades without having some kind of Sunday on omnivise. Coordination mechanism and there's also an argument to that yeah I don't know well there is a suspicious of that kind of thinking because it seems like the entirety of human history is. It has people in it that are like predicting doom or just around the corner there's something about us that is strangely attracted to that thought. It's it's almost like fun to think about the destruction of everything just objectively speaking I've talked and listened to a bunch of people and they are gravitating towards that it's almost I think it's the same thing that people love about conspiracy theories is. They love to be the person that kind of figured out some deep fundamental thing about the that's going to be going to mark something extremely important about the history of human civilization because then I will be important when in reality most of us will be forgotten and and and life will go on in one of the sad things about whenever anything traumatic happens to you whenever you lose loved ones or just try to. If tragedy happens you realize life goes on even after a nuclear war that will wipe out some large percentage of the population and will torture. People from years to come because of the sort of I mean the effects of a nuclear winter people will still survive life will still go on I mean depends on the kind of nuclear war but in case you go well it will still go on that's one of the amazing things about life. It's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's Like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's like it's... probability, it's increased in probability over the last few years. To direct you use have not gone favorably, let's put it since 2010. So it's right, I think, for people to be thinking about it. But that's where it's a useful fiction or whether it's actually true or whatever you want to call it. I think having this faith, this is where faith is valuable because it gives you at least this anchor of hope. And I'm not just saying it to trick myself. I do truly, I do think there's something out there that wants us to win. Yeah. I think there's something that really wants us to win. And it just, you just have to be like, just like, okay, now I sound really crazy. But like, open your heart to it a little bit. And it will give you the sort of breathing room with which to marinate on the solutions. We are the ones who have to come up with the solutions. But we can use that there's like this hashtag positivity, there's value in that. Yeah, you have to kind of imagine all the destructive trajectories that lay in our future and then believe in the possibility of avoiding those trajectories. All while you said audience, all while sitting back, which is the two people that listen to this are probably sitting on a beach, smoking some weed. Just that's a beautiful sunset. Or they're looking at just the waves going in and out. And ultimately there's a kind of deep belief there in the momentum of humanity to figure it all out. But we've got a lot of work to do, which is which what makes this whole simulation, this video game kind of fun. This battle of polytopia. It's still, man, I love those games so much. That's so good. And that one for people who don't know battle of polytopia is a big, it's like a, is this really radical simplification of a civilization type of game. It still has a lot of the skill tree development, a lot of the strategy. But it's easy enough to play in a phone. Yeah, it's kind of interesting. They've really, they've really figured it out. It's one of the most elegantly designed games I've ever seen. It's incredibly complex. And yet being, again, it walks that line between complexity and simplicity in this really, really great way. And they use pretty colors that hack the dopamine reward circuits and all brains very well. Yeah, it's fun. The video games are so fun. Yeah. Most of this life is just about fun, escaping all the suffering to find the fun. What's energy healing? I have in my nose energy healing question mark. What's that about? Oh man. God, your audience is going to think I'm mad. So the two crazy things that happened to me, the one was the voice in the head that said you're going to win this tournament and then I won the tournament. The other crazy thing that's happened to me was in 2018, I started getting this like weird problem in my ear where it was low frequency sound distortion where voices, particularly men's voices, became incredibly unpleasant to listen to. It would create this, it was like falsely amplified or something. It was almost like a physical sensation in my ear, which was really unpleasant. And it would last for a few hours and then go away and then come back for a few hours and go away. And I went and got hearing tests and they found that the bottom end, I was losing the hearing in that ear. And I saw it in the end, I got doctors said they think it was this thing called many ears disease, which is this very unpleasant disease where people basically end up losing their hearing, but they get this like, it often comes with like disease spells and other things because it's like the inner ear gets all messed up. Now I don't know if that's actually what I had, but that's what at least a couple of one doctor said to me. But anyway, so I'd had three months of this stuff, this going on and it was really getting me down. I was like, I was that burning man of all places. Don't mean to be that person talking about burning man, but I was there. And again, I had it and I was unable to listen to music, which is not what you want because burning man is a very loud intense place. And I was just having a really rough time. And on the final night, I get talking to this girl who's like a friend of a friend. And I mentioned I was like, oh, I'm really down on the dumps about this. And she's like, oh, well, I've done a little bit of energy healing. Would you like me to have a look? I'm not saying, sure. Now this is again, deep, I was, you know, no time in my life for this. I didn't believe in any of this stuff. I was just like, it's all bullshit. It's all wooing nonsense. I was like, sure, I have a go. And she starts like with her hand and she says, oh, there's something there. And then she leans in and she starts like sucking over my ear, not actually touching me, but like close to it, like with her mouth. And it was really unpleasant. I was like, whoa, can you stop? She's like, no, no, no, there's something there I need to get it. I was like, no, no, no, I really don't like it. Please, this is really loud. She's like, I need to just bear with me. And she does it. I don't know how long for a few minutes. And then she eventually collapses on the ground, like freezing cold, crying. Not, you know, and I'm just like, I don't know what the hell is going on. I'm like, I'm thoroughly freaked out as does everyone else watching. Just like, what the hell on me? Like warm her up and she's like, what? Oh, she was really shaken up. And she's like, I don't know what that, she said it was something very unpleasant and dark. Don't worry, it's gone. I think you'll be fine in a couple. You'll have the physical symptoms for a couple of weeks and you'll be fine. But, you know, she was like that. You know, so I was so rattled, A, because the potential that actually I'd had something bad in me that made someone feel bad. And that she was scared. That was what, you know, I was like, wait, I thought, you do this. This is the thing. Now you're terrified. Like you pulled like some kind of exorcism or something. Yeah. Fuck is going on. Yeah. So it, it like just, it was the most insane experience. And frankly, it took me like a few months to sort of emotionally recover from it. But my ear problem went away about a couple of weeks later and touched wood. I've not had any issues since. So. That gives you like hints that maybe there's something out there. I mean, I don't, I, I, I, I, I don't have an explanation for this. The most probable explanation was a, you know, I was a burning man. I was in a very open state. Let's just leave it at that. And, you know, placebo is an incredibly powerful thing and a very not understood thing. So almost assigning the word placebo to it reduces it down to a way that it doesn't deserve to be reduced down. Maybe there's a whole science of what we call placebo. Maybe there's a placebo is a door. Self healing. Yeah. You know, I mean, I don't know what the problem was. Like I was told it was many years. I don't want to say, I definitely had that because I don't want people to think that, oh, that's how, you know, if they do have that, because it's terrible disease and if they have that, that this is going to be a guaranteed way for it to fix for them, I don't know. And I also don't, I don't, you're absolutely right to say like using even the word placebo is like it comes with this like baggage of, of like frame and I don't want to reduce that down. All I can do is describe the experience and what happened. I cannot put an ontological framework around it. I can't say why it happened, what the mechanism was, what the problem even was in the first place. I just know that something crazy happened and it was while I was in an open state. And fortunately for me, it made the problem go away. But what I took away from it, again, it was part of this, you know, this took me on this journey of becoming more humble about what I think I know. Because as I said before, I was like, I was in the like Richard Dawkins train of atheism in terms of there is no God, there's, and everything like that is bullshit. We know everything, we know, you know, the only way we can get through, you know, how medicine works and it's molecules and chemical interactions and that kind of stuff. And now it's like, okay, well, there's, there's clearly more for us to understand. And that doesn't mean that it's ascientific as well. Because, you know, the beauty of the scientific method is that it's still, it's still can apply to this situation. Like I don't see why, you know, I would like to try and test this experimentally. I haven't really, you know, I don't know how we would go about doing that. We would have to find other people with the same condition, I guess, and like try and repeat, repeat the experiment. But it doesn't, just because something happens that's sort of out of the realms of our current understanding, it doesn't mean that it's the scientific method can't be used for it. Yeah, I think the scientific method sits on a foundation of those kinds of experiences. Because they, scientific method is a process to carve away at the mystery all around us. And experiences like this is just a reminder that we're mostly shrouded in mysteries, though. That's it. It's just like a humility. We haven't really figured this whole thing out. But at the same time, we have found ways to act, you know, we're, we're clearly doing something right because think of the technological scientific advancements, the knowledge that we have that was the blow people's minds, even from a hundred years ago. Yeah. And we've even allegedly got out the space and landed on the moon. I still haven't, I have not seen evidence of the earth being round, but I'm still, I'm keeping an open mind. Speaking of which, you studied physics in astrophysics. When, just to go to that, just to jump around through the fascinating life you've had, when did you, how did that come to be? Like when, when you fall in love with astronomy and space and things like this, because early as I can remember, I was very lucky that my, my mom and my dad, but particularly my mom, my mom, my mom is like the most nature she is mother earth. It's the only way to describe her. Just, she's like, Dr. Doe Little, animals flock to her and just like sit and look at her adorningly. And she sings. Yeah. She's just, she just is mother earth and she has always been fascinated by, you know, she doesn't have any, you know, she never went to university or anything like that. She's actually phobic of maths. If I try and get her to like, you know, I was trying to teach her poker and she hated it. But she's so deeply curious. And that just got instilled in me when, you know, we would sleep out under the stars. Whenever it was, you know, the two nights of the year when it was warm enough in the UK to do that. And we'll just lie out there until we fell asleep looking at, looking for satellites, looking for shooting stars. And I was just always, I don't know whether it was from that, but I've always naturally gravitated to like the biggest, the biggest questions. And also the like, the most layers of abstraction, I love just like, what's the meta question, what's the meta question and so on. So I think it just came from that really. And, and then on top of that, like physics, you know, it also made logical sense in that it was a, it was, it was the degree, it was a degree that was subject that ticked the box of being, you know, answering these really big picture questions, but it was also extremely useful. It like has a very high utility in terms of, I didn't know necessarily. I thought I was going to become like a research scientist. My original plan was like, I want to be a professional astronomer. So it's not just like a philosophy degree that asks the big questions. And it's not like biology in the path to go to medical school or something like that, which is overly pragmatic, not overly is, is very pragmatic. But this is, yeah, physics is a good combination of the two. Yeah, at least for me, it made sense. And I was good at it. I liked it. Yeah, I mean, I, it wasn't like I did an immense amount of soul searching to choose it or anything. It just was like this. I made the most sense. I mean, you have to make this decision in the UK age 17, which is crazy, because you know, in US, you go the first year, you do a bunch of stuff, right? And then you choose your major. I think the first few years of college, you focus on the drugs and only as you get closer to the end, do you start to think, oh, shit, this wasn't about that. And I'm, I owe the government a lot of money. How many alien civilizations are out there when you, when you looked up at the stars with your mom and you were counting them, what's your mom think about a number of alien civilizations? I actually don't know. I would imagine she would take the viewpoint of, you know, she's pretty humble. And she knows how many, she knows there's a huge number of potential spawn sites out there. So she would spawn sites. Spawn sites, yeah. You know, this is our spawn site. Yeah, spawn sites in polytopia. We spawned on earth, you know, it's. Hmm. Yeah, spawn sites. What does that feel weird to say spawn? Does it make me feel like it's, there's only one source of life and it's spawning in different locations? That's why the word spawn. Because like, it feels like life that originated on earth really originated here. Right. It is, it is unique to this particular. Yeah, I mean, but I don't, in my mind, it doesn't exclude, you know, the completely different forms of life and different biochemical soups can't also spawn. But I guess it implies that there's some spark that is beautiful. Yeah, I kind of like the idea of it. Yeah. And then I get to think about respawning like after it dies. Like what happens if life on earth ends? Is it, is it going to restart again? Probably not. It depends. Maybe earth is too. It depends on the type of, you know, what's the thing that kills it off, right? If it's a paperclip maximizer, not that, you know, for the, for the example, but, you know, some kind of very self replicating, you know, high on the capabilities, very low on the wisdom type thing. So whether that's, you know, grey goo, green goo, you know, like nanobots or just a shitty misaligned AI that thinks it needs to turn everything into paperclips. Um, you know, if it's something like that, then it's going to be very hard for life, you know, complex life because by definition, you know, a paperclip maximizer is the ultimate instantiation of molecule, deeply low complexity, over optimization on a single thing, sacrificing everything else, turning the whole world into something tells me like if we actually take a paperclip maximizer, it destroys everything. It's a really dumb system that just envelops the whole of earth. And it will be on. Yeah. I didn't know that part, but okay, great. So it becomes a multi planetary paperclip maximizer. Well, it just propagates, I mean, it depends whether it figures out how to jump the vacuum gap. Um, but again, I mean, this is all silly because it's a hypothetical thought experiment, which I think doesn't actually have much practical application to the AI safety problem, but it's just a fun thing to play around with. But if by definition, it is maximally intelligent, which means it is maximally good at navigating the environment around it in order to achieve its goal, but extremely bad at choosing goals in the first place. So again, we're talking on this orthogonality thing, right? It's very low on wisdom, but very high on capability. Um, then it will figure out how to jump the vacuum gap between planets and stars and so on. And thus just turn every atomic its its hands on into paperclips. Yeah. By the way, for people who, which is maximum virality, by the way, that's what virality is. But does not mean that virality is necessarily all about maximizing paperclips. In that case, it is. So for people who don't know, this is just a thought experiment example of an AI system that's very that has a goal and is willing to do anything to accomplish that goal, including destroying all life on earth and all human life and all of consciousness in the universe, you know, for the goal of producing a maximum number of paperclips. Okay. Or whatever its optimization function was that it was set up. But don't you think we're creating lexas, maybe it'll tile the universe in legs. Go on. I like to say, did not just get that's better. That's that's more interesting than paperclips. That could be infinitely optimal for you to say something. It's still a bad thing because it's permanently capping what the universe could ever be. It's like that's it's end or achieving the optimal that the universe could ever achieve. But that's up to different people at different perspectives. But don't you think within the paperclip world that would emerge just like in the zero zone ones that make up a computer that would emerge beautiful complexities? Like it won't suppress, you know, as you scale to multiple planets and throughout, they'll emerge these little worlds that on top of the fabric of maximizing paperclips, there will be that that would emerge like little societies of paperclips. Well, they're not with them. We're not describing a paperclip maximized or anyone because by the, like, if you think of what a paperclip is, it is literally just a piece of bent iron, right? Yes. So if it's maximizing that throughout the universe, it's taking every atom it gets its hand on into somehow turning it into iron or steel, and then bending it into that shape and then done and done by definition, like paperclips, there is no, there is no way for, well, okay, so you're saying that paperclips somehow will just emerge and create through gravity or something? No, no, no, because there's a dynamic element of the whole system. It's not just, it's creating those paperclips and the act of creating, there's going to be a process and that process will have a dance to it because it's not like sequential thing. There's a whole complex three dimensional system of paperclips, you know, like, you know, like string theory, right? It's supposed to be strings that are interacting in fascinating ways. I'm sure paperclips are very string-moly that can be interacting in very interesting ways as you scale exponentially through three dimensional, I mean, I'm sure the paperclip maximizer has to come up with a theory of everything. It has to create like wormholes, right? It has to break, like, it has to understand quantum mechanics. I love your optimism. I love your optimism. This is where I'd say this, we're going into the realm of pathological optimism, where it by its... I'm sure there will be a... I think there's an intelligence that emerges from that system. So you're saying that basically intelligence is inherent in the fabric of reality and we'll find a way, kind of like, goblins as life will find a way, you think life will find a way, even out of this perfectly homogenous dead soup. It's not perfectly homogenous. It has to... It's perfectly maximal in the production. I don't know why people keep thinking this homogenous. It maximizes the number of paperclips. That's the only thing. It's not trying to be homogenous. It's trying to... True. True, true, true. It's trying to maximize paperclips. So you're saying... You're saying that because it... Because, you know, kind of like in the Big Bang or, you know, it seems like, you know, things... There were clusters. There was more stuff here than there. That was the enough of the patonicity that kickstarted the evolutionary process. There's a little weirdness that will make it beautiful. A lot of... Yeah. So yeah... About city emerges. Interesting. Okay. Well, so how does that line up then with the whole heat death of the universe, right? Because that's another sort of instantiation of this. It's like, everything becomes so far apart and so cold and so perfectly mixed that it's like homogenous grain-ish. Do you think that even out of that homogenous grain-ish where there's no negative entropy that, you know, there's no free energy that we understand. Even from that, new... Yeah. The paperclip maximizer or any other intelligence systems will figure out ways to travel to other universes to create Big Bangs within those universes or through black holes, to create whole other worlds to break the... What we consider the limitations of physics. The paperclip maximizer will find a way, if a way exists, and we should be humbled to realize that we don't... Because it just wants to make more paperclips. Yeah. So it's going to go into those universes and turn them into paperclips. Yeah. But we humans, not humans, but complex system exists on top of that. We're not interfering with it. This complexity emerges from... The simple base state. The simple base state. Yeah, whether it's... Yeah. The plank lens or paperclips is the base unit. Yeah. You can think of like the universe as a paperclip maximizer because it's doing some dumb stuff. Like physics seems to be pretty dumb. It has... Like I don't know if you can summarize it. Yes. Yeah. The laws of fairly basic and yet out of them amazing complexity emerges. And its goals seem to be pretty basic and dumb. If you can summarize this goals, I mean, I don't know what's a nice way, maybe... Laws of thermodynamics could be... I don't know if you can assign goals to physics, but if you formulate in a sense of goals, it's very similar to paperclip maximizing in the dumbness of the goals. But the pockets of complexity as an emerge is where beauty emerges. That's where life emerges. That's where intelligence, that's where humans emerge. And I think we're being very down on this whole paperclip maximizer thing. No. The reason we hear it. Because what you're saying is that you think that the force of emergence itself is another like unwritten... Not an unwritten, but like another baked in law of reality. And you're trusting that emergence will find a way to even out of seemingly the most molecule, awful, plain outcome emergence or stuff. Anyway, I love that as a philosophy. I think it's very nice. I would wield it carefully because there's large error bars on that and the certainty of that. And... About we build the paperclip maximizer and find out. Plastic. Yeah. Molec is doing cartwheels, man. Yeah. But the thing is, it will destroy humans in the process, which is the reason we really don't like it. We seem to be really holding on to this whole human civilization thing. So that makes you sad if AI systems that are beautiful, that are conscious, that are interesting and complex and intelligent, ultimately to the death of humans, that makes you sad. If humans led to the death of humans, sorry. Like if they would supersede humans. Oh, if some AI. Yeah. AI would end humans. I mean, that's the reason why I'm like in some ways, in less emotionally concerned about AI risk, as it then, say, bioresc, because at least with AI, there's a chance, if we're in this hypothetical where it wipes out humans, but it does it for some higher purpose, it needs our atoms to energy to do something. At least now, the universe is going on to do something interesting, whereas if it wipes everything, you know, bio just kills everything on Earth and that's it. And there's no more, Earth cannot spawn anything more meaningful in the few hundred million years it has left, left, because it doesn't have much time left. Then, yeah, I don't know that. So one of my favorite books I've ever read is Noverseen by James Lovelock, who sadly just died. He wrote it when he was like 99. He died age 102, so it was a fairly new book. And he sort of talks about that that he thinks it's, you know, sort of building off this Gaia theory, like Earth is a living, some form of intelligence itself, and that this is the next like step, right? Is this whatever this new intelligence that is maybe silicon base as opposed to carbon based goes on to do. And it's really sort of in some ways an optimistic but rudely fatalistic book. I don't know if I fully subscribe to it, but it's a beautiful piece to read anyway. So am I sad by that idea? I think so, yes. And actually, yeah, this is the reason why I'm sad by the idea, because if something is truly brilliant and wise and smart and truly super intelligent, it should be able to figure out abundance. So if it figures out abundance, it shouldn't need to kill us off. It should be able to find a way for us. There's plenty, the universe is huge. There should be plenty of space for it to go out and do all the things it wants to do and like give us a little pocket where we can continue doing our things and we can continue to do things and so on. And again, if it's so supremely wise, it shouldn't even be worried about the game theoretic considerations that by leaving us alive will then go and create another like super intelligent agent that it then has to compete against because it should be omnivise and smart enough to not have to concern itself with that. Unless, unless it deems humans to be kind of assholes. Like, the humans are a source of non-avolus-lose kind of dynamics. Well, yes and no. We're not molecules. That's why I think it's important. But maybe humans are the source of malloc. No, I think, I mean, I think game theory is the source of malloc. And you know, because malloc exists in non-human systems as well. It happens within like agents within a game in terms of like, you know, it applies to agents, but it like it can apply to, you know, a species that's on an island of animals, you know, rats out competing the ones that like massively consume all the resources of the ones that are going to win out over the more like chill socialized ones. And so, you know, creates this mouth-usian trap like malloc exists in little pockets in nature as well. Well, it's not a strictly human thing. I wonder if it's actually a result of consequences of the invention of predator and predynamics. Maybe it needs AI will have to kill off every organism that's about killing off competition. Not competition, but just like the way it's like the weeds or whatever in a beautiful flower gardener's, the parasites, yeah, on the whole system. Not, of course, it will, it won't do that completely. You'll put them in a zoo like we do with parasites. It'll ring fence. Yeah, and there'll be somebody doing a PhD on like, they'll prod humans with a stick and see what they do. And I mean, in terms of letting us run wild outside of the, you know, a geographically constraint region, that might be that might have decided to. No, I think there's obviously the capacity for beauty and kindness and non-malloc behavior of this human. So I'm pretty sure AI will preserve us. Let me, I don't know if you answered the aliens question. No, I didn't. We got a conversation with Toby, Toby Lloyd about various sizes of the universe. I think did he say, now I'm forgetting, but I think he said it's a good chance we're alone. So the classic, you know, Fermi paradox question is, there's so many spawn points and yet, you know, it didn't take us that long to go from harnessing fire to sending out radio signals into space. So surely given the vastness of space, we should be, and you know, even if only a tiny fraction of those create life and other civilizations too, we should be, the universe should be very noisy. There should be evidence of disenfiers or whatever, you know, like at least radio signals and so on, but seemingly things are very silent out there. Now, of course, it depends on who you speak to. Some people say that they're getting signals all the time and so on and like, I don't want to make an epistemic statement on that, but it seems like there's a lot of silence. So that raises this paradox. And then they, you know, the Drake equation. So the Drake equation is like basically just a simple thing of like trying to estimate the number of possible civilizations within the galaxy by multiplying the number of stars created per year by the number of stars that have planets, planets that have a small blah, blah, blah. So all these like different factors. And then you plug in numbers into that and you, you know, depending on like the range of, you know, you're low bound and you're up about point, point estimates that you put in, you get out a number at the end for the number of civilizations. But what Toby and his crew did differently was Toby, there's a researcher at the future of humanity institute. They, instead of, they realize that it's like basically a statistical quirk that if you put in point sources, even if you think you're putting in conservative point sources, on some of these variables, the uncertainty is so large, it spans like maybe even like a couple of hundred of orders of magnitude. By putting in point sources, it's always going to lead to overestimates. And so they, like by putting stuff on a log scale, or actually they did it on like a log log scale on some of them. And then like ran the simulation across the whole bucket of uncertainty across all those orders of magnitude. And you do that, then actually the number comes out much, much smaller. And that's the more statistically rigorous, you know, mathematically correct way of doing the calculation. It's still a lot of hand waving as science goes. It's like definitely, you know, just waving, I don't know what an analogy is, but it's hand waving. And anyway, when they did this and then they did a busy update on it as well to like factor in the fact that there is no evidence that we're picking up because, you know, no evidence is actually a form of evidence, right? And the long and short of it comes out that the, we're roughly around 70% to be the only intelligence civilization in our galaxy thus far and around 5050 in the entire observable universe, which sounds so crazily counterintuitive, but their math is legit. Well, yeah, the math around this particular equation, which is equations of ridiculous at many levels, but the powerful thing about the equation is there's the different things, different components that can be estimated and the air bars on which can be reduced with science and hence throughout since the equation came out, the air bars have been coming out on a different aspects. Yeah, that's very true. And so that it almost kind of says what like this gives you a mission to reduce the air bars on these estimates. Now over a period of time, once you do, you can better and better understand. Like in the process of reducing the air bars, you'll get to understand actually what is the right way to find out where the aliens are, how many of them there are and all those kinds of things. So I don't think it's good to use that for an estimation. I think you do have to think for like more like from first principles, just looking at what life is on earth. Like and trying to understand the very physics-based biology chemistry, biology-based question of what is life, maybe computation-based, what the fuck is this thing? And that, like how difficult is it to create this thing? It's one way to say like how many plants like this are out there, all that kind of stuff, but it feels like from our very limited knowledge perspective, the right ways to think how does, what is this thing and how does it originate from very simple, non-life things, how does complex life-like things emerge from from a rock to a bacteria, protein, and these like weird systems that encode information and pass information from self-proplicate and then also select each other and mutate in interesting ways such that they can adapt and evolve and build increasingly more complex systems. Right, it's a form of information processing, right? Right. Or it's information transfer, but then also an energy processing which then results in, I guess information processing, maybe I'm getting booked. So it's always doing some modification and yeah, the input is some energy. Right, it's able to extract resources from its environment in order to achieve a goal. But the goal doesn't seem to be clear. Right. The goal is, well the goal is to make more of itself. Yeah, but in a way that increases, I mean, I don't know if evolution is a fundamental law of the universe, but it seems to want to replicate itself in a way that maximizes the chance of its survival. Individual agents within any ecosystem do yes. Yes, evolution itself doesn't give a fuck. Right. It's a very, it don't care. It's just like, oh, you optimize it. Well at least it's certainly, yeah, it doesn't care about the welfare of the individual agents within it, but it does seem to, I don't know. I think the mistake is that we're anthropomorphizing. To even try and give evolution a mindset because there's a really great post by Elias Yudkowski on Les Wrong, which is an alien god. And he talks about the mistake we make and we try and put on my think through things from an evolutionary perspective as though giving evolution some kind of agency and what it wants, yeah, worth reading. But yeah. I would like to say that having interacted with a lot of really smart people that say that anthropomorphization is a mistake. I would like to say that saying that anthropomorphization is a mistake is a mistake. I think there's a lot of power and anthropomorphization if I can only say that word correctly one time. I think that's actually a really powerful way to reason to things. I think people, especially people in robotics seem to run away from it as fast as possible. And I just, I didn't give an example of like how it helps in robotics. Oh, and that our world is a world of humans. And to see robots as fundamentally just tools runs away from the fact that we live in a world of dynamic world of humans. Like these all these game theory systems we've talked about that a robot that ever has to interact with humans. And I don't mean like intimate friendship interaction. I mean, in a factory setting where it has to deal with the uncertainty of humans, all that kind of stuff, you have to acknowledge that the robot's behavior has an effect on the human just as much as the human has an effect on the robot. And there's a dance there. And you have to realize that this entity when a human sees a robot, this is obvious in a physical manifestation of a robot, they feel a certain way. They have a fear, they have uncertainty. They have their own personal life projections with pets and dogs and the thing looks like a dog. They have their own memories of what a dog is like. They have certain feelings and that's going to be useful in a safety setting, safety critical setting, which is one of the most trivial settings for a robot. In terms of how to avoid any kind of dangerous situations. And a robot should really consider that in navigating its environment. And we humans are right to reason about how a robot should consider navigating its environment through anthropomorphization. I also think our brains are designed to think in human terms. Like game theory is best applied in the space of human decisions. And so. Right. You're dealing with, I mean, things like AI, AI is they are, you know, we can somewhat, like I don't think it's the reason I say anthropomorphization we need to be careful with is because there is a danger of overly applying, overly, wrongly assuming that this artificial intelligence is going to operate in any similar way to us because it is operating on a fundamentally different substrate, like even dogs or even mice or whatever in some way it's like anthropomorphizing them is less of a mistake, I think, than an AI, even though it's an AI we built and so on. Because at least we know that they're running from the same substrate and they have, and they've also evolved from the same out of the same evolutionary process. You know, they've followed this evolution of like needing to compete for resources and needing to find a mate and that kind of stuff. Whereas an AI that has just popped into an existence somewhere on a cloud server, let's say, you know, whatever, however it runs and whatever, whether I don't know whether they have an internal experience, I don't think they necessarily do. In fact, I don't think they do. But the point is is that to try and apply any kind of modeling of like thinking through problems and decisions in the same way that we do has to be done extremely carefully because they are like, they're so alien, their method of whatever their form of thinking is. It's just so different because they've never had to evolve, you know, in the same way. Yeah, I was beautifully put. I was just playing devil's advocate. I do think in certain contexts anthropomorphization is not going to hurt you. Yes. Engineers run away from it too fast. I can see that. But for the most point, you're right. Do you have advice for young people today, like the 17 year old that you were of how to live life? You can be proud of how to have a career. You can be proud of in this world full of mullets. Think about the win-win, look for win-win situations. And be careful not to, you know, overly use your smarts to convince yourself that something is win-win-win, it's not. So that's difficult. I don't know how to advise people on that because it's something I'm still figuring out myself. But have that as a sort of default MO? Don't see things. Everything is a zero-sum game. Try to find the positive sumness and find waste if there isn't seem to be one to consider playing a different game. So that I would suggest that. Do you not become a professional poker player? Because people always ask that, like, oh, she's a pro. I want to do that too. Fine, you could have done it if you were, you know, when I started out, it was a very different situation about then. Poker is, you know, a great game to learn in order to understand the ways to think. And I reckon when people learn it, but don't try making living from it these days, it's very, very difficult to the point of being impossible. And then really, really be aware of how much time you spend on your phone and on social media and really try and keep it to a minimum, be aware that basically every moment that you spend on it is bad for you. So it doesn't mean you say you can never do it, but just have that running in the background. I'm doing a bad thing for myself right now. I think that's the general world of thumb. Of course, about becoming a professional poker player. If there is a thing in your life that's like that and nobody can convince you otherwise just fucking do it. Don't listen to anyone's advice. Find a thing that you can't be talked out of too. That's a thing. I like that. Yeah. You were a league of stars in the metal band. Did I write that down for something? What did you, what would you do it for? The performing, was it the pure, the music of it? Was it just being a rock star? Why'd you do it? So we only have a played two gigs. We didn't last, you know, it wasn't a very, we weren't famous or anything like that. But I was very into metal. Like it was my entire identity sort of from the age of 16 to 23. It's the best metal band of all time. Oh, it's Don't Ask Me That. So how Don's it? So I know I had a long argument with, I'm a guitarist, I'm more like a classic rock guitarist. So you know, I've had friends who are very big Pantera fans and so there was often arguments about what's the better metal band Metallica versus Pantera. This is a more kind of 90s maybe discussion. But I was always on the side of Metallica, both musically and in terms of performance and the depth of lyrics and so on. But they were basically everybody was against me because if you're a true metal fan, I guess the idea goes as you can't possibly be a Metallica fan. I think it's like it's like it's sold out. Metallica are all metal. Like they were the, I mean, again, you can't say who was the godfather of metal blah blah. But like they were so groundbreaking and so brilliant. I mean, you've named literally two of my favorite bands. Like that's that when you asked that question, I know who are my favorites. Like those were two that came up. A third one is Children of Bodham who I just think they just tick all the boxes for me. Yeah, I don't know. Nowadays I kind of feel like a repulsion to the, I mean, I was that myself. Like I'd be like, who do you prefer? I'm like, who's like, you have to rank them. But it's like this false zero sum this is like why they're so additive. Like there's no conflict there. Although I, when people ask that kind of question by anything movies, I feel like it's hard work and it's unfair, but it's, it's, you should pick one. Yeah. And that's actually, you know, the same kind of, it's like a fear of a commitment. People ask me, what's your favorite band? It's like, but I, you know, it's good to pick. Exactly. Yeah. Thank you for the tough question. Yeah. Well, maybe not a, no, no, it's a lot of people are listening. Um, can I just like, what? Why doesn't it matter? No, it does. It is. Are you still into metal? Uh, funny enough, I was listening to a bunch before I came over here. Oh, like you, do you use it for like motivation or get you in a certain, yeah, I was weirdly listening to 80s hair metal before I came. Does that count as metal? I think so. It's, it's like proto metal and it's happy. It's optimistic, happy proto metal. Um, yeah, I mean, these things, you know, all these genres bleed into each other. Um, but yeah, sorry to answer your question about guitar playing. My relationship with it was kind of weird and that I was deeply uncreative. My objective would be to hear some really hard technical solo and then learn it, memorize it and then play it perfectly. But I was incapable of trying to write my own music. Like, the idea was just absolutely terrifying. Uh, but I was just also just thinking I was like, it'd be kind of cool to actually try starting a band again and getting back into it and write. But it's, it's scary. It's scary. I mean, I put out some guitar playing just other people's covers. Like I play comfortably numb on, on the internet. It's scary too. It's scary putting stuff out there. Uh, and I had this similar kind of fascination with technical playing both on piano and guitar. You know, uh, one of the first, um, one of the reasons I started learning guitars, the from Ozzy Osborne, Mr. Crowley solo, and one of the first solos I learned is that, um, and it's, there's a beauty to it. There's a lot of beauty to it. It's tapping, right? Yeah. Is there some tapping, but it's, it's just really fast. Beautiful. Like, arpeggios. Yeah, arpeggios. And there's a melody that you can hear through it, but there's also a build up. It's a beautiful solo, but it's also technically just visually the way it looks when the person is watching you feel like a rock star player. Yeah. Um, but it ultimately has to do with technical. You, you're not developing the part of your brain that I think requires you to generate beautiful music. It is ultimately technical in nature. So that took me a long time to let go of that and just be able to write music myself. And, and that's a different, that's a different journey, I think. Um, I think that journey is a little bit more inspired in the blues world, for example, or improvisation is more valued, obviously in jazz and so on, but, um, I, I think ultimately it's a more rewarding journey because you get to your relationship with the guitar then becomes a kind of escape from the world where you can create, create, I mean, creating stuff is, um, and it's something you work with, because my relationship with my guitar was like, it was something to tame and defeat. Yeah. Which was kind of what my whole personality was about then, like I was just very like, you know, as I said, like, very competitive, very, just like, must, you know, bend this thing to my will. Yeah. Whereas writing music is you work, it's like a dance. Yeah. But I think because of the competitive aspect, for me, at least that's still there, which creates anxiety about playing publicly or all that kind of stuff, I think there's just like a harsh self criticism within the whole thing. It's really, really, it's, it's, it's really tough. I want to hear some of your stuff. I mean, that it, there's, there's certain things that feel really personal. And on top of that is we talked about poker offline. There's certain things that you get to certain height in your life and that doesn't have to be very high, but you get to a certain height. And then you put it aside for a bit and it's hard to return to it because you remember being good. And it's hard to like you being at a very high level in poker, it might be hard for you to return to poker every once in a while and enjoy it knowing that you're just not as sharp as it used to be because you're not doing it every single day. That's something I was wondering with, I mean, even just like in chess with Kasparov, some of these grades, just returning to it. It's almost painful. Yes, I can. Yeah. And I feel that way with guitar too, you know, because I used to play like every day a lot. So returning to it is painful because like, it's like accepting the fact that this whole ride is finite and that you have, you have a prime. There's a prime when you're really good and now it's over and now. And on a different chapter of life. I was like, oh, but like, what is that? Yeah, but you can still you can still discover joy within that process. It's been tough, especially with some level of like, as people get to know you, there's a, and people film stuff, you don't have the privacy of just sharing something with a few people around you. Yeah. That's a beautiful privacy that is a point with the internet. It's just because disappearing. Yeah, it's a really good point. Yeah. But all those pressures aside, if you really, you can step up and still enjoy the fuck out of a good musical performance. What do you think is the meaning of this whole thing? What's the meaning of life? It's in your name, as we talked about, you have to live up. Do you feel the requirement have to live up to your name? Because live? Yeah. No, because I don't see it. I mean, my, well, again, it's kind of like, no, I don't know. Because my full name is Olivia. Yeah. So I can retreat in that. I'll be like, oh, Olivia, what does that mean? Live up to live. No, I can't say I do because I've never thought of it that way. Okay. Anything you name backwards is evil. Yeah. As far as I talk to both. There's like, I mean, I feel the urge to live up to that, to be the inverse of evil. Or even better. Because I don't think, you know, is the inverse of evil good or is good something completely separate to that? I think my intuition says it's the latter, but I don't know. Anyway, getting in the way. What is the meaning of all this? Of life. Why are we here? I think to explore, have fun and understand and make more of here and to keep the game going. Have here more of here more of this more of this is more of experience. Just to have more of experience and our ideally positive experience and more complex, you know, to try and put it into a sort of vaguely scientific term, make it so that the program required the length of code required to describe the universe as long as possible. And the, you know, highly complex and therefore interesting. Because again, like, I know, you know, we bang the metaphor to death, but like, titled with X, you know, told with paper clips, doesn't require that much of a code to describe. Obviously, maybe something emerges from it, but that steady state, assuming a steady state, it's not very interesting. Whereas, it seems like our universe is over time becoming more and more complex and interesting. So much richness and beauty and diversity on this earth. And I want that to continue and get more. I want more, more, more diversity in the very best sense of that word is to me the, the, the, the goal of all this. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And somehow have fun in the process. Yes. Because we do create a lot of fun things along instead of in this creative force and all the beautiful things that create somehow there's like a funness to it. And perhaps that has to do with the finiteness of life, the fineness of all these experiences, which is what makes them kind of unique. Like the fact that they end, there's this, whatever it is, falling in love or creating a piece of art or creating a bridge or creating a rocket or creating a, I don't know, I'm just, the businesses that do that, that, that build something or solve something. The fact that it is born and it dies somehow embeds it with fun, with joy for the people involved. I know what that is, the finiteness of it. It can do. Some people struggle with the, you know, I mean, a big thing. I think that one has to learn is, is being okay with things coming to an end. And in terms of like projects and so on, right? People cling onto things beyond what they're meant to be do it, you know, beyond what make is reasonable. And I'm going to have to come to terms with this party has come into an end. I really enjoy talking to you. I think it's obvious as we've talked about many times, you should be doing a podcast. You should, like, you're already doing a lot, a lot of stuff publicly to the world, which is awesome. And you're a great educator, you're a great mind, you're great into like, but it's also this called medium of just talking is a fun one. It's a fun one. It really is good. And it's just, it's just something but like, oh, it's just so much fun. And you can just get into so many, yeah, there's the space to just explore and see what comes and emerges. And yeah, to understand yourself better. And if you're talking to others to understand them better, and together with them, I mean, you should do your, you should do your own podcast, but you should also do a podcast with C's. Yeah. Talk about the two of you have such different minds that like melt together in just hilarious ways, fascinating ways, just the tension of ideas there is really powerful. But in general, I think you, you, you got a beautiful voice. So thank you so much for talking today. Thank you for being a friend. Thank you for honoring me with this conversation. With your valuable time. Thank you. Thank you. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Lou Berry to support this podcast. Please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from Richard Feynman. I think it's much more interesting to live not knowing than to have answers, which might be wrong. I have approximate answers and possible beliefs and different degrees of uncertainty about different things. But I'm not absolutely sure of anything. And there are many things I don't know anything about such as whether it means anything to ask why we're here. I don't have to know the answer. I don't feel frightened not knowing things by being lost in a mysterious universe without any purpose, which is the way it really is as far as I can tell. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.