 The following is a conversation with Ayla, a sex researcher who does some of the largest human sexuality survey studies in the world on everything from fetishes to relationships. She is fearless in pursuing her curiosity on these topics by asking challenging and fascinating questions and looking for answers in a rigorous data-driven way and writing about it on her blog, knowingless.com. She's also a sex worker, including OnlyFans and escorting. And is an exceptionally prolific creator of thought-provoking Twitter polls. Ayla and I disagree on a bunch of things, but that just made this conversation even more interesting. I like interesting people in the full range of the meaning that the word interesting implies. I'm currently reading On the Road by Jack Kerouac and would be remiss if I didn't mention one of my favorite quotes from that book that feels relevant here. The only people for me are the mad ones. The ones who are mad to live, mad to talk, mad to be saved, desirous of everything at the same time. The ones who never yawn or say a commonplace thing, but burn, burn, burn, like fabulous yellow Roman candles, exploding like spiders across the stars. In the middle, you see the blue center light pop and everybody goes, ah. And now, a quick few second mention of each sponsor. Check them out in the description. It's the best way to support this podcast. We got House of Macadamias for healthy midday snacks. Why midday snacks? Snacks anytime. A set of greens for a delicious daily multivitamin and inside tracker for biomonitoring. Choose wisely, my friends. Also, if you want to work with our amazing team, we're always hiring. Go to lexfriedman.com slash hiring. And now, onto the full ad reads. As always, no ads in the middle. I try to make this interesting, but if you skip them, please still check out our sponsors. I enjoy their stuff. Maybe you will too. This show is brought to you by probably our most delicious sponsor. The sponsor that has given me a tremendous amount of happiness and joy. Simple joy. Sitting alone on a couch in a podcast room just eating macadamia snacks. They ship delicious, high quality, and healthy macadamia nuts directly to your door. Anyway, this thing is delicious. It's healthy. 30% less carbs than almonds. It's the only nut of the many nuts. And I've researched this, but they've also told me that it's rich in omega-7s. Professor Tim Noakes, who I should probably talk to at some point, sings macadamia oil praises. There's so much to say. That's awesome. The thing is, it's just delicious. It's portioned perfectly. It brings happiness. Get it. Maybe it'll bring you happiness. And we can just telepathically enjoy these nuts together. Go to houseofmacadamias.com slash lex to get 20% off your order for every order, not just the first. Our listeners, that's you, will also get a four-ounce bag of macadamias when you order three or more boxes of any macadamia product. That's houseofmacadamias.com slash lex. This show is also brought to you by Athletic Greens and its AG1 drink, which is an all-in-one daily drink to support better health and peak performance. It, too, is freaking delicious. And it, too, is a source of a lot of happiness. Every day. Twice a day. In fact, I'm now religiously bringing in, on the road with me, the travel packs, because I like to bring the happiness with me. It's actually really stressful for me to travel, as it is for a lot of people. This is a recent discovery for me. One of the things that kind of makes it a lot better, if I bring little trinkets that remind me of home, or little habits that remind me of home, or little food items and so on. And Athletic Greens is that. I bring Element Electrolyte and Athletic Greens with me on the road, and it just reminds me of home. And Athletic Greens, that's what I start the day with, in terms of breaking my fast. And I put it in the fridge. It's just, it's delicious. It's refreshing. It's just a great mental boost for me. They'll give you one month's supply of fish oil when you sign up at athleticgreens.com slash lex. This show is also brought to you by InsideTracker, a service I use to track biological data. It's interesting because this conversation with Ayala is, in fact, about data. A lot of data. A lot of data from, I think she has over 500,000 people that took a very extensive survey on their sexual preferences and all that kind of stuff. So basically, self-report information about your own understanding of your mind and body and so on. I mean, that's so powerful. That's so, so, so powerful. Data, in general, is really powerful for any kind of study. For medical studies, for psychological studies, sociological, for any kind of study that includes humans. And it's nice to see Ayala do this gigantic data set. But to figure out what you need for your body, for your life, for your diet, that should not be based, no matter how big the data set is, that should not be based on population data. Or it should only be in part based on population data. It should be, hopefully, in large part based on the data that comes from your own body. And that's what InsideTracker is one of the great folks that are taking a step forward in this thing that obviously represents the future. Get special savings for a limited time when you go to InsideTracker.com slash Lex. This is the Lex Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Ayala. I feel like this conversation can go anywhere. Is that exciting or terrifying to you? I think it's more exciting. The uncertainty exciting to you? Yes. In conversations in general or just this one? I think conversations in general. Like, is anybody like, oh, the certainty is really exciting? Maybe if the certainty is something new. I mean, novelty always comes with uncertainty, right? Almost always. I started trying to think of a counterexample. Immediately. Yeah. You're uncomfortable with generalizations of that kind. Like, always is always a really bold word to use. But if it's truly novel, that means you don't really understand it. It's outside your distribution. So therefore, it's going to have a bunch of uncertainty. But you don't think of it as uncertainty. You think about it as something new. But it actually also attracts you because there's a lot of uncertainty surrounding it, probably. Like, what is this new thing? Yeah. Like, annihilating the mystery. Like, that drive. What about the danger of it? I was just thinking of, on the drive over, because I was like, I'm a little nervous about doing this podcast. And then I was, like, feeling into the unpleasantness of it. Like, the fear of what if something goes terribly wrong. And then I was also feeling into, like, how much that feels like part of why it's exciting. Like, if I knew that it was going to go great, I don't know. Did you actually imagine all the possible ways it can go wrong? Not, like, all of them. But I was like, what if I say something really dumb? Or, like, you ask me a question and I answer it in a way that makes me sound, like, a lot less capable than I am. I'm, like, really afraid of being perceived as stupid or something. I was also thinking about this on the way over. Like, I'm kind of risk averse in some ways. Like, I don't like driving fast in cars because I was driving very carefully here because the roads are bad. Yeah. And then I was thinking, but I'm very, like, pro-risk in other ways, like, being really exposed to, like, a wide variety of people who might hate you. And I think, like, from the outside that might look fine. But I think the monkey brain is really sensitive to lots of people yelling at you for whatever problems that you seem to have. So that's the big risk you're taking is putting yourself out there as an intellectual, like, through your writing. And then a lot of people yelling at you. Is that the worst embarrassment you can experience? It's pretty bad, yeah. I think the worst embarrassment is if I put something out there that I failed to, like, be properly skeptical of in myself. And then people are, like, oh, we caught this thing that you didn't catch. I think that's the biggest terror. Yeah, from looking at your reading and listening to your interviews, you seem to be very defensive and worried about being a good scientist. Yeah, definitely. About your, like, methodology. Yes. And funny enough, you get attacked on that methodology. Even though, you know, I'm a fan of psychology, like, academic psychology. And it's kind of disappointing often how non-rigorous their work is, how small the sample size and so on. And how big and ambitious, over-ambitious the proclamations about results is. Especially when the news reports on it. Now, you're both the researcher, the scientist, and the reporter. Right? So, like, that's what you have with the blog. Your sample size is often gigantic. The methodology is right there. The data is right there. You provide the data. And then you're, like, raw and honest with your interpretation of the data. Like, there's an honesty, authenticity to it. So, I don't know. It's actually really refreshing. I don't know why people criticize it. I think this is what psychologists are probably terrified about being transparent. And transparent in that way is because they'll get attacked for their methodology. So, they want to cloak it in a, you know, sort of layer of authority. Like, I'm from this institution. It was peer-reviewed. There's kind of all these layers. And I'm also not going to share the data with you. And I'm also going to pretend, like, most psychology studies are not replicable. I'm just going to pretend there's authority to it. I think it works on a lot of people. Like, from the outside, you're, like, ah, the scientists with the white lab coats with credentials. Those are the people who are, like, doing science. And, like, doing science is, you know, you have, like, fancy terms that other people don't really understand. And to be fair, like, I have a lot to learn. I'm still, like, I'm self-teaching. I'm, like, learning through people. I'm learning as I go. I'm definitely not super knowledgeable about this stuff. But a lot of what those people are doing in science is not that hard. And a lot of people, like, don't try to learn it because it seems so, like, elevated. And this is one thing that really bothers me. I think, like, everybody can do science. Like, if you just have this aspect of curiosity and, like, you just really want to figure something out, you can go and start, you know, asking people questions, doing surveys, like, writing down the answers. And then you can go learn how to look at that data in a way that gives you more information about the world. Like, it's very simple and straightforward. If you just approach it humbly and earnestly, and you're, like, please, let's, like, let's figure this out together. But people, like, are, I think, self-crippled in this because they view this as, like, relegated to the domain of the experts and, you know, the fancy scientists. And I think that makes me feel really sad. You're almost attracted to the questions you're not supposed to ask. Oh, yeah. Also, yes. Which might contribute to the controversy. Not exclusively, probably. Oh, no. You're just not limited by, like, part of your curiosity is asking questions that seem common sense. Like, some of the most controversial questions are, like, around sex. It's, like, everybody thinks and talks and does sex. I mean, it's the driver of human civilization. And yet, there's so little, like, rigorous discussion about, like, the philosophical and the scientific questions around it. And it's, like, it gets really weird to be able to discuss them. And it becomes tricky to discuss them. Yeah, super charged. Super. Because everybody has a really strong opinion. Like, whether or not, you know, pornography is damaging to society or, like, how sex corresponds to gender. Or, like, what kind of sexuality is acceptable. Like, do, can you have sexual preferences that in themselves are immoral? People get very angry about it. Well, the sad part is they're not just opinionated. But most of us, our relationship with sex is, I think, I guess, I want to say not rigorous. I think it's very difficult to be rigorous about sex. Like, I would consider sexual urges to be kind of elusive to introspection in a way that's a little bit disproportionate to a lot of other things. Like, you could, like, you know, introspect about, you know, how I want other people to like me and how, where my insecurities lie. But sex is one of those black box things. A really common thing is for people to, if you have a fetish, you sort of check back in your childhood to see an event that corresponds to that fetish. And then you, like, develop a narrative. Like, ah, this event in my childhood must have caused this fetish. And so I think this causes people to be biased towards, like, a concrete, coherent, causative way that events happen. Or that sexual fetishes happen. This is just, like, one example of, like, why I think it's really hard to be rigorous with introspection. Because we can't avoid, you just want to tend towards making, like, coherent narratives. Which I think is not always the correct way to explain it. The narratives that are connected to childhood and so on. Yeah. How they originate. Yeah. You've, I mean, we'll talk about fetishes because you have a lot of really interesting writing on that. Just actually zooming out. I should mention, you tweeted, I wrote this down. You tweeted, I do not understand how to have normal conversations with people in person if I'm not on drugs. So I guess let's both agree to not have a normal conversation, I guess. Assuming you're not on drugs now. Or if you are, you don't have to tell. I feel like a very small amount of phenibut. Okay. Which is a nootropic. I don't know if that counts. Is that a drug? Well, I guess I'm on caffeine. Yeah. So we're both. Drugged up. Good enough to have a normal conversation. We don't have to. What is normal anyway? What do you think is the primary driver of human civilization? Is it the desire for sex, love, power, or immortality? Like avoiding the fear of death. Constructing illusions that make us forget about our terror over mortality. So sex, love, power, death. Is this a Twitter poll? There's four options. This is reality. Not everything maps perfectly to a Twitter poll. But in this case, because there's four options and it is a small number of characters, it does. But I'd like to think I'm more interested. You know what? I think your Twitter polls are fundamentally interesting. There's something about the brevity of a poll limiting to a set of choices and having an existential crisis and searching for the answer. That's beautiful. That combination. Well, this one is a big one. Like, what do you think is behind it? Do you believe that there is one primary driver? Like, do you think that it can be understood in the terms of primary drivers? Yeah, I think, well, maybe it's an engineering perspective, like trying to reverse engineer the brain. I don't think we're equipped or understanding enough about the mind to get there. Yeah, like, what's the primary driver of a tree? Yeah, well, then it gets to the question of what is life? What is a living organism? To self-replicate, probably. That's a very clean simplification. But I think life is more interesting than just self-replication. Yeah, but it sounds like there's a curiosity in you that you're trying to, like, poke at. And I don't understand exactly what that curiosity is. So if I had to dedicate a thousand years to understand one of these topics, which one would be the most fruitful, I guess, is the indirect thing I'm asking. No, well, fun. To me, everything is fun. Really? Yeah. I mean, I'm with David Foster Wallace. The key to life is to make sure that everything is unboreable or to be unboreable or nothing is boring. Everything is fun. Like everything. I could just literally sit. I honestly, because I don't think, I don't know where you got that glass, but that glass exists and I forgot it exists. It was really fun to me to know that now I was there. What about the really unpleasant things? Like if you're in, like, deep agony. Yeah, that's fun. Okay. That's fun. Because it's like, I mean, yeah, heartbreak. It's like knowing that I'm capable of that. It's like from, you know, we're all living in the gutter, but some of us are looking up at the stars. So when you're in that gutter, for some reason, the stars look brighter, right? Like, so like whenever you're going through a difficult time or whenever you see maybe other people being shitty to each other, it makes you like really appreciate when they're not. The contrast makes life kind of amazing. I'm reading a bunch of books. One of them is Brave New World, where they remove, you know, where they remove the ups and downs of life. Partially through drugs, but over sexualization and all that kind of stuff. And I feel like you need that, you need the ups and downs of life. The dark, you know, you need the dark to have happiness. Have like a deeply intense feeling of affection towards another thing or a human being. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So everything's fun. But fun is also a weird word to define. Because fun, I think for a lot of people, that's why I talk about love a lot. I think love is a better word than fun. Because fun is like lighthearted. Love is more intense. Like, I love that glass and the water that's in it. Because it's freaking awesome. Like somebody made that glass, right? And like not have many mistakes. And like there's a, and the way bends light in interesting ways. And the way water bends light in interesting ways. Like I can see part of your arm through that water. That's freaking amazing. Everything is amazing. I'm with the Lego movie. Anyway. If, but if like from a scientific perspective, if I were to investigate sex, I don't know why I put love in there. Let's just narrow it down in the Twitter poll. Let's focus on the basics here. Sex, power, or death, immortality. If I were to try to, like from a neuroscience, neurobiology perspective, or reverse engineer through building AI systems that focus on these kinds of dynamics. Exploring the game theoretic aspects of it. Exploring the sort of cognitive modeling aspects of it. Which one would get me to a deeper understanding of the human condition? That's the question. Sex. Okay. Nietzsche is the will to power. Freud and the bunch is all about sex. And then death, Liv just, Liv Burley, brilliant previous guest on this podcast, she just released a video where on her bedside was the book Denial of Death by Ernest Becker. Which of course she would have on her bedside. But that, his whole work is that everything is motivated by our trying to escape the cold, harsh reality that we're going to die and we're terrified of it. One of the gifts and burdens for human beings is that we are cognizant of our own death. And that terrifies us. That's the theory. And because of that, we do everything we can. We build empires to escape the fact that we're mortal. Wouldn't this change quite a bit for religious people then, who don't believe that they're going to die? Well, they created religion. The idea there is to create myths, religions. You can create religions of all kinds. Yeah. But if this is one of the defining things that defines civilization, then we should expect to see massive differences between people who believe we're going to die and people who don't. Good. I love it. You think it's scientifically here. And they have actually answers. There's a whole terror management theory where they do write psychology-type papers and they do actual experiments. I can mention how their methodology is interesting. They prime with the discussion of death. Like, they take one certain set of people and have a conversation with them. And another set of people, they mention death to them before the conversation and see how that affects the nature of the conversation. It's really interesting because death fundamentally alters the nature of the conversation. Just even priming. Like, reminding you that you're going to die briefly changes a lot of things. These kinds of priming papers are usually not replicated. I just have like, I feel like I've heard a bunch of priming ones that... I think you have PTSD over psychology papers and not replicated. I just did one, I just did a priming experiment on my own and found it didn't have any effect. But again... Can't you just give me a careless statement summarizing an entire scientific discipline of terror management theory? I don't know. I think people should... Like, I haven't rigorously looked at how good of it is psychologically. I think it is interesting philosophically, the way Freud talked about the subconscious mind. Philosophically, it's an interesting discussion. Then you have to get rigorous with it, for sure. But the idea is that... Like, it's not that religious people get rid of the terror of death. This is just one of the popular ways they create an illusion on top of it. That's that idea. Like, a myth that allows... That makes it easier for them to forget, to escape that terror. But everybody else does different methods. Like, you feel your days with... Like, capitalism has a whole religion of itself. Like, the rat race for getting more and more material possessions and so on. And couldn't you argue it in the opposite direction? Like, let's say, assume that we're Christians here. And we're like, ah, the atheists, you know, everybody has terror of hell. And the atheists invent this mythology where, you know, actually evolution is true in order to escape their terror of hell. So, that doesn't feel like a persuasive argument to me. But I used to be very, very Christian. And I did not have a terror of death. And then I lost my faith. And then I had a deep terror of death set in for a few years. And it felt very different to me. And so, for denial of death, I don't know if he says that it's actually possible without really a lot of work to get to the actual terror. Like, I think his claim is that in early, early, early childhood development, that's when the terror is real. And then we aggressively construct systems around it of social interaction to sort of construct illusions on top of it. I'm doing a half-ass description of this philosophy. But it is interesting to simplify the human mind into underlying mechanisms that drive it. Yeah, I was going to say, your thinking seems kind of poetic. Like, the way that you're sort of handling these concepts feel, like, more, like, aesthetically driven. I think this theme is going to continue throughout this conversation as we talk about relationships and sex. Yes. For sure. I think so. And I think your thinking seems to be very driven by how can I construct an experiment to test this hypothesis. Yeah. Something like that. Yeah, but aren't there some things, especially that have to do with the human mind, that are really messy, really difficult to understand. There's so many uncertainties and mysteries around that we don't yet have the tools to collect the data. Like, one of your favorite tools is the survey, is asking people questions. And then figuring out different ways to indirectly get at the truth, because there's flaws to the survey. You kind of learn about those flaws, and you get better and better at asking the right questions and so on. But that's not, that's indirect access to the human mind. But do you think, like, poetic narratives are? I'm not, like, saying poetic narratives are bad. Like, I think it's, like, a cool way of, like, handling concepts. But I'm not sure that they are more rigorous. No, no, no. Okay. No, but, like, they might be the more correct, like, philosophy might be the right way to discuss things that we're really far from understanding. Yeah, I mean, they might be more useful shorthand. Yeah. Like, morality. Like, I don't think morality makes any sense. But it's really useful shorthand to use when handling concepts a lot of the time. Right, like ethics and morality. You could construct studies that ask different questions. Like, you know, just having worked with autonomous vehicles a lot, the trolley problem gets brought up. And I don't know. You can construct all kinds of interesting surveys about the trolley problem. But does that really get at some deep moral calculus that humans do? It's sexy because people, like, write clickbait articles about it. But does it really get to, like, what you value more? Five grandmas or, like, three children? Whatever. Like, they construct these arguments of, like, if you could steer a train, if you could steer an autonomous car, which do you choose? Yeah. I don't know. I don't know if it's possible with some of those to construct it. Sometimes the fuzzy area, there's some topics that are fuzzy and will forever be fuzzy, given our limited cognitive capabilities. I don't know. There's a way of looking at things where it's like, for example, the childhood fetish thing that I was talking about. Like, where do your fetishes come from? Like, you can develop a narrative where it's like, you know, I think, like, this kind of thing is, you know, when you're surrounded by feet when you're a child, this causes foot fetishes. And this is, like, kind of a cool narrative. And I think a lot of people's ideas about philosophy follow the same sort of thing. Like, what is the narrative that is cool? And I think this is useful for meaning making. Like, I'm very pro-meaning making. Like, when you're talking about everything is fun because, you know, the contrast or whatever. I very much just ascribe to that. I really enjoy that philosophy. I also find everything to be very delightful. And this isn't, like, a question of truth, right? We're not, like, where is the true delight that we're objectively measuring? Like, this is a frame, a poetic frame that you're using to, like, sort of change the way the light hits the world around you. And that's super useful because it, like, makes you happier or something. Yeah, but also gets to the truth or something. Yeah, I guess what is the truth? Yet another question. What is truth? You've, actually, to jump back, you believe that free will is an illusion. So why does it feel like I'm free to make any decision I want? It's a cool illusion. I think that's probably, like, where our sense of identity comes from. It's a fun illusion. Oh. Like, when you really meditate on your sense of identity, at least for me, it seems like it comes down to the sense of choice. Like, oh, I am doing the thinking. Like, what does it mean to do with thinking? It's like, ah, something in me has exerted agency over having this thought or not having this thought. Like, the sense of self really comes down to choice. And so when I say that, like, free will is an illusion, I also mean there's something like the self is an illusion. Identity is a trick of the light. But it's a really fun one. Yeah. You think a lot about your identity. I have occasionally. Yeah. Like, you really struggle with it. You're proud of it. I do, too. It's not, we have different journeys, but. So. I really take a lot of delight in it. I used to be very into, like, deconstructing it. Like, maybe, you know, I did a bunch of, like, way too much LSD for a while. And at that point, very, no ego. And now I'm, like, very ego. And I really enjoy having a lot of ego. I actually happen to know, like, everything about you. Really? Yeah. Like, more than you do. It's interesting. That's fascinating. Wait, could you solve my problems? Yes, all of them. I did thorough research. Okay. What is consciousness, then? I actually wrote that as a quote. What is consciousness? To remind myself. So, like, how does that tie in together with free will and identity and all of that? What is consciousness is, like, one of the biggest questions ever. I think, I do think that people often get confused when talking about consciousness. Because I think people are referring to two separate concepts. And often, like, combining them into one thing. Like, we asked the question, you know, is AI going to be conscious? And I think this is kind of the wrong question. Like, we can identify signs of consciousness. Like, ah, they seem to refer to themselves. But this is not necessarily proof of consciousness. In the same way that, like, dream characters acting exactly the way normal human people do in your dream is not evidence that they themselves are conscious. So, like, signs of consciousness are not proof of consciousness. But there is something that we definitely know. Which is, like, I currently am conscious. I can tell. Because, right. Right. Like, I'm, like, just directly observing my experience. Yeah. And so, like, there's one kind of consciousness, which is I am directly observing my experience. And that, you cannot replicate it. Like, I cannot observe two experiences. It is necessarily singular. And it is necessarily certain. Like, you can make all the arguments you want. Like, I'm still directly observing. It's not a thing that's subject to reason. Whereas, are other things conscious? This is something that's replicable. Like, you can apply it to multiple people. It's something that's not certain. Like, almost definitionally not certain. Like, we don't actually know if there is, you know, an internal experience. So, my argument is that, like, when people are talking about other things having experience, they're using a different concept than the thing that they're actually looking at when they look at their own experience. I think they're two different things. Definitionally not possible. No. If you understand the mechanism of consciousness, you'll be able to measure it probably, right? Yeah. But what are you measuring? Like, I think there's just, like, a subtle difference. Like, when you're asking the question, is this other thing conscious? Yeah. The easy thing to measure is, like, a survey. Does this thing appear conscious? Yeah. Yeah. And then the hard thing is, you understand the actual mechanism of how consciousness arises in the physics of the human brain. Yeah, but you can do that in a dream, presumably. Like, if you had a very good dream or a very good simulation. Yeah. But we could then have somebody in a simulation or a dream where they go through and they fully understand, you know, they do all the tests and the tests come back exactly the way you'd expect them to. Yeah. But from the outside, we're like, well, this is misleading. They're not actually conscious. Like, your dream characters aren't conscious, right? Probably. I don't know. Are you asking? Are you telling? I'm, like, appealing to an intuition. But it sounds like you're driving towards a narrative. I don't... You did a poll about men and women and dreams. Yeah. There was some kind of difference. I couldn't tell what the difference was, except that more men and women... Quite a lot more women dream vividly than men. Oh. Which I actually found in my chaos survey. So I did a survey. Maybe you know that. I just had... I know everything. Do you remember? You know. Yes. I'm sorry. So as you clearly know. I'll try not to talk down to you through this conversation. I'm sorry. And I not only know everything, I know how your future looks like. Really? And how everything ends. Yeah. So you could probably win all the prediction markets on my life. Yeah. Cool. So we should also mention that you have, like, prediction markets. You have, like, votes. What's the site called again? Manifold. Manifold. And one of them was, will I be on the Lex Friedman podcast? Yeah. And I voted. I invested everything I owned into the yes. Is there such thing as insider trading on there? Because that goes against the terms of the... No. I think insider trading is part of the information. So it's supposed to be... And then I realized it's actually public information that I voted. Because, like, I think my face shows up there. It's like, damn it. It's going to influence... Make a fake account. You could make the fake account. Or I could be lying, right? Yeah, that's true. And then dump the stuff or whatever. You know, I try to manipulate... Somebody made a market, like, is Ayla going to post a poll, spelled P-O-L-E, on her Twitter, like a photo? And I was like, I'm going to manipulate this market. So I, like, fucked around with it. And I voted no. And then I accidentally posted a photo of a poll without thinking. Oh, but that's like self-sabotage. I accidentally fucked up my own market. That doesn't... That's like the reverse of insider trading. What were we talking about? Oh, the women and the men and the difference, the vivid dreams and the markets. I forget what the market... Oh, because I can perfectly predict your future. But then it's not fun. I like the romance of unpredictability. And so I like to... Even though I know everything, I like to forget everything. Yeah. Very Buddhist of you. Yeah. The river. No man in the river once, whatever. The footsteps, however that goes. One of my favorite questions is, like, if you could press a button and then have all of your wants fulfilled. Anything that you want. So it's like such a rapid degree that you don't really experience the want. Like, as the want arises, it then is, like, completed immediately so that you are completely without want. Like, would you press that button? 100% not. Yeah. I didn't think you would. No. No. No. No. Because immediately everything stops being fun. It's only fun the first time. But if you want it to be fun. But, like, what would be my source of fun? I feel like I would, like, on day four, just to get off, I would need to, like, do, like, nuclear war. Because it will escalate quickly. I feel like if everything is possible. I assume you mean, like, something that, like, is not just normal human things. Yeah. Magical world. Magical world. And you start escalating really quickly. Like, I wonder, I'll probably do, like, I want everybody to just fly into the air and hover in the air. Mm-hmm. That'd be cool. Everybody. And then you're like, oh, life is meaningless. Like, why does, like, you go, I feel like you get, no, I, actually, that'd be a really interesting experiment. Like, what are the limits? Like, are we all capable of becoming psychopaths, essentially? Like, I'd like to believe not. There's very hard limits on that, like, in our own mind, like, of basic compassion. Because I love being compassionate towards other human beings. And it's one of the things I think about, if you give me power, like, a lot of power, like, absolute power. And I think that's the power you mentioned is the scariest kind of power. Because it's like, it's not even power in this normal world. It's like magical power, where you lose, it's like dream world power, where you, like, video game power. You don't even think of it as reality. You could just mess with the world. And I feel like that's terrifying. Yeah, you'd basically be God. God, yeah. But without, like, I feel like the idea of God wants to, like, keep things, like, functioning properly. But then you'd probably, if you wanted to keep them functioning properly, then it would rapidly. Like, you would never experience a time where you're like, oh, no, that was a mistake. Because as soon as you, like, before you even experienced that, the world would shift to match it. Oh, interesting. No, I think I would actually, I take it back. I think I would regret the first time I hurt somebody. See, in my visualization, it was like a video game, where everybody's like, NPC, really dumb. No, I think the first time I witnessed pain from anybody, that's when I would stop. And I would probably run into that very quickly. Like, even just the hovering. Make a person hover, and they're going to be probably really upset with the hovering, right? And so I'm going to be like, no, don't do that anymore. And then I'll probably go to, honestly, I'll just return back to my normal life. Yeah, that's kind of what I feel like. Like, if I had the power to do anything, I think I would probably want to have a life very similar to where I am now. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's like with Uber, like, it'd be probably more convenient to do certain things. But even then, like, the struggle. Like, I got a flat tire, so I have to fix that. I kind of, the flat tire makes everything more beautiful. It's like, cool. I could do, like, a normal manual thing. But also, it makes you, like, appreciate your car, appreciate transportation, appreciate the convenience of transportation. All of it. I know some people who would, like, call this a bunch of copium. Like, you're just sort of making do with what you have. Like, we wouldn't go back to Amish times or, like, pre-technology because to, like, in order to make ourselves appreciate things more. And so this seems like a hindsight reasoning, which, like, I can appreciate that argument. But I don't know. I'm like, I can't. Anyone who uses, sorry to interrupt the word copium in their argumentation, I think is sus. Is sus? Is sus? Yeah. Is sus my entire argument in this now? No, I'm just kidding. I'm sorry. Go ahead. Sorry. I interrupted rudely the flow of thought. But you, so you don't think so? In part, you disagree with that kind of argument? Yeah. Because I think people have this idea that if you, like, come to accept or, like, find meaning in what you have now, this is sort of at odds with trying to improve it. And I don't find this to be the case. I find, like, the attempt to improve it to also be part of it. Yes. Like, I enjoy the fact that there's something, like, problematic going on because now I get the experience of, like, striving to make it go away. And, like, that in itself is where the meaning lies. It's not just that things are bad. It's that there's things are bad and we're trying to stop it. And also. Exactly. Mm-hmm. Exactly. There's. If you combine that with a sense of optimism that the future can be better, yeah, that feeds into this productive effort of making things better. And it somehow makes the vision of the things that are better more intense. Having experienced shitty things. Yeah. Yeah. So we talked about free will and consciousness and what drives human civilization. Question left unanswered. It's a homework problem for the reader. Okay. Let's. I get, like, a scoreboard at the end, the amount of questions. The answer. Completely successfully versus not. Like, polls. Yeah. Can we talk about some practical things? Sure. So one of the many amazing things, I think of you as a researcher, but you've also been doing research in the field. Yeah. Fieldwork. Fieldwork. The Jane Goodall of. Yeah. Sex work. How did you get, what's the short and the long story of how you got into sex work? How did I get into sex work? Well, I mean, there's a whole, like, childhood thing where I was conservatively homeschooled. Do you want to actually talk about your childhood? I think it's interesting because you also worked at a factory. It's like your childhood is really fascinating and difficult, traumatic. So, and you've written about it. There's a lot of ways we could talk about it. But maybe, what are the things you remember, the good and the bad of your childhood, of your, maybe, interaction with your father? Yeah. My dad probably has narcissistic personality disorder. And so it was very centered on very controlling childhood. Immensely so. We were homeschooled and pretty isolated from the outside world. Like, we didn't know anybody else who wasn't homeschooled. We went through a program called Growing Kids God's Way, which was very, it was like the kind of program where you're not supposed to pick up babies when they cry to train them that they can't manipulate the parents. Because, like, baby crying was viewed as, like, you're just teaching them from an early age that they're allowed to make the parents do what the kids want. Yeah. And we were very against this philosophy. So, you know, that combined with a narcissistic personality disorder, dad was pretty rough. So controlling? Super controlling, yeah. And developing and feeding the self-critical aspect of your brain? Yeah, very much. It was, you know, I was, like, lazy. I was never going to accomplish anything in life. I was going to move out of the house and realize how good I had it at home, you know, the classic stuff. He was very, like, logical and smart, though. And so he'd also, like, teach us logic stuff. I remember some of my earliest memories are him, like, giving me basic logic puzzles. Like, the dog has three legs. You know, how many dogs have four legs? And I would mess up. But he was an evangelist, basically, a Christian evangelist. So we did, like, Bible study five nights a week. I memorized, I think, 800 verses of the Bible by the time before I became an adult. Yeah, and it was very patriarchal also. So I was expected to grow up and become a housewife, basically. They're like, oh, you can go to college to meet a man and also to get a little bit of education so that you can homeschool your own kids. Like, we were explicitly told that women were subordinate to men in regards to, like, making decisions when you're married. Our pastor's daughter was not allowed to leave home because she would be outside of the authority of a man. So when she got married, she was allowed to leave because she was never allowed to live in a house where she was not under a hierarchy. So this is, like, the kind of culture that we live in. So there's a hierarchy and there's a gender aspect to the hierarchy. There's men at the top of that hierarchy. Men at the top. Okay, but your own psychology, your own mind. So most of that self-critical brain is bad, right? It's confusing because he told me that I was smart, but also that I would fail. But not smart enough, right? Like, smart, but not smart enough. Smart, but, like, not virtuous or something. Okay, right. There's always a flaw. Yeah, there's always a flaw. I think a lot of it was, a lot of the fucked upness of my brain came from feeling like I didn't have the authority to think because it was so, like, carefully, like, suppressed. Like, my ability to, like, express or have any sort of power was just absolutely annihilated. Like, systemically, like, psychologically, they would do, like, psychological torture mechanisms to make sure that, like, I wasn't actually thinking on my own. Or, like, being able to deviate from anything anybody ever told me. To the degree that it still ingrained in me. Like, I once was a friend, we were traveling, and he wanted me to hop a turnstile. It was, like, very late at night. The train was here, and I could not physically force myself to do it. Like, he was, like, yelling at me, like, come on, do it. Like, no, I was trying so hard to make my body cross the line, and it was just, it's, like, embedded in my physical being to, like, be unable to do stuff like that, which is really annoying. So you're not free to take action in this world? Yeah, some of them. So that was, I think, the most annoying part of my upbringing. Would you classify it as, like, suffering? At the time, yeah, definitely. Well, it's confusing, because, like, when I was a child, it was just painful in the sense that, like, things suck. But it was placed in a meaning framework, right? Like, it is good, it is virtuous to submit to your parents and do what they want. If they tell you to say goodbye to your best friend forever and never talk to them again, you go do that without complaining. And so, like, I would go do something like that, and I would, like, it would suck. It really was, like, concretely painful, but it was also placed in this narrative where I was, like, fulfilling some sort of greater purpose. True. Yeah. And so it's very confusing to refer to it as suffering, because there's so many painful things we do today that are placed in the narrative of a greater purpose that, like, I think I would agree with. Like, I go get a medical procedure done, and that sucks, but I'm like, ah, this is helping me in the long run. But, like, say if I got abducted to an alien planet, and they're like, by the way, all of those medical procedures you got done, like, you didn't have to get them done. Those are totally unnecessary. Then I might get really upset about it. Yeah. I would trust those aliens, though, because they probably want to do different medical procedures. This is true. I saw a thumbnail for a video that I'm proud of myself for not clicking on about a man who has claimed that he had sex with aliens. Proud of yourself for not clicking on that? Because I would probably watch it for, like, 20 minutes, and then I should be doing work. Oh, I see. So, like, I – and I'm actually happy, because I get to imagine all the different possibilities that could have been for that man who had sex with aliens. Do you have, like, a really high, like, resting happiness state? Yes, yeah. Probably, like, a mushroom state, yeah. Wow. Do you do mushrooms? I've done mushrooms before. It was very awesome. Oh. Like, more intensely awesome. But, like, because I was just looking at nature, it makes nature even more beautiful, I think. But it's already pretty beautiful. I haven't done MDMA. People say that I should. It's very nice, yeah. Yeah. Anyway, but I'm already – yeah. What did you call it? Resting happiness state? Yeah, high resting happiness. Yeah, that's a good way to describe it. But it's not, like – some of it is genetic, that you're able to notice the beauty in the world, and some of it is practiced, where you realize focusing on the negative things in life, like, unproductively is – it just doesn't help your mind flourish. So, like, you just notice that, and it's, like – I mean, I think people with, like, depression learn that. Or, like, probably with trauma, too, is, like, there's certain triggers. Like, if you're – if you suffer from depression, you have to kind of constantly know there's going to be triggers that will, like, force you to spiral down. And so just avoid those triggers. Some people have that with diet, with food, and so on. And so I just don't, like – whenever there's shady things happening or shady people, unless I can help, unless I can somehow help, like, why focus on it? Yeah. Anyway, back to your upbringing. What was the journey of escaping that? I – well, I left home, like, kind of early, because my dad and I were not getting along by the time I was a teenager. But I was still Christian for a while. And I lost my faith after, I think, I moved away, and I started having friends that weren't religious or, like, weren't raised in the super conservative environment that I came from. And I think – this was not conscious at the time. This is my hindsight story. But I believe that, like, being exposed to a culture in which I had the capacity to believe, like, allowed my brain to actually seriously consider the thought that maybe all of this stuff was untrue. That I had been taught, like, 6,000-year-old Earth and evolution is a lie, you know, macroevolution and all of this stuff. Because, like, when you're immersed in an environment like that, I don't think you actually have a choice. Like, your brain has to believe these things because this is a survival thing. Like, if you believe this, you'll be – like, if you believe the wrong thing, you'll be totally cast out. Even if they're not going to cast you out, you're going to be cast out in, like, communion with others. Because we were always told that you can't, like, trust nonbelievers, really. They don't have a moral compass. They're going to screw you over. And so I'm like, oh, I can't be that. Like, everybody's going to outcast me internally. So anyway, I wasn't – I don't think I actually had the capacity to seriously question my faith, even though I thought that I was questioning it quite hard, until I got into an environment where it was safe to do so. And once I started being able to make friends who were not religious, I'm like, oh, if I lose my faith, I'm still going to have some sort of community. And then at that time, I went through some questioning, and then I lost my faith. So in that, given your friends, given your situation, you now have the freedom to think, essentially. Or at least the ability to think of something that was acceptable in the new culture, yeah. Without – I mean, is there a danger of, like, adopting the beliefs of the new culture? So, like, there's some aspect of just being able to think freely, which you weren't able to do when you were growing up. Just to think. Like, look at the world and wonder how it works. That kind of thing. I mean, you work it within certain boundaries. Like, there are certain basic assumptions. And as long as you were following those basic assumptions. Which is, to be fair, it's like kind of what we're doing now. Like, we have – have I gone and done the personal research that, like, evolution is the thing that's going on? Have I looked at, like, the age of the stones? No, I haven't. I'm trusting other people. Yeah. Which I think is, like, a fair choice to make, given where I'm at right now. But you're also assuming, like, there's causality in the universe. Time is real. Yeah. That, like, that first of all, the thing that your senses are perceiving is real. You're assuming a lot of things. Yeah. Yeah. I think, like, it's better just to become aware of the assumptions you're making. Like, as opposed to not making those assumptions at all. Like, you have to assume something. And I did – it's very suspicious, right, that I went out of this very conservative culture. And now – well, I guess I don't believe things that are super in line with the current culture. I think this is why I feel a little bit safer right now. Because, like, when I was Christian, I believed generally in Christian things. But now I believe a bunch of things that, like, people really hate. Like, I get canceled online all the time. I'm like, okay, this is a sign that maybe you're thinking independently. If you're, like, able to think things that are completely at odds with the people around you. And to be fair, this is a little bit easier to do when it's, like, general culture. But it's much harder to do with your peer group. Like, the people that you trust, your friends, the people whose opinions you respect. Like, disagreeing with those people is very difficult and I'm not very good at it. Yeah. I do think that if you establish yourself as a person who can be trusted and is a good human being, you have a lot more freedom to then explore ideas that are different from your peer group. So, like, those seem, like, if you separate the space of ideas versus some kind of, like, deeper sense of what this person is. Like, that they're an interesting and trustworthy and good human being. Well, like, is there somebody that you respect who you consider significantly smarter than you? And can you imagine believing an idea that you've heard them talk really disdainfully about? Like, how would you feel coming to me, like, I believe this thing that you find to be? Yeah, I do all the time. Oh, yeah? Yeah. You may be braver than me. And to be fair, I support doing this. Like, I try to do this. But I think, like, subconsciously, I notice that I don't do it as much. And so, I'm suspicious of myself. I'm like, oh, I wonder if I'm hiding to myself, like, actual curiosity about things that might deviate from my peer group. Because I notice that I'm not actually deviating with them as much as I do with the outside world. Yeah, that's interesting. I mean, like, because I do see most people I interact with are smarter than me. But I also have this intuitive feeling that dumb people, which I consider myself being, have wisdom. So, like, in the disagreement. Actually, I also believe in the power of conversation and in the tension of disagreement. So, I think even just disagreeing from a place, from a good place, from a place of, like, love and respect for each other, I think I just believe in that. So, it's not like individuals you're disagreeing. You're, like, working towards arriving at some deeper truth together, right? Even if the other person is smarter. Maybe that's how I justify it for myself. I just, I'm also a fan of conversations because, like, I've seen, just listening to conversations, it seems like a great conversation more emerges from it than the sum of its parts, right? Like, somehow two people together can do, like, that dance of ideas can somehow create a cool thing. By the way, I enjoyed, I saw a video of you dancing at a bar drunk. It wasn't the bar drunk. It didn't look drunk. But just the dancing. It was, like, ballroom dancing type of thing. Yeah. Yeah. Something like that. I've been doing a bit of tango dancing. I like it. Argentine? Mm-hmm. Nice. I like stuff with the body in general, like, like, wrestling or combat. Like, usually when there's a tension, you have to understand the mechanics of how two bodies move when they're in conflict. And dancing is similar. Like, you have to do, like, rapid thinking also. Like, rapid intuitive physical thinking. And that's my favorite kind of thing. Like, a lot of exercise is really boring to me because you can just do it while your brain's off. But something like ballroom dancing or fusion dancing, like, you have to constantly be, like, figuring out. Like, it's a rapid puzzle. And that's so wonderful. What's fusion dancing? That's the video. Fusion dancing is, like, if you have any sort of dance background, you can come and you just kind of mix those together. Oh, you just kind of improvise. So you can have, like, people doing ballet with people doing ballroom with people doing blues. Cool. And then there's an interesting dynamic because there's, I don't know, maybe you can correct me, but there's, that's very meta. There's usually a lead and a follow. I guess most dancers have that. Yeah. Yeah. And so that, but both have a different, like, you both have to be quite sensitive to the other human being, but in a different way. Yeah. It's interesting. Yeah. So I like both that there is that definitive role. But also, like, it's not somehow that one is better than the other. There's an interesting tension between the two. Yeah. Yeah. It's good because it's like a basic rule set that allows for a ton of expression. I've recently started to experiment with, like, reverse leading. It's not, like, back leading. It's, like, I don't know. Like, sometimes I'll, like, lead a move. So you can lead as a follow. Oh, you can lead. When I'm typically following, I'll, like, occasionally throw in a little lead here and there. But don't you kind of follow it? Oh, I see. Don't you hint at a lead when you're following? Like, don't you, just by the dynamics of your movement, you're not perfectly following. I mean, because there is, like, the lead is listening to your body, right? Yeah. So, like, you're kind of both figuring out what you do next. That's true. I'm a very good follow, though. Okay. So I'm, like, I'm an invisible follow. You do a move, it's like a... Oh, interesting. I'm not, like, good at technique. I didn't know those existed. Like, a perfect follow. Oh, yeah, perfect. So you can perfect follow. I'm really ideal. I'm not great at technique and sometimes I'll follow over. But, like, with the following part, I'm very good at it. Do you enjoy following? Yeah, yeah. It's really nice. Again, like, it's a very fast physical puzzle you have to solve. It's like typing. I really like typing. That's why I was inquiring about your keyboard earlier. Why do you like typing? Because it's, like, the very fast, like, the really rapid response. What's the reaction time? I like things that, like, have very fast reaction times. Like, games like that. Yeah. But typing is not a reaction. Or is it the brain generating words? And then you're, like, how's typing a reaction? Well, okay, the sensation that I get when I am typing is the kind of thing that I'm trying to point out. So maybe reaction time isn't the quite... I don't know what the term is. But whatever that thing is. Like, the thing where you have to, like, look at a word and then communicate it into your fingers. Yeah. It feels like dancing. Like, you're responding. You're responding to your brain. Your fingers are doing the responding to the brain that generated the words. Yeah. Making your body do what your brain wants it to do, but, like, fast and precisely. Well, then you might not like this Kinesis keyboard, because it makes the... It makes it easier to do that. You probably like the struggle. Right? No. Well, I mean, it looks hard, because you have... It looks like it's high depression on the keys. No. It's... Well... Oh, I see. Yes. More than, like, a laptop keyboard. But, like... That you don't have to... One of the main things is you don't have to move your fingers at all. So, like... So, like, for example, a lot of people that... I think they have a backspace up in the top right corner. Yeah. So, if you have to make mistakes, which is, like... I mean, that's, like, so metaphorical. Like, every mistake you have to, like, really hurt yourself for. You have to, like, stretch for the backspace. So, there's that poetic narrative again. It's everywhere. It emanates... It emanates... Like, a lot of your perspective. Everything. Yeah. No. Um... Yeah. I don't... And I see it as a good thing. It's a good... Like, a romantic element permeates my interpretation of the world. Yes. But you left home early. Mm-hmm. How did you end up working at a factory? Well, I tried to go to college, but it failed. Couldn't afford it. Did you like it? I remember it just being really slow. I remember being shocked that the teachers didn't care. Like, I was used to homeschooling. Yeah. And where... I don't know. Like, educate... It just, like, meant something... It felt like the people around me that were teaching me, because we had, like, a mom's group also, like, directly cared about what I was learning. And I would be able to ask questions, and they would, like, really respond. What's a mom's group? And it was, like, homeschooling groups where a bunch of moms who were homeschooling their kids get together and then teach each other's kids. Oh, cool. Yeah. And they have different, like, interests and capabilities and so on, and they kind of... And sometimes if some of the kids are really good at something, you have, like, the older kids teaching the other ones, too. So it was very, like, everybody kind of figures out what they're good at, and they share that skill set with everybody else, which I think was a pretty great setup. Honestly, I think my childhood kind of sucked in a lot of ways, but homeschooling was excellent for me. Mainly because it just had so much free time. Like, I just did, like, two to three hours of school and then did whatever the fuck I wanted for the rest of the day. And I got to actually pursue skills that are still useful for me to this day, so... Even in that constrained environment? Mm-hmm. Like, I wrote... I've read fantasy books, and I wrote so much. And now I'm writing a lot on my blog, so... What kind of fantasy books? Like, sci-fi type stuff? Like, classic. Like, I read, like, Mercedes Lackey and the E.E. Knight and Ursula Le Guin and... I don't know any of this. What is this? What is it? Is it, like, a romantic thing? Or is it, like, is it romance? Just all the fantasy books. Like, dragons and elves. Oh, dragons. Got it, got it, got it, got it. You didn't mention Tolkien for the fantasy. I read Tolkien. Okay. Yeah. All right. Well, it's beautiful. So, you threw all the dragons. How did you end up in a factory? You tried school. Yeah, yeah. I tried school. Had to drop off a couple months, and then I was like, well, I'm poor, and... I was ready to take any job. I was, like, applying for sewer jobs, and then I got a factory. I'm like, oh, let's do it. Because my parents know no financial help at all. They're like, you pull yourself up by your own bootstraps, you know? So, anyway, I went to work at a factory, and that sucks ass. Do not recommend. We had to wake up, like, 4 a.m., you know, work on weekends, too. fluorescent lights. It was terrible. And so, I did that for about a year, and I was like, this is... I was trying to grip my teeth and be like, this is my life, right? I didn't have high expectations for my life. I was just like... I thought, like, if you get a job where you don't have to be on your feet all the time, that you're living a good life. But... And then I got another job briefly as a photographer, and then they fired me. I think I was 19 at the time. Fired you for, like... I was just too young. And really, really bad at interacting with people in the outside world. Like, I was pretty well socialized as a homeschooler with other homeschoolers. But in the outside world, especially with all of the, like, hierarchy submission stuff beaten into me, like, literally beaten into me, it was very difficult for me to interact with other people who were, like, older than me or had any sort of confidence at all. So, they hired me to do, like, photography for people, and then I was... Rapidly turned out that I was bad at this, and so they fired me. But at that point, I'd left my factory job. I'm like, I can't go back to the factory. So, I tried... I had some savings, and I slept on friends' couches, and I tried various self-employment stuff. I'm like, oh, maybe I can do product photography or something. But it's Idaho, you know? Nothing... And if you're, like, a 19-year-old with no experience in the outside world at all, it was really difficult. And so, I had a friend recommend that I try becoming a cam girl. So, that's how it started. What's... What is camming? What is being a cam girl? What's that about? Camming is, like, you talk to the camera live on the computer, like, you live stream. It's kind of like Twitch. And then people are typing in the chat, like, hi, I do this stuff. And then the people can tip you money, and then you can do things in response. Like, oh, if you tip me 100 tokens, you know, I'll take my shirt off, or something like that. And, like, what's the... What site were you using at that time? MyFreeCams. MyFreeCams? Yeah. Is that a popular site? Yeah, it's pretty popular. Okay. And how did... What were the next steps? Like, did you enjoy it? Oh, well, it was the first time I had actual control over my life. And I made, like, actual real money. And so, I just exploded into it. I thought about it nonstop. I was streaming all the time. I was, like, coming up with, like, new creative things. And the thing is, like, I don't know. There's something about public school that... I ended up living in a house of cam girls full of other girls who had gone to public school. And I don't know how much of it's genetic, or, like, just because I'm weird, or is it because of our upbringing. But I felt like I was much more fearless and much more weird and creative online than other people were. Not because they weren't awesome people, but because I think, like, public school... I got the impression, based on them talking about it, that it sort of, like, beats out any sort of deviance from you. Like... More so than your... Because I got the... We had moral deviance was beaten out. But, like, you could do whatever... Creative deviance was not... Creative deviance wasn't so much. Like, I didn't have other kids making fun of me ever. I didn't... I don't think I'd ever heard an insult about my physical appearance as a child or teenager once. So, your father was basically saying you're not good enough was intellectual. Oh, no. That was, like, a moral failing. Moral failing. Yeah. Like, I was not virtuous. Oh, wow. Like, in various ways. Like, you know, like, you're lazy and... Sure. Mostly the lazy part. Lazy. I have, like, ADHD or something. Yeah. And it was... I was not good at it as a kid either. I would totally forget all the time. Is there some sexual repression aspect to that? Like, you know how they say that there's... It's not just homeschooling, but just, like, Catholic girls and so on. Just because, like, there's moral... You're forbidden to do certain things. Like, there's a kind of liberating feeling of saying, like, basically rediscovering yourself, rediscovering your freedom by doing... Just diving head in, head first into sexuality, interior on sexuality. Yeah. Is there some aspect to that? Yeah. Absolutely, to some degree. I think that, like, people kind of model it slightly wrong. Like, I think there's a truth to it. But when I first got out of the house, for me, freedom was, like, going outside at 2am. Yeah. Or, like, eating chocolate. Yeah. You know, on days that I previously wasn't allowed to eat chocolate. Like, that was, like, a really intense expression of rebellion for me. And I think people, like, don't think of this. Like, I got out a lot of my, like, intense rebellion through things that people don't typically consider to be rebellious at all. Sure. Like, I wore a bikini. Yeah. Insane. I just, like, walked around in it and, like, I can do this. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. And so, like, this was most of that emotional processing for me. And it took me a couple years from leaving home and all of that conservative culture into doing sex work. In the meantime, I was, I did try having sex with a lot of people. But this was mainly because I didn't know what the norms were. I didn't really understand. I was just like, okay, take things logically. Take things one step at a time. And I'm like, okay, if the whole previous set about, like, how I'm not supposed to kiss somebody until the altar of marriage, if that's not the way that things are supposed to go, then what is the way things are supposed to go? And I was like, well, if I am aroused, I should go have sex with someone, right? Is there any reason not to? No. So I went, I just, I would go around asking random people to have sex with me. Did you have any peer pressure saying, like, that's not good or that is good? Or, like, any, did you feel any currents of society in any direction? Or were you independently just thinking, like, from first principles? I think, I mean, like, I'm not saying it was a totally clean thing. I'm sure that I was experiencing society telling me this is bad. But you have to know, like, I wasn't watching normal movies when I was a teen. Like, we watched Christian movies. The stuff that we watched was filtered. Like, I watched the Titanic and I had no idea that Jack and Rose had sex because it was put through a filtered. Wait, did they? Yeah, they went and, you know, he painted her naked. Yeah, yeah. There was a scene in a car on the ship. In a car? Oh, in the ship. Yeah, on the, they had, like, cars in storage and there's a hand. I watched it again later. And I was like, oh my God. I don't remember the sex scene. Well, maybe were you also put through a filtered version? Maybe it's the filter I see, like, did the couple in the notebook also have sex? Because maybe for romantic movies, I focus on the romance. Maybe, right? And the sex scenes are always, like, weirdly filmed in these. Yeah. Because it's never, I mean, it doesn't, it feels more like romance than sex. I guess that's the main focus of this, right? Yeah, yeah, that makes sense. Yeah, anyway. So they had sex. It's good to know now. They did. I'll go back and watch now. You have your own personal filter on your brain. And once you realize that there are some, like, the foundation of your beliefs were wrong, then everything might be wrong. And you're kind of just doing first principles. Yeah, first principles, basically. And again, like, not totally separate from culture. But also, I think in general, I also have a predisposition to just be like, you know, fuck what culture tells you. Just figure out what's right for you and do it. And so that mixed with, you know, the figuring things out from first principles. I did eventually figure out that I didn't like having casual sex with just anybody quite as much. So I stopped that. But it took me a while to figure that out. What's the negative of casual sex? It's just, like, not good. I mean, if you, like, figure out the chemistry you have with someone better, then it can be a lot nicer. But I wasn't doing that. I was just, like, somebody I met. And I'm like, you seem kind of cute. Okay. Like, I didn't bother to try and develop any chemistry. I mean, I didn't know. Chemistry even outside of sex. Just chemistry, like human chemistry. Yeah, just basic. Conversation. Yeah. Okay. I would, I would, it's, like, kind of cringy. But I would, like, I would, like, walk up to guys or send them messages. Like, would you like to have coitus? That's what I would say. You would say coitus. I said that. I mean, it's kind of, it's kind of cute in a way. I mean, it's a girl asking you to get laid. So they probably didn't care that much. But anyway, I'm saying that, like, I had a lot of rebellion out of my system by the time I started sex work. Yeah. So, like, for me, like, maybe, I'm sure it was somehow related. Because we were extremely sexually repressed growing up. I remember the day I learned I had a vagina. Which was absolutely horrifying. Do not recommend figuring out you have another orifice in your body. But, like... Do you want to share the process of you figuring out that you had a vagina? They told me I had a vagina. Oh, like, intellectually. Like, there was somebody said you have a vagina. You have a vagina, yeah. And that was horrifying to you. Yeah. I didn't know I had... Because you weren't supposed to ever, like, touch or look at yourself ever. So I never did. It was really disgusting. And so I had no idea that what was going on in my genital region. And so one day my mom sat me down. I think it was, like, nine or ten. And she was like, you have a... There's another? What? And you're going to bleed out of it, is what she told me. Well... You're going to bleed out of it for a while. And I was like, what the fuck, mom? I didn't know what the word fuck was. But I would have said that if I had known. When did you first learn the word fuck? Oh, I think I learned it when I was at a playground. And it was written somewhere. And I read it out loud. And then a kid next to me started giggling. Did you ever... Did you say fuck again for a while? No. I think the next time I said... I swore the first time when I was 18. Like, intentionally said a swear word when I was 18. Did you feel good? I was, like, really nervous. I was, like, nervous. What's your favorite swear word? I mean, fuck's pretty good. Yeah, fuck's pretty good. Yeah. Okay. So that's camming. I mean, what are the pros and cons of camming? And how does OnlyFans map into this? Did you switch to OnlyFans at some point? I did, yeah. I came for, like, five or six years. And I burned out eventually. What are the good aspects? What are the bad aspects of camming? Well, the good aspects were that it was just your own terms. You get to decide. Everything about it is under your control, which I loved at the time. I was, like, I can work when I want, how I want, any sort of expression. I experimented. And I was very successful. I was making around $200 an hour, which for that website at the time was, like, pretty good. I had elaborate routines. I was a mime. I would do, like, dress up as a mime and then dress up a chair. And I would seduce the chair. Oh, cool. Yeah. Or, like... So it was... Was there an artistic element to it almost? Yeah, very much. I had, like, gnomes. Did you talk to the chair? You had gnomes? No, I was a mime. You don't... Oh, sorry. Right. Yeah, get it straight, dude. Lisa, you know what I really appreciate about you is I'm asking some really dumb questions and you're answering it in a very intelligent way, so I appreciate that. All right. Did you ask the chair questions? I was a mime, you fucking idiot. Okay, I'm sorry. It's true. But there's gnomes on the... Yeah, there are gnomes. Like, big gnomes or small gnomes? Like, lawn gnomes. Lawn gnomes. And you seduce the lawn gnome on the chair? The gnome is sitting on the chair? There were some, yeah, gnomes on the chair. I did a photo set, which I submitted to Reddit, where I got abducted. I was, like, stripping, taking my clothes off, and then slowly the gnomes surrounded me in the background and then dragged me off. And I did this as a photo set. Consensually? I mean, I didn't feel consensual in the photos, but... Okay. But it was the 11th top post of the gnomes. It was very successful on Reddit, basically. It was a top post of Gone Wild and 11th top post of all time on Reddit. Which I think probably just means it's artistic, it's interesting, it's edgy, it's funny, so it's really, really well done. But it was really shocking to me that nobody else was doing anything creative with sex work. Like, for me, it was, like, breathing. Like, you're just doing sex and you're bored. I'm like, what do you do? I don't know, let's try something funny. Like, it's just the natural progression. And it felt to me like there was almost no competition. Like, I would just be really creative and, like, immediately was the top not-safe-work post on Reddit. Like, I didn't even try that hard. And so it's really shocking to me that other women who are doing this sort of thing... Is that still a little bit of the case? Like, that there's not as much, like, because I, from my sort of... Outside of perspective, that seems to be still the case. Like, there's not... Like, as you describe it, that's kind of cool. That's, like, almost like playing... Like, having fun with sexuality, almost. Yeah. And... Yeah, but that does require kind of thinking through... It's almost like a creative project. Like a photography project or something like that. Almost like a little skit movie. It's interesting. It's this vibe of, like, how can you, like, bring, like, vibrant novelty to whatever you're doing, anything you're doing. Yeah. And I really like doing this with surveys, too. Like, I've been doing a lot of standard surveys, but I'm also, like, experimenting with novel creative artistic surveys. I'm like, how do you ask a question in a way that's, like, beautiful and unusual and, like, a thing that's completely groundbreaking? Like, nobody's ever, like... You always make everything so poetic and romantic. It's disgusting. No. But, yes, I think you have that engine in your head, I guess, of creativity. Like, yeah, the way you ask questions is not trivial to do. Like, for... It's actually very difficult to do, like, good survey questions. And, I mean, we're joking, but, like, yeah, almost, like, poetic. Because you have to ask a question in a way that doesn't lead to the answer. Yes. Like, you have to kind of inspire them to think and then indirectly get at the truth. Right. It's just very... It's an art form, honestly. Yeah, and also in a way where they don't misinterpret the question because it's amazing how you... Any question you think, oh, this is the clearest question possible. No, you're wrong. It has to be even clearer. Right. Willingly or unwillingly. Because, like, you also have to defend against that question being criticized later when you publish about it. All of that. You have to think about it all. I think this might be my greatest strength. So, I'm not very good at statistics. I'm not, like, great at presenting data. But I think probably my greatest strength is, in fact, survey design and, like, question phrasing. Because I have tweeted so many thousands of polls. And every single one, I get people telling me, like, the way that they misinterpreted the poll. So, it's like... You've become a master. ...gone through fire. And then, again, I'm testing the phrasings all the time. Like, what happens if you slightly shift phrasings? And so, I'll do the same question test over time to see how it changes and the way the framing affects the results. So, the good and the bad of the camming. So, you said good, the... What was it? I forgot. You said... The freedom. Yeah. The freedom to be... Also, be creative. Yeah. And the bad is just... It was exhausting. The site that I was on, the way that it's structured, is that you're ranking on the site and thus the amount of people that see you, and thus the amount of money you earn, is affected by the amount of money that you earn, on average, over the last 60 days. So, if you're streaming and nobody's tipping you, this means that you're going to be dropping down in the rankings, which is going to make it harder in the future. Okay. So, the rich get richer on that site. Yeah. So, it's very high pressure. Like, if you're on, you need to be making money as fast as you can, if you want to continue to make money. So, that was really stressful. It was very mentally taxing. I would do it for a couple hours and just log off and be completely exhausted because you're just, like, on as hard as you can. And this is why I have a little PTSD around streaming. Like, I've considered Twitch streaming and I try a little bit and I'm, like, I haven't fully integrated the fact that you don't have to be, like, maximally entertaining every single second yet. You can actually just chill out and take it slow and nothing bad happens. Yeah. Yeah. You can just enjoy silence. Yeah. Yeah. Did you feel lonely doing it? I mean, even just streamers feel lonely. I made it into a house of cam girls. Did that make it better or worse? It made it better. They're great. I'm still friends with them to this day. Oh, so, it was, like, a team almost, like, we're in this kind of together? Yeah. So, we would, like, work together and, you know, stream together and swap our clothes and stuff. It was great. Swap ideas, too? Swap ideas, yeah. Yeah. And, actually, on a small tangent, maybe a big tangent, what do you think, because it's the recent controversy of Andrew Tate and that he, I think, in the past ran a camming business and he's being accused of sex trafficking. What do you think, like, from your own experience, what do you understand about Andrew Tate? Is he a good person? Is he a bad person? Is there something shady about his practices or not? I wish I could answer, but I don't know. I haven't looked into it at all. At all. I've heard people talking about it. I just haven't bothered to go into it. Wow. It is well known that, like, when I was doing it back in the day, the Eastern European models had something different going on, though. It was, like, a trope about, you know, there's the Eastern European models and then there's everybody else. That they're, what, it's, like, darker or something like that? Like, they do studios and they're lower quality. Which means what? Like, studios are, you go into, like, a warehouse and then they have set up a little, like, things that replicate bedrooms. Yeah. But they're just, like, stalls. And then you give, you rent out or you pay the studio percentage of your income. And you can tell when something looks like a studio. It's, like, a type of background. Yeah. If you're, like, watching enough, it kind of starts to notice the patterns. So, like, the standards are lower there and the ethical boundaries are a little looser. Yeah. How people are treated. It's unclear. I never heard anything about the ethical side. So, I just knew that it was, like, lower quality. Like, the girls seemed like they were less into it and, like, cared less. How does this all interplay with, like, sex trafficking? So, consensual versus non-consensual. I would be shocked if there were never any non-consensual camming. I mean, I guess it's, like, if it were going to happen at that point. I'd be surprised if it were, in fact, Eastern European models. Based on, this is outdated. This is, I'm just thinking of my stereotypes back when I cammed a lot. Sure. So, some of that is stereotypes versus, like, collecting good data, right? Yeah. I haven't done data on camgirl. It's hard. I mean, it's hard. It's even hard to get that data, right? Yeah. But, obviously, a really important problem. There's a method that I'm trying that I really like. I designed a survey type, which is, like, asking people who you know. Yeah. Like, who do you know who's done this? And you tell me, like, oh, do you know anybody who's a doctor? Do you know anybody who, you know, has had cancer or, like, smokes or... Personally, you mean? Yeah, personally. Just do you know anybody? Yeah. And then, if you ask about a whole bunch of things, you can calibrate the responses. So, like... That's really interesting. If your population, you know, 20% of them know doctors, and then you know the actual amount of doctors, then you can tell, like, how this is corresponding. Like, what is the visibility of doctors? So, you can reconstruct the graph. Basically, yeah. And we can do this with sex trafficking. And, of course, people are going to be like, well, sex trafficking is not visible. People, you don't know those. I'm like, well, then we can ask about other non-visible things that other people don't know that we do have data for. Like, homelessness or being in jail or, like, if you have been, like, sexually assaulted. A lot of people don't like talking about if they've been sexually assaulted. So, you can do a whole bunch of things that are, like, similarly suppressed in knowledge in some way that we do actually have rates for. And then compare that to the graph when we ask people, do you know anybody who's in sex traffic? Yeah. So, again, this is not perfect. I'm not saying this is ideal. But you can infer things. You can infer things about that graph. But let me say we don't have good ways of measuring sex trafficking right now. Anyway, I did a big deep dive into the research that we have on sex trafficking in the Western world. And the actual, like, I read the studies and, like, reports about the studies. And it's really pitiful. We have terrible data. It's like there's just, like, vague estimations made from one guy in a basement in the 80s. That's, like, the basis for, like, one big study that, like, a lot of people report on. And so I'm like, okay, so the method I'm proposing, obviously, is not perfect. But, like, the bar is so low at this point. Well, I wonder also if there's ways to design a survey that gets at the victims of sex trafficking also. Which is, they presumably have public access to the internet. And I wonder how many of them are distinctly aware that they're victims. Like, it's asking the question, when you're inside of a toxic relationship, are you inside of a toxic relationship? I mean, if the toxic relationship is truly toxic, sometimes your mind is fucked with, right? You don't even know what's true. Yeah. So it's interesting if you can design surveys that break through that. For people who are actively sex trafficking? Yeah, who could break through that. So basically, get data on how many people are getting sex trafficked directly. Oh, yeah. Like, if you don't frame it, like, if you don't say the word sex trafficking, you're like, are you just in a situation where you'd... And maybe through the survey, I mean, that's very meta, but through the survey, help them. You know, I did this. This is what started my relationship surveys. So I've done a series of relationship surveys. And that was because I knew somebody in a terrible relationship. And I was like, I bet if she took a survey where she answered questions about her relationship and at the end got a score that compared her to everybody else, she'd be like, oh, wait. Everybody else has much better relationships than I do. So that's why I started making the relationship surveys was exactly for that reason. Yeah, that's really, really, really powerful to know that, like, you're not crazy for thinking this is a bad relationship. Right. Or I think, like, the actual question is, like, could you do better if you broke up? And I think the thing that keeps most people in their relationships is, like, this is the best that I can do. And, like, this is normal. And if it were normal, I would say that they are right. Like, if you live in a culture where everybody is abusing their people and their relationships, then, yeah, I mean, what are you going to do? Break up and then just be alone for the rest of your life? Most people don't want to do that. But not comparing yourself to the average is good to know. To know. Know what your options are. At least understand it because, you know, being normal is not always, like, this conversation is not always great. Meaning this conversation is anything but normal. So, okay, and that was a tangent on a tangent about a niche passion, which is really fascinating that you're playing with those kinds of ideas of survey design. But back to camming. So, what were the cons? What were the negatives of camming? Oh, like, the exhaustion of just, like, live, like, the high pressure thing. That was probably the worst thing. So, not, was there, what about the interaction with different people? Like, the dynamics of the interaction with the fans, I guess. I had a pretty great time. I mean, obviously it wasn't perfect because it's the internet. But I don't know. This is the thing that confuses me a lot. Because a lot of women that I know complain about being harassed by men quite a lot. They're like, you know, men are always, you know, groping harassed. You know, you have to be paranoid in the club. People are, like, they're always huffing on you and you're just like, Jesus Christ, get away, man. And I do not have this experience. Or, like, maybe I do, but I'm interpreting it differently. I don't know. The thing is, I don't know what causes me to have such a different experience from these women that are, like, really, feel really hostile towards men. And my guess is that there's some sort of, like, very subtle signaling that we're accidentally doing. We're like, no fault of our own. I'm not saying this is a virtue. I'm saying, like, maybe it's just genetic or the fact that I'm a fault. That women are doing? That the women are doing, yeah. Like, that, and it might be just something I'm completely accidentally, through no intention, like, happening to signal the thing that is causing men to not view me as, like, a desirable target or, like, a target at all. Well, what about the flip side? Maybe you're not sensitive to the creepy stare. Yeah, that also might be true. The dude who's, like, is undressing you with his eyes that, like, in a creepy way. That you're just not, you don't, like, worry about it. Or you're not, like, the fear of that, the anxiety of that, the unpleasantness of that just doesn't hit you. I think that's also at least part of it. Maybe all of it. Yeah. Yeah, I think there's some evidence for it. I think often, like, guys will do a thing to me, and I'm just like, that's a thing. Cool. I don't have any negative response whatsoever. That's callback to the tire. It's a thing. This is nice. Yeah. That happened. It was good to know that can happen. Like, I once had, like, a homeless guy, like, ask me to come back to my place, baby. And I was like, this is fun. Yeah. Like, I'm like, do you want me to, I love asking men, like, are you trying to get me to have sex with you? Just, like, saying it out front. And they'll be like, well, usually they stop for a minute. They're like, well, yeah, I mean, I would like to have sex. And they'll be like, thanks for asking, but I'm not interested in having sex with you. How do you have a good day? And then I walk away. And that's great. I don't know. I have no issues with that interaction. But, like, maybe this is the kind of thing that other women would find to be really offensive. So you have that conversation and it doesn't turn into, like, a threatening feel. No. Like with a homeless guy. No. I've never had that happen, though. But I think there's just something, I think I'm doing something, like, again, this is kind of accidental. Like, I just am like this, always. And I think I just happen to be like this at people and they don't expect it. Like, they don't expect me to be, like, really nice while explicitly asking them what their intentions are. Like, directly putting my finger on the thing that, like, oh, you're trying to have sex with me. And then also not judging them for it. Yeah. I think this, like, throws people off a little bit so they don't get aggressive. They're like, oh, you're autistic or something. Even the cloak of anonymity on the internet, you weren't getting. Yeah. I just think I'm just not reactive. Or maybe I'm giving off. I don't know. I don't know what's going on. Maybe it's both. Maybe it's a feedback loop. So I just, I had a pretty good experience. I know not everybody did. Definitely people reported having antagonistic experiences. But when I was scamming, I generally really liked people really nice to me. Had a great time. Made friends. So you also did OnlyFans, as you mentioned. And I read on a website, so this is very investigative reporting, that on some months you've made over $100,000 on OnlyFans. How did that feel? Great. Really great. I mean, like, well, actually, because so much of your upbringing, you didn't have money. You had to struggle with the fact of your job and so on. Maybe a good person to ask, can money buy happiness? Well, I mean, I think you get like a resting set point of happiness regardless of how much money you have. But money can buy being less stressed, I would say. Is there a lot of variation in the basic rest happiness for humans in general? Like, is that a good thing to think about? I mean, they've done some studies, but again, like, again, I'm not sure. I haven't actually read the study, so maybe they didn't replicate. Where, like, they measured people before and after winning a bunch of money to see if their happiness is higher. Yeah. I think, like, it's by some measures it was and by some it wasn't. But, no, I mean, like, basically almost genetically, so nature and nurture, but is there, let's say after you're 18, is there like some stable level of happiness that all the environmental genetic factors combine to create so that everything that life throws at you has to face that happiness? Like you mentioned earlier that I seem to be happy with a lot of stuff. So maybe I have a certain level. Do other people have a lower level? Some people have higher level? Yeah, definitely. Like, is there, is that a useful or, is that a useful model of human beings? Or is it all ups and downs? Like, is it all, like, there's no stable. I mean, it's my combo, right? Like, I don't know. Some people just are happier than others in general and other people aren't. But then you also have ups and downs. Like, I'm sure you've experienced sadness sometimes and happiness the other times. Like, if I actually were to integrate, so have an integral onto the, the area onto the curve, I don't know if I'm different than other people. Maybe I'm just, like, really focused on the happy moments and maybe feel the down moments most intensely. And maybe that, like, on average, it's all the same. Is that possible? I mean, maybe? I just, I don't know. Like, I remember when I was a kid, my mom would call me Pollyanna all the time. So I was, like, finding the good in everything. Oh, yeah? I'd be like, something bad would happen. So you were a happy kid. I was a really happy kid, yeah. Even in the harsh conditions. Yeah. I mean, like I said, like, I think the harshness comes from the bad meaning. Like, and I had a good meaning applied to it. You were a stoic. Yeah. With another book I'm reading next week. Tune in. Marcus Aurelius' Meditations. All right. All right. Camming, 100K. So it felt good. So it's crazy, though, right? You can just, like, take clothes off in a creative way with some gnomes and make 100,000? Yeah. I mean, there was a lot more to it than that, but yeah. What was it? What's the different process? I mean, it's marketing. Like, so with only, with my free cams, I was unusual in that I decided to do outside of the website marketing. I would, like, post on Reddit, right? This was very unusual at the time. But, like, OnlyFans is structured such that they have almost no internal discovery whatsoever. So if you want people to come to your page, you have to go out onto external websites and advertise for yourself directly. Very different model. And so this is something I had already been doing and already had practiced in. And so I think I was, like, already quite advanced. Like, I already had an account on Reddit that was, like, seven years old at the time. Tons of, like, karma that means I could post in subreddits. I'd already been on Twitter for years, you know, like, posting actively. So I already had, like, presences on all these other platforms that really helped with the conversion. Reddit and Twitter? Reddit, Twitter, FetLife, Instagram, TikTok. And you were still advertising creatively? Yeah. So, like, there's, like, sexuality, but there's also, like, creative sexuality. Yeah. And ideas, too. Yeah. Like, one of the really popular ones was I, like, molested myself as a mime using a, one arm through a jacket. And so the jacket looked like it was, the jacket looked like it was alive. And, you know, and that one did really well. Did you, like, brainstorm with somebody? And, like, I recently got to hang out with Mr. Beast and sit on a session of brainstorming different ideas. I just envision you with, like, a team brainstorming. All right. How about we try the mime and the molesting thing? I don't know. It's too edgy. I wish. I think the team would have been a lot more fun. But no, it's just me. Like, I had an apartment that looked, like, kind of like this, you know. You just sit alone. You're like, well, that would be a good idea. And I'd seen, you just collect ideas over time, right? Like, I'd seen somebody doing a version of, like, this animated hand act, like, when I was a kid. And I just always stuck in my head. And, like, one day I was like, I bet I could do that. And then when I was trying to think of ideas to do as a sex worker, I was like, why don't I just try that? And then it turned out to be, like, a really, like, quite a viral hit. Is there stuff, like you mentioned, too edgy? Like, Mr. Beast tries to keep it PG. Yeah. Do you try to keep it PG-13? Well, with the sex advertising stuff, I mean, it's sex advertising, so it's obviously not PG-13. I don't know these ratings. What is even beyond that? It's not family-friendly. It is X. Like, the one that I'm describing to you at some point, like, you can see my boob. And the boob is X. A boob is, I guess. It's not R. I think you could show a boob in PG-13. Yeah, maybe X is, like, if you got some sort of rhythmic motion going on. Maybe that sound, but the rhythmic motion not. You can have one or the other, but you can't have both. You have both. That's when we hit the X. Yeah. Okay. So, definitely not family. I mean, with the sex advertising stuff, like, guys like vanilla shit. Guys want basic, hot girl. You can do something, like, kind of sexy and creative, like getting abducted by gnomes or, like, the self-molestation, right? But those are still pretty within the normal boundaries. What do you mean guys like vanilla stuff? I mean, most guys like vanilla stuff. What's vanilla stuff? See, we'll talk about fetish. Fetishes. I think my Overton window on what is vanilla is expanding. Quickly, after following your work. I actually have done a lot of studies on what is vanilla. Like, I've done a couple different surveys where I ask people, like, how taboo is this thing? And now I have, like, a rating from least to most taboo. By the way, I don't like, I don't appreciate the beauty of vanilla ice cream. You don't? No. It is really good, though. You eat vanilla ice cream? I eat vanilla ice cream, yeah. I think there's just so many more options. It's, like, the absence of creativity. I mean, if you put in, like, some chocolate chips or something. Yeah, they already made it more interesting. It's a start. Okay, so what's vanilla? And why do guys like vanilla? So hot girl doing hot girl things? What, like, undressing and then having sex? The thing that I found was most successful were frames where the man was framed as passive and the woman as active. Or, like, for example, like, oh, you know, we got assigned to the same bunk at the breeding school or something. Or, like, oh, we're the last people on Earth. Right? Or, like, oh, no, you know, I, like, I desperately need somebody to, like, cure me with this disease and I need semen. So it's, like, in any scenario where the guy just, like, finds himself such that the woman, like, desperately needs him for some reason and he doesn't have to do much. That is, like, typically one of the much more successful things. Like, guys like women falling into their lap. What about the power dynamic? So guys are less into power dynamics than women are. And you can do power dynamics as long as it's, like, handed to them. Some guys, obviously, some guys are, like, very dominant and, like, prefer, like, having to work. But this is the minority. Like, if you're trying to do, make 100K a month and you're trying to appeal to the widest group of people, the most effective advertising, you're not going to be making the most money by being, like, particularly submissive. So on the camming side, that's your, unlike, like, escorting or just personal relationships, you're trying to, you have an audience. You have, like, a theater full of people. Like with live camming? Yeah, with live camming. Yeah. It's like a live theater. Does that freak you out? There's just, like, a bunch of people watching? I mean, what, how do you feel right now? I don't, I don't know they're watching because it's not live. Yeah, that's true. It's not live. Like, it might as well be. Like, they could be watching. I feel like there's just the two of us. I don't know. And there's, like, I feel, sometimes I imagine there's a third person. Like God? Usually. No, no, not God. Just, I usually imagine either a guy or girl or a couple just sitting there for some reason. Like, usually on the beach and usually high. Or on some kind of, like, on mushrooms. Just, like, listening passively. Just kind of looking at the sunset. That's what I imagine. Oh, that's really good. Yeah. I think that's useful. Like, when I write my blog posts, sometimes I do terribly. But it's the most effective when I imagine one person that I'm writing to, to try to explain. And, like, having a high couple watching the sunset is maybe really lovely as a calibration. I have to say, it is pretty romantic. Because I've gotten a chance to meet couples that listen to podcasts together. I don't know why. That seems, like, intensely romantic to me. Because, like, because you're not watching TV together. You're listening to a thing. I mean, I guess sometimes they watch it. But, like, you're listening to ideas together. I don't know. It seems. It's like you're going through the same kind of thought process at the same time. That's a really beautiful way to put it. So, it's like you're melding. Your thinking is following the same line. Some of our podcasts do that more than movies. I think movies give you a lot more freedom to think about stuff. I feel like your thoughts are aligned. And, like, especially if the podcast is good. Like, if it's listening to, like, a Dan Carlin podcast about history. That you're, like, on a journey together. There's an intimacy to that. Anyway. But I've learned that couples do that. You know. Hashtag relationship ghost. Go ahead. That's what you want with your future wife. With my. Yeah. You should make an application. Application. An application for dating you. I mean, maybe this is more of, like, my strategy and less yours. But you have, like, a wide enough audience that might work. I. It's not. Okay. Let's just go there. So, because you put together an application of, like, people to have casual sex with you, I think. And also dating. Yeah. And also dating and relationship. I'd love to. So, what is in that application? Because, like, you know, I'm sure there's quite a lot of people that would like to date you or to sleep with you. But finding the person. I mean, it depends what your goals are. I guess relationship would be an open relationship for you? Yes. Right. Like, for me, I guess it's more intensely selective. Yeah. Because it's, like, a monogamous relationship and a committed one. Like, I'm swinging for the, like, for, like, long term. I'm not, like, weirdly obsessed with long term. But it's, like, I would love to have one girl for the rest of my life. But finding that, I feel like applications will not get to that. I feel like there's some aspect of the magic of the serendipity of it, of meeting people in strange places and so on. And I just, I personally have noticed that, like, fame has not made that process easier. But, I mean, like, if you could, you know, if there's two rooms, and one of them, it's, like, a random population of hot women. And the other one is a random population of hot women. But all of them definitely are monogamous and are looking for a long term committed relationship. Yeah. Like, which room would you rather go into? Like, if you're looking for a mate. Yeah. Well, but see, I guess my preferences are more, this is a really strong point. But my preferences represent the majority, probably. Right? Because don't most women want monogamous relationships? Yeah. So, like, it's, I'm okay with either option. Mm-hmm. Because, like, statistically speaking. But I feel like we can apply it to, like, a bunch of other things. Yeah. More specifically. This is just a problem if you have, like, high, if you have a high volume to filter through and, like, you don't know. Like, it's a good, like, initial filter. Like, you can take it from, like, a thousand people to 20 people and then go on dates with them. But the filter is so anti-romantic. Like, what? This is true. This is not the romantic narrative that you're very prone to. I feel like, how did you two meet? Well, she passed the three filters I set up. And, I mean, but it's also, but also can you put into a survey the things that you're interested in? Yeah. I mean, I definitely think about this a lot with hiring, like, teams, engineers, and so on. But with engineers, you're okay losing truly special engineers because you have to filter because there's, like, thousands of applications. Like, it feels like, it feels like I worry that you would miss the thing that actually, because so much of it is chemistry. So much of it is, like, the magic, you know? But the thing is, you're missing it anyway. Like. Yeah, you're missing it. Oh, you can just run it and then, in addition, try some of those people. And then go on the dates that you were going to go on with anyway, regardless. It's just the thing that helps, like, pull someone out of the crowd. Like this, I dated a guy from my survey. I'd ran the survey. I assigned point values to each of the questions. Yeah. I wanted a date with, like, the top couple people. And then one of them, I was like, and I'm still dating him to this day. And it was awesome. And I would never, I never would have gone on a date with him without the survey. Can you, can you, if from memory or we can look it up, do you remember what kind of questions were on the survey? I asked a couple different categories. I asked about, like, basic life stuff. So, like, what kind of relationships, like, monogamy versus polyamory. Like, do you want kids? You know, like, where you want to live. Like, basic things that you need to be compatible. And then I asked, like, sexual compatibility, like, various preferences. And then I had a section about, like, personality. Like, what are, I try to ask questions that would do the most effective filtering. So, like, what are ways that, like, I can't give people what they need that, like, maybe they really want. Like, I don't really, I'm not very outdoorsy. It was just very common. A lot of people like being outdoorsy. So, I asked the question, like, how much do you value someone else that you're dating being outdoorsy? And if they marked yes, I was like, okay, we probably, I should probably downgrade the results. Man, but doesn't polyamory make that really difficult? Because can't they find somebody for the outdoorsy stuff? Yeah, they could. I mean, this doesn't, like, but if you're going to have somebody, it's, like, nicer to have them be more compatible than less. But you're a little bit, like, in terms of sexual compatibility, you're able to, like, yourself aware enough to know what preferences you have? Like, you can. I think so. I think that one helped a lot with the escorting. Like, the escorting helped a lot with knowing my preferences. But there's, like, out of the giant pool of different preferences, you haven't, like, a subset that's clearly defined for you? Okay. Like, like, dominant, submissive. Yeah, power dynamic stuff. Power dynamic stuff. Okay. In the, not just sexual, but in relationship, too. Like, that was that in a survey? I don't like power dynamics in relationships. No, defining them in, like, making it clear in a survey, like, asking a question about power dynamics in a relationship. I don't think I asked about power dynamics in relationships. Okay. Because I just assume most people don't. And there's a lot of things that are kind of, like. Most people don't. You're putting together a survey, a systematic survey to understand compatibility. Wouldn't power dynamics inside of relationships that naturally emerge often be part of the question? Or is that hard to question because it naturally emerges? Well, the thing is, like, a lot of questions sort of overlap in demographic. And if you're making a survey, you want to have the minimum possible questions that give the maximum possible, like, filtering information. Yes, yes, yes. Wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute. But the purpose of that survey wasn't to do a good research study. It was to select one subject that you could take. So that's part of what is good. Like, you want to most efficiently filter out. Because, one, like, you get more people taking the survey the fewer questions you have, which is good for finding a mate. Like, if you have 5,000 men take the survey, it's better than 1,000 men take it. Don't you want men that would be patient enough and dedicated enough? Yeah, but, like, what if you're, like, a high-powered man who's, like, on his lunch break? Yeah. Right? So it's like. Like a billionaire who's too busy just flipping through. Yeah. And the guy that I did was, he took the survey. He was waiting for the pizza to come out of the oven. And so it was important that it was short. And so you want to be efficient. Or literally pizza coming out of the oven. He was literally waiting for pizza. And he saw the thing. He's like, I guess I'll just fill up the survey really fast. Wow. And it changed our lives. So romantic. For me, this is my kind of romance. Yeah. I'm really into it. But you could be efficient with surveys by, like, making sure your questions don't overlap. So, for example, if somebody is very polyamorous, they're very unlikely to be interested in, like, a traditional, like, man works and, like, and the job and the woman stays home and raises the kids kind of relationship. Because poly people just generally don't do that. Yeah. And so if I'm asking about polyamory, it sort of kind of already covers the thing. And so if I have a whole bunch of questions, like, I can kind of, like, triangulate a bunch of implicit kinds of questions that I haven't directly asked about. So this is why I didn't ask directly about power dynamics. Because, like, from the rest of the questions that are in my survey, like, I can pretty accurately predict whether or not you're going to be interested in power dynamics. But I'm afraid, yeah, like, I'm trying to think as you're talking. I get it. That's really interesting that you did that. But also, maybe not for the effectiveness of finding a partner, but for just exploring the actual, the process of human sexuality, of, like, the search, this complicated optimization process we're all engaging in on the landscape of happiness that seems to be this not even a differentiable function. It's a giant nonlinear mess. Okay. But, like, for me, I don't think I would be able to design that survey. I would, like, bias it too strongly. Like, I would probably prefer women that have read Dostoevsky or something like that. Like, that would be a filter for me, right? Yeah. But, like, that's a horrible filter. Because there's a lot of, like, there's a lot of amazing people that have never, they don't give a shit about reading. Or they don't give a shit about reading Russian literature. Or they don't give a shit about, but they're amazing and passionate and creative and all, in some other dimension that you might completely miss. But you're, like, because I wonder if there's any, basically you're saying compatibility, like, hard lines that you know statistically is just going to be an issue. Yeah. I mean, you weight this a lot more. Yeah. But there's also, like, preferences. Like, if you have a woman who's totally equal and she's read the thing that you like, for another woman who's also identical, but, like, she hasn't read the thing that you like. Like, you probably, like, very slightly prefer the one that happens. But you don't know if they're identical. Yes, yes. But, like, you can't, through survey, get the identical. Like, you don't know. Sure. But you can kind of, like, do a whole bunch of weights. So, like, the person that, like, I ended up going on a date with, he did not answer, like, correctly to a lot of the survey questions. But he didn't have to. Like, he was just overall. Overall, the weights were, like, he just tended to be more in the direction. Was there a text-based fill-in, like, survey? But, like, sorry, paragraph, like. No, you ought to avoid that if you're dealing with, like, large amounts of data. No, why not? Because you have to fill. Oh, oh, interesting. Interesting. Like, I'm different. Yeah? First of all, you can do keyword searches. Okay, that's fair. Second of all, you can do machine learning models that, like, first of all, you can do, like, crude metrics, like, the length. That's a good point. Of how long they've written, right? And it could flag certain things. Yeah, it's actually pretty easy to. Like, I've looked at, like, for hiring, I've looked at, like, thousands of applications really quickly. Like, you can really, the human brain is really interesting, especially, like, if you visually highlight certain information for yourself, like, keywords or, again, with machine learning models, like, sentiment, you can highlight different parts that will catch your eye better than not. And I can go through just a huge number of applications. Are you telling me I can use, if I learn machine learning, I can process dating survey applications better? Yes. No, like, textual. Textual. Yeah, like, I can, like, have them write things in. Like, this is, like, a new way of. That would be. Yeah. It's a really good incentive. I think that would. So, it's a really nice aspect of text input, like, long-form text input, multiple long-form text input based on an interestingly phrased question, is you get to learn how to make a better survey. I think you would appreciate that. Like, you start to see how they're actually interacting with these questions. Like, I ask certain questions, like, just to see how people think. Is it better to work smart or better to work hard? Or is it ever okay to betray a close friend? Like, I'll ask, like, questions like this that don't really have a right answer, but I just want to see how they think. Or is truth more important than loyalty? Yeah. And I get their long-form answer. You get, like, and you get to see the reasoning process. Yeah. Yeah. Like, what they, it reveals so much, not just about the person, but about the kind of questions I want, I should be asking that have nothing to do with truth or loyalty. But, like, how to get a good engineer with, like, very specific questions. But I think it's really useful to get text input. I have done text input usually with beta surveys. So I usually do beta surveys before I do the real survey. What's the beta? Like, I do, like, a shorter version, or it depends on what I'm doing. But, like, a different version of the survey that I have people take before I release. I use the information from the initial survey to inform the questions that I ask in the real survey. And I haven't actually, recently, but I used to do a lot of, like, the text-based questions to see for similar. Although I don't think I relied on it quite as heavily. And if I introduced machine learning, I think it would be a lot more efficient. I love that you're also doing, like, you're writing scripts and stuff. Like, you're doing some, like, statistical analysis. Are you using Python mostly? Yeah. Yeah. I had to learn Python for this just a couple months ago. Which is the best way to learn Python. And the best reason to learn machine learning is to solve actual, like, problems. Yeah. I can't be motivated. I'm just not motivated to learn something unless there's an actual curiosity I have. And I have to learn it to solve it. I was trying to avoid learning coding for so long. But eventually, it was my data set became too large. I couldn't work with it with anything else. So, well, Python it is. You know what's also an interesting data set that you're probably interested in? A little bit is, like, Twitter itself, right? I don't know if you've – I've played with the Twitter API a lot. Can you just get – Download the – I'm just – I'm stuttering now because the – Download the Twitter? You can download Twitter? No. There's a lot of Twitter. So, Twitter is a social network with a bunch of people. They're interacting a lot. Like, there's, like – I don't know. The number is insane, the number of interactions. But there's different ways to interact, to get data from Twitter. There's streams. You can look at – It depends on what you're interested in. You can do results for searches. You can look at individual tweets and get entire – which to me is super interesting – the entire tree of different conversations, the replies. Ooh. Which might be very interesting for you because, like, it's not – it's much harder to ask rigorous questions, which you do with your polls. Mm-hmm. But you can see, like, how divisive certain things are. Yeah, it'd probably be good, like, calibrators to figure out, like, exactly what questions you should be asking. Yeah. And also highlight interesting anecdotal things when, like, two people freak out at each other and just argue, like, a thread that goes on for, like, a thousand messages. Yeah. That you might never be even aware is happening because you're, like – because Twitter doesn't, like, surface that. Like, it would be – Twitter doesn't make it easy for you to, like, visualize what the hell's going on even with your own social network. Like, if you post something that's controversial that gets a large amount of attention, you can't clearly visualize everything that's going on. Yeah. Like, it's very – it's blurry, amorphous. Like, you're just kind of looking through the fog at different replies and they kind of – it's – yeah. So to be able to – You see, the API, they have, like, graphs of networks? They have the data for the graphs. Yeah. So you can reconstruct it yourself. And then you have different levels of access in terms of how many queries you can do. That is really cool. And now, because there's, like, Elon, there's a lot of sort of revolutionary stuff happening at Twitter. I think you could literally sort of push for innovation there. Like, there's aggressive innovation happening. So in terms of requesting stuff for the API, you could do all that kind of stuff. I think Twitter is just a fascinating platform for the – as cliche as it sounds for studying. For me, it's interesting what makes for a healthy conversation. That term has been used, but it's interesting how conversation – to me, it's fascinating how conversations break down and not. Like, how – like, the virality of drama or conflict or disagreement, how that evolves when a large number of people are involved, when a large number of misinterpretation of statements is involved in text-based with some anonymity thrown in. Like, I feel like there's a lot of studies that can be done there. I mean, Twitter's probably not great at it, right, as it stands. No. Because it's, like, necessarily short. You can quote-treat things out of context, et cetera. But we should understand that, right? Yeah. At a large scale, you should be able to study that kind of thing. Oh, yeah. What was your casual sex survey? I actually haven't looked at it in a while. I think I just asked people about a whole bunch of fetishes because you don't want to be obvious about yours because then people are going to hijack it to try to tell you that they like what you like. Oh, sure. So you want to be obscure. So how do you design a survey where you're testing for a thing but you're still obscure about the thing you're trying to ask about? So you still see it as a survey? Yeah. Like an application because I think you tweeted saying, like, I'm thinking of just, like, showing up to San Francisco and saying, is anybody open for casual sex? Yeah. Something like this. Am I misremembering? Maybe escorting? I'm not sure. Oh, for escorting. Sorry, sorry, sorry, sorry. Which is similar. Like, I kind of use escorting as the way to have casual sex now. Okay. So let's talk about escorting. So you wrote about escorting in your blog post. Escorting was good for me. How did you get into escorting? I was working at, like, I quit camming because I was burned out and I was, like, trying to work at a friend's startup. And it was hard for me. I don't, it's difficult for me to work on projects that are not my projects. And so I was like, hey, fuck it. Like, I want to go back to sex work. I want to make more money. But I don't want to cam anymore because I'm burned out. So I'm like, well, let's try. I have a friend who's an escort. I'm like, let's try that. And so we had a call. She, like, outlined the basics for me. And then I put up some ads and it started working. What's the basics of escorting? How does that work? If you want to get started escorting. So just in case you have a career change. I would like to. Or you're going to want to get some nice photos. So you probably have those. First of all, you assumed I haven't done it before. How rude. Have you? Yeah. Well, you know. Recreation, I would like to do it professionally, I suppose. So if I wanted to do it, if I really wanted to step up my game, how would I do it? Yeah. Well, you got the whole tutorial. Recreational escorting is just. Okay. Okay. No, meaning like, you know, like selling products on Etsy versus doing a startup. Yeah. Well, I mean, escorting is kind of all just selling products on Etsy. No, like, but selling a lot of products. Like high volume. You've like dabbled. Yeah. Like, yeah, yeah. Small handcrafted. It's small handcrafted. Artisan. Artisan. Yeah. Escorting. Versus mass manufacture. Okay. If you want to mass manufacture, you're escorting. I just feel like I haven't been getting, you know, I've been undervaluing my services. And I would like to really step up. I think you could really just like grease some marketing gears and be true. Yeah. I mean, it's just some of this is marketing. So like how, I guess I want to like know, is it similar to camming in that way? Like, is it, you're basically advertising yourself and you're marketing, all the creativity that you mentioned before, all of that. Yeah. Yeah. I found escorting to be pretty easy because escorting is not like highly competitive. For example, camming is highly competitive because like the strategy, the thing that I outlined before, you know, the amount of money that you make determines your ranking. And you can also go and see other girls. You can see what they're doing. So if a girl figures that incredible strategy for making money, it's like two seconds before that strategy proliferates into everybody else. So it's very fast paced and like really tough. With escorting, you don't get to see what other girls are doing. You can look at their websites, but like you don't know what they're doing with clients at all. You can look at their rates, but you don't know what their volume is. So you don't actually know what is successful and what isn't very much. So I think there's much less like evolution of marketing through this process. And so I came in with like my aggressive marketing skills for being a cam girl. I think that really helped. I did very well as an escort. I just came in and like made a fantastic website. You know, I knew how to do the ads right. And what was the finding people, I guess is also like finding the right kind of customer, the right kind of client. I got like in a lot of trouble for this recently in the sex worker sphere, because I said that if you raise prices, you're more likely to encounter clients that aren't going to abuse you. Like it's safer. Yeah. They did not. They said that I was being classist, you know, implying that poor people are more violent. But to be fair, if you're a guy and you want to be violent towards a woman, you're probably not going to be paying her a lot of money. You're probably going to be like, you're the kind of person likely who's going to haggle a lot because you don't respect her. But anyway, that aside, it's a little pet peeve for me. Yeah. I just, I started charging 800 an hour and then pretty rapidly raised it to 1200. And then a while after that raised it to 1400. Well, the interesting thing you mentioned in my extensive research, you used to do 1200 to 1400 an hour. And then you said that you're thinking of jumping back in at a rate of 2400 the first hour. Yeah. And I think 900 each successive hour. That's interesting. That's like, that's, I mean, to me, that's really interesting. Like the first, like why? It's like a lot on the first hour. Yeah. Oh, it's just because, uh, it depends on how you want to incentivize like the amount of hours. So if you have to pay a lot for the first hour, but not very much for the excessive, you're more likely to buy like a longer period of time. And usually I find that clients who buy a longer period of time are nicer to you. I don't have like a great theory for why that is, but there's the more likely like take you to dinner and get to know you first. And I just enjoy that a lot more. I enjoy like, like knowing who I'm going to have sex with. Like a date, you know? Yeah. So it incentivizes the long form date dynamic versus like a knot. That's really interesting. That's really interesting. Like how does money change the dynamic, just basic human dynamic of interacting for free versus for money? Like, I think about that a lot. Cause like just talking to rich people, it's like you usually get paid for your time and you're doing this for free. Like what, uh, like what's the difference? Is there a difference really? Or no? A bit. Yeah. So I've actually, it depends a lot. So when I was doing it full time, it was my only source of income. Uh, the, it changed quite a lot because I was really incentivized to have repeat customers. So I'm like, okay, if I'm my primary interaction with you is to like, have you hire me again. I'll do whatever that takes to make that happen. And so if I have to like laugh at jokes that I don't find funny or like be like more adoring of your penis than I actually genuinely feel like that's what I'm going to express. Yeah. Um, and obviously it's to some degree like titrated, you know, like I, it's unpleasant to force yourself to like something that you don't. So like, I would actually like not see clients again that I didn't want to, but it's just some degree there was a sort of self-suppression going on, which I think is the way it works in any sort of customer service job. Like you want the customer to leave happy. So you just make sure that you are happy the whole time and you're like, ah, really enjoying the other person. Um, but, uh, so recently when I've like kind of dabbled in it since baking money for, through other means, um, where I don't need the money, it's more like a fun side thing that like, that I'm, like I said, it's fulfilling the role of casual sex for me. So like, I don't have to do it. This is not my primary job. I just want sort of a good excuse to like have sex with somebody. Um, and the money is like a great filter for that. Uh, and so in that case. That's interesting. So the money is, yeah, okay. The money is basically a filter for somebody who's taking this interaction seriously. Yeah. It also, so there's an interesting like psychological thing where I have difficulty having casual sex with somebody because some part of my brain, which I assume is like quite female, is doing some evaluation of status and whether or not this is going to damage my reputation by having sex with them. So like, if you found out that I went and like had random sex with like a homeless man, you might be like, wow, that says something about Ayla. Like maybe she's, you know, trashy or she just has no standards for who she's going to fuck. But if, and so some part of me is continually anxious. I'm like, does this mean I have no standards if I decide to have casual sex with you? Like what are people going to think? Uh, and so if you introduce money, it takes away that anxiety. I don't have to worry about it because it's like, oh, of course Ayla would have sex with that person. They paid her. Like, this is not an indication of the kind of mate that she can get. This is just an indication of like a business transaction. And this allows me to enjoy casual sex so much more when somebody pays me for it to the degree that like I almost view it as a kink. And so it's like, so I'm using it sort of to replace casual sex now. Like occasionally, I'm like, I just pay, you know, like it's paying me a little bit to erase the anxiety and I'll like have a fun, fun time. I mean, can't you see like dinner like that or something like that if the person pays for dinner? Or like, so like it's all just if any money's involved, if it's a kink, then you could just like use it and you buy, buys a coffee at a Starbucks. It's like, all right. Right. But it has to be plausible. Like you have to like trick my brain into like having it actually be incentivizing for me. Two coffees? Like a cappuccino or something? Yeah. Like, oh, the homeless man bought me a coffee and then I sucked his dick. Like, that's not cool. All right. So I... No shade of homeless men, by the way. Like I've been friends with a lot of them. I'm just using like some sort of stereotype of... Yeah. Right now. So like it has to be plausible where you could trick your mind. Interesting. Yeah. I mean, yeah. And so that's different. So now, now within this sort of frame, I am still like, I'm accepting money, but still much more expressive of my actual preferences. So like I, before when I would start escorting full time, I was suppressive. And now I'm like, you know, like I'm doing this for me. So we're going to make sure that I have a good time. And so I'm much more demanding. And then you're having more fun because you're not pretending. Exactly. Like laughing at a joke or something like that. That sounds terrible. Sounds like... I mean, it's... But it's also like social. I mean, I guess I would... Would I do that? Like when you first meet people, like strangers and so on, there's some aspect of like niceties, but like, I don't know, intimacy, like real intimacy requires like getting past the niceties. Like laughing at somebody's joke when it's not funny feels like anti-intimacy. Yeah. Yeah. But I laugh at so many jokes automatically. It's interesting because like, I don't mean to, I'm not trying to be fake. But like, if I'm in a group of people and somebody makes a joke and everybody laughs, I laugh even before I'm checking within myself, like, do I genuinely enjoy this joke? Yeah. So it's like, I don't know. Like the degree that I am sort of just like a result of social programming in all cases, that like when I'm with a client back when I was doing it full time, like it doesn't feel significantly different. It just felt like a different version of myself. Yeah. That's true. Yeah. To that degree, to the degree you don't feel like you're going against your nature. Yeah. Yeah. It was very rare that I actually felt like I was going against my nature. What about the market of how much to charge? So you're 2,400. Like how transparent is that market? Is there like a market? Like how much can you sell when you're charging that much? Yeah. No. Like what are the competitors? Like if this, like what do you, are you distinctly, because you said it's a lot of it is a bit more shrouded in mystery. Like it's more confidential. Like do you have some transparency to the market, what the competitors are? I did a survey of Escort. It's only like 130. I'm trying to remember. And the median was around like $400, $300, I think, an hour. Oh, wow. Something like that with a very long tail at the top end. I'm trying to remember what the, I also asked the amount where I could calculate the amount they made per month. I think it was like $6,000 or $7,000 a month. I need to double check that one, but. I charge 50 bucks an hour. You charge 50 bucks an hour. You should raise your rates. Yeah. I give a really shitty hand job. All right. But usually the rates are around, like if you want a median Escort in a big city, it's usually $400 to $600. A city, so the, or, sorry, $400 to $600? In a big city. But like smaller cities, you charge, the rates go lower. That's so fascinating. What's like the most you've ever seen somebody charge? I think I am. You're like the. But at this point, it's because I'm post work. Like I can just put it in the same number. Does like, like, does the fact that you're sort of like a sexuality expert, like a researcher and so on, like your mind is fascinating as well. And you're a bit of a celebrity. Does that play into it? Yeah. Or do you feel the celebrity now? Like when you're with people? Yeah, absolutely. Usually if people are interested in hanging out with me, it's because of that. But that's, that's different. Like I think besides the, like the, the fun part, like the, this is a kink as opposed to this is a job. Like with this as a job, usually the high end is closer to $2,000 an hour. Like the very high end. Have clients ever fallen in love with you? I think so. Yeah. I think it doesn't, happens to me much less than most other people due to like the thing that I think we were talking about before. Which is what? Where like, you know, you give off vibes, maybe like subconscious vibes. But they have fallen in love or not, but not as often. I think I, something about my signaling indicates that people should not fall in love with me because I don't think it happens very much. And it happens a lot with other women, but I know. But I have occasionally had, the thing is, it's, it's hard for me because I try to be as vulnerable as I can in a connection with a client. And like, I do really like some of them. I still remember some of them very fondly and I'm like, I hope they're doing well. And some of them are really profound. And like, one guy saw me because he found out he was dying of cancer. And he was like, I don't want to die without seeing someone. I'm like, Jesus Christ, that's such a, I don't know. I'm very touched by many of the people that I saw. So there's like deep intimacy there. Yeah. I know that it's brief and I know that it's like kind of weird, but like there's, there's like a real glimpse into somebody's soul when you get to be intimate. And I think this is especially true for men because a lot of time men don't have like a way to be really vulnerable in front of anybody. But like, if you're in bed with a woman that you find to be attractive, you can sort of let loose a little bit more. So they can become vulnerable in general quickly. Yeah. And I really like that. I like being as vulnerable as I can to match it. Like I'm not forcing myself or anything, but like, I just feel into it and like notice how like beautiful the person was and like feel grateful for being able to be in this intimate experience with them. And that was so wonderful. Does it ever hurt to say goodbye? Yeah. Uh, no, but I think that's as unique to me because I like being alone a lot, even with my friends who I like dearly, I'm like happy not seeing them. Uh, cause I don't like making facial expressions very much. But I do miss some of my clients. Wait, sorry. What does making facial expression have to do with saying goodbye? Well, if, if you are not with somebody in person, you don't have to make facial expressions anymore. Oh, you can just think about them. Yeah. Yeah. You can just, you can just sit there totally blank face and then have all of the emotions that you want. Oh, you're telling me. Do you have this thing too? It's not a thing, but like you're on camera. Yeah. So like, I feel feelings, but people usually want you like social interaction is such that like you probably want me to show feelings on my face. Yeah. Right. Good job. Yeah. There you go. So like, I, I, I definitely, there, there, there, there could be just an introvert thing where you like have a vibrant inner world that you forget to show to the, to the rest of the world. And also I'm scared of social interaction and I just have a lot of anxiety about interacting with the external world. So, yeah. Yeah. I'm kind of surprised to hear that because when you talked about like finding the light and everything and everything is fun, like I usually don't associate that with having not very much anxiety. Well, because I have the, we mentioned that earlier. I just appreciate the beauty in the world when I observe it. But then when I'm interacting with others, I have a very harsh self-critical aspect to my brain that says like, you're going to fuck this up. You're going to fuck up this interaction. You're going to fuck up the, the beauty that's there. If I'm sort of being fragile and vulnerable for a moment. One of the things I'm afraid of, I get so much love from, from people that listen or even like reach out, like you said, through the survey, like women and so on. I'm afraid that, yeah, you know, you admire me because you don't know me, but you won't admire me once you know me. So that, that's self-critical, but it's a silly, I mean, as you get older, you're like, yeah, okay. Yeah. Like I'm able to step away and objectively look at myself as like, there's no, this is, you're fine. You're good. It's like, but it's still there. This is the part of the brain that you can't just shut off. Does it, is like, what would fucking up in this conversation look like? Like it doesn't have to be rational, but I'm curious if there's like a specific thing. A lot of it is just a feeling like an amorphous fear of failure. What it would actually look like. Maybe because we're talking about sexuality, me not being able to eloquently explain the worldview I have and why I appreciate, appreciate it. That would make me feel like a failure because that would make me feel like maybe you don't know what you're doing. Right. Cause sex, sexuality and not sexuality, but even romantic relationships are really important to happiness to, they're really important to me. And I'm not sure like the conception of love I have, romantic love is like fully made rigorous. So especially when I'm talking to you that thinks very rigorously about a lot of these topics, I'm not sure if I've thought about them a lot. I feel them. I interact with the world in the space of feelings. Maybe I'm almost afraid to be very rigorous with these kinds of thoughts. Yes. And so I think the, the, the failure would be like, I would be confronted with the fact that I can't explain what makes me happy. That could be a failure. And there could be just a bunch of other failures. Another big failure is like, uh, not, I think you're a really brilliant person. Um, and a lot of folks I know, know and admire your work as well. And so like for me not to be part of highlighting that brilliance would be a failure. Definitely. Like because then other people might feel like, like notice the discrepancy or something. Yeah. The discrepancy. But no, no, no, that's not other people. Just my personal, like my, my personal feeling. And the other is like jokes. Cause like we're talking about sex, right? So for me, like, it's fun to just joke around, but you also have to tread carefully because like it's, it's a weird, it's a weird surface because like, you know, even I already feel bad about making a joke for 50 bucks for a hand job. That's crappy by me. Um, but I think, I think sometimes you just got to go for it. I went for it. It kind of flat, fell flat on his face. But, uh, um, that's, that's the thing of the conversation. I think there's like this fear where it's like, uh, if you become like scientific about something, you'll figure out that your feelings are unjustified. And then you'll experience this horrible thing where you're like, ah, shit, like I'm like afraid of this, but I'm sort of being forced to by my logical mind to like believe this thing. Uh, which I don't think, I don't think this is true at all. I, I think like your feelings are there for a reason, like they're for a good reason and like logic or like rigorous analysis or something should be dedicated to figuring out why it's there. Yeah. Not that, not by, not to like suppress it or tell it it shouldn't be there. You know, what do you think is more important to like, to just life to reason versus emotion? Like not life to what makes us human, I guess. My, my romantic narrative answer to this, which is like not rigorous at all is curiosity. Curiosity. Yeah. What is curiosity? That's such a middle. Curiosity is like both emotion and reason. Yeah. So it's like this pull because reason is the tool you use to figure out the puzzle. And then curiosity is the pull towards the puzzle. Yeah. I don't like worldviews that pit like emotion rationalities opposite each other. They feel like beautiful parts of like a cohesive whole. Yeah. Like if you're doing rationality to the extent where you're like suppressing some emotional reactions you have, then I think you're doing it wrong. You're like missing a big part of it. Like it should be like integrated. It should be like part of like one unified flow. Like the things that you like, if you want to be in a romantic committed relationship for the rest of your life, then this is like beautiful and good. And the kind of like logic that you're using to make sense of the world should be fitted into that correctly. I think it's really cool. Like anytime you have sort of like an internal at odds thing with it, I think you're like using some sort of force to suppress one or the other. Like, oh, I'm not allowed to reason about this or I'm not allowed to feel about that. And that feels harsh to me. And I think curiosity is the solution. Like if you're simply just calmly curious, oh, why do I feel like that? Let's go find out. That's so cool. Right? Like you can use logic and your feelings to like discover the answer. Do you sometimes, because you do this kind of technique, which is interesting, and I've mentioned it to others. You'll sometimes step away from like a third person perspective and describe the feeling you're feeling. Or like even just the situation, like you'll step out and talk about, wait, what is happening here? Like in the conversation itself. In the conversation itself. Yeah. First of all, what is that? Do you find that to be useful and interesting? Because it's very interesting. It feels raw and honest. The danger of it seems like you escape the actual experience of it though. So that's the trade-off. You make it intellectual, right? Is it though? Yeah. Intellectual to do that? I mean, maybe it is. I don't mean to. No. Maybe that's the wrong word. You can make it intellectual. Yeah. But you can still continue the same flavor because you're not fully disengaging from the conversation. You're just creating an extra metal layer. Yeah. That's happening at the same time. I think exploring the emotional reaction to what's going on in the moment. Yeah. Yeah. In some way, it's actually making it stronger or enriching it, like making it more. Yeah. Giving it more context, giving it deeper understanding. I think there's a way of going meta that is a flinch move. Like, oh, I noticed that we're doing this thing. I'm going to name it. And I think the thing that I described earlier, like when the homeless guy approached me and asked, you know, can you go home with me? And I was like, oh, are you trying to have sex with me right now? Like what I was doing was like a meta move. Like you're stepping outside. Like, and like, okay, what is the purpose of this conversation? And we explicitly identify it. And in that case, I think that is sort of like a flinch move. Like I'm not telling him my emotional response. I'm not like being fully present. I'm like sort of identifying it as a way to subvert what's going on. And I absolutely think this is a possible thing. But I usually try to be aware of that myself. And it depends on the purpose of what's going on. That guy, because that is actually like a chess move you did. You had a purpose with that chess move. But the flirtation is on. Like he could have like done a better move that would make you like curious. Like, huh. Yeah, that's true. Like interesting. Because you had an agenda with that. But he could have changed your mind. Like he could have with a few words. Because you just created extra layers, extra entry points. If he had gone more meta, he might have been like, okay, well, now I am going to sleep with you. Exactly. See, there is something, yeah, that aids into the chemistry of the conversation when you do that meta. I really enjoy it. It's like a rare, I forget, did you and I, I forget who, I've had a few people do that with me. Like just in conversation. And I feel like you were involved somehow because I've met you before somewhere. Yeah. I don't know if we were, or you were just in. We had a couple parties together. Or maybe it was just like a bunch of people that kind of play with the same, or like a conference. There's circling. It's just a practice explicitly dedicated towards that. What's circling? Circling is like. That might be the thing. Yeah, I think, I think we know we have some mutual circulars in our. Circlars? In our networks here. What's circling? I don't, I don't remember what circling. I'm going to describe it horribly. Because it's like one of those things that's difficult to describe unless you experience it. Like kind of like drugs. Yeah. But it's something like you sit around, there's like kind of guidelines to the conversation where you talk about the present moment. Yeah. And you're like honest about your experiences as much as you can be. And if you don't want to be honest, then you say, I don't want to be honest. Yeah. And your like commitment to connection. So you're like, you're here to like actually connect with the other person, understand them and be understood. Yeah. You're not supposed to like project. So if you're like have an analysis about the other person, you own it. You're like, I'm experiencing you as this, you know, and then you check is it true. Are you supposed to be almost like converting it towards the thing you're thinking? Like constantly? If it feels right in the moment, you can. The thing is, it's very amorphous, right? It's like almost like creating a magical sensation. And I've been with some, I've seen some very good circulars, really high skill circle. And I feel like I'm on drugs when that happens. It's very rare to see. Does it feel honest somehow? Yeah, very honest. Like, like right now in this moment, I'm feeling like kind of like nervous energy because I'm talking to you and this is a unique situation. And like, I want you to think I'm cool. I want everybody listening to me to think I'm cool. But I'm also having some sort of delight at being able to express in this way. And like some admiration for how you like set up and built this thing that I can be a part of. And all of these things are sort of in my body right now is this sort of vibrating high thing. I remember like in the party setting, because I had to talk to a few people, I felt like it was going sexual very quickly. Okay. I don't know if you remember this, but the first time I met you, I didn't know who you were. I just heard, I knew I'd heard your name. Like you noticed your name. And I'm like, I think I've heard people discuss that. Sure. And I was in the middle of a very sexual conversation with another woman. Oh, you were? Yeah, I was. And you just like turned around and left very shortly afterwards. And I thought it was very... Oh, was I listening in on the conversation or something like that? It was like, I was talking to her and you were just kind of like right there. And so we introduced ourselves and then we continued on with the conversation. You were like standing there and listening. Yeah. I don't think I would have left the cut. So it's funny, you probably interpreted it in a different way. I interpret it as you like not wanting to listen to like graphic sexual stuff. Was it like super graphic? I don't know. I was asking her about, I was doing, I was interviewing her about her fetish, basically. Oh, yeah. I don't think I would have walked away from that. I would have been like curious. Oh, interesting. Because I don't often see people having a deep interview about fetishes. Because like I wouldn't even be, listen, I'm like Jane Goodall here. Like I'm not like, I'm not afraid of sexuality or something like that. I just have certain values in terms of like monogamy and so on. But I think sexuality is really beautiful. Yeah. I don't think, yeah, I can't imagine myself walking away from that conversation. Somebody must have like called you or something. Because I didn't remember exactly how it worked. I just remember thinking later on. Or maybe I thought I was intruding. Oh, maybe. Because if. I was kind of drunk, so. And I probably was very drunk too. Okay. I would like to actually have like footage of that conversation so we can actually interpret what actually happened. Because it's probably, I mean, you know, human interactions are funny like that. They can happen for all kinds of reasons. Have you ever fallen in love with a client? No. I mean like in tiny ways, like micro loves. Have you ever fallen in love love? I mean, I don't know what it means, but probably. The thing that other people say when they say fall in love is probably something I've experienced. What do you think they mean? What is love? Ayla. Yeah, I know. No. It's a fantastic question. I think, so love is one of those words that refers to like a billion different concepts. And I think we maybe should just taboo the term to have a better understanding of what we're referring to. Because there's things like feeling like intense attachment. There's something feeling like soulfully aligned. There's like sexual attraction. There's like excitement. Talking to me and saying we should taboo the term love in this conversation. How dare you? No. Romantic love. To make it flourish into lots of other new definitions. Okay. Thank you. We're expanding love. It sounds like you're censoring the most important word. This is like 1984 all over again. Okay. Also on the book reading list. No. Okay. Listen. No. Romantic love. Like a deep intimacy for somebody else. Like a deep connection with a human being. That is also. I mean, yeah. With polyamory, it's tricky. And your relationship with sex is also tricky. So like what's the difference between a deep friendship and a friendship that also has a sexual component? I remember being very confused about that when I did a lot of LSD. I was like, what? The line between romantic relationships and everything else kind of got blurred. I was like, oh, I'm just like in intimacy. And some intimacies mean that you spend your life together more and have sex. But like the same basic thing is there. Like you're seeing someone for who they are. Do you think you can be, if you're heterosexual, do you think you could be really deeply close with friends with a guy and not have sexual relationships with him? I assume it's possible. Like if anything is ever possible, then probably, yeah. Everything is possible. Time travel is possible. Quantum mechanics makes everything. Traveling faster than the speed of light is possible, according to general relativity. Everything's possible. So you're saying there's a chance. Dumber has taught me that everything is fucking possible. It's probably not super likely, assuming that they are like attracted to each other. Yeah. And for some of the surveys and statistical analysis, we're interested in like what's the likely thing here versus like what's possible. If you say possible, it's like anything's open. Did you just avoid answering the love thing? Okay. I have a lot to say about love. I just need to be precise. Yeah. Okay. Let's be precisely and precise and continue. Oops, sorry. That's my phone. It feels like a passive aggressive suggestion that we shouldn't talk about love anymore, but we shall continue. No, we should absolutely talk about love. It's just the term is very confusing. Because it's like some people say the word love and the thing that they're thinking of is like, oh, the butterfly is like the sparkle thing that I get in my stomach when I think about my loved one. But I study relationships over time. I just released, like I did a survey about it and that sparkle goes away within like two to four years. But people still report loving their partner after that. So I'm like, okay. Like when you say the word love, what the fuck are we talking about? Yeah. I just want to get on the same page. Okay. So what are the different, so the butterflies, boy, I'd like to push back on two to four years on the butterflies, but okay. I mean, statistically, not everybody. Butterflies don't give a fuck about statistics. You ever heard of the, like the flap of a butterfly wing causing like nuclear war? How do you describe that with your statistics? Okay. So butterflies, that's the basic infatuation, the chemistry of the initial interactions, sure. But a deep, meaningful connection like that feels like sexuality is a component of that. Like the kind of intimacy that's only possible when you're also sexual with another human being. On top of that, you have the butterfly. And on top of that, you have the friendship. And on top of that, you have like, what is that? That's a sandwich. The love sandwich. The love sandwich. Okay, I'm down to call it a love sandwich. Okay. Sandwich. We just call it a sandwich. L-S. Okay. What role does that play in the human condition? He asked me about the human condition. It's an interesting phrase. Yeah. I'm like, this is like not a phrase that's common in my own thinking. Sure. Human condition is a good summary. You know, what do you think? What do you feel when I say human condition? I think I ask very different kinds of questions than you. Sure. Yeah. Which is interesting. I've been trying to like figure out like what kind of brain that you have is like creating like this category of question. Which is why I was like saying like there's something about a poetic narrative in there. Yeah. Because it's very like aesthetic. I think you've asked much more aesthetic questions than I do. I don't even know what the word aesthetic means really. Like artistic. Artistic. Yeah. Well, I mean, I know what aesthetic means, but I also don't know what it means. It's kind of like the word love. Oh. Aesthetic perspective. Yeah. Well, but part of it in conversation, you don't want to ask a question that has an answer fully, always. Like do you have an example of a question that has? What's the meaning of, oh, has an answer? Yeah. Like one that you say was like, ah, that's like a bad question because it has an answer. How many sexual partners you had in the last year? Oh my God. That's such a, okay. I feel like we just like got to some sort of crux about like the kinds of questions that we like to answer. Sure. Because I would love that question. Okay. Right. To ask it of people. All right. But does that really tell the story of what you've felt over the past year? That's true. But then I could just tell you. Okay. So by when you're saying the kinds of questions that you like, the ones that don't have an answer, by not an answer, you mean like not an answer where you can know that you're done telling it. Is that? That you can escape having to think by actually answering it. I see. Yeah. The struggle is the place where we discover something, not the destination. Okay. It's working. It's working. Okay. So what is the role of the love sandwich in the human condition? Okay. That's fine. I take that question, but it's a stupid question. You have to. I'm ready to try. Do you like love? Do you personally like love? Do you like love? Yeah. I mean, I think like there's a part of me that feels like I have unconditional love for all things. Like when you're talking about the class being beautiful, I felt that. It's like, that feels like it, it felt like it rang something that like I have a similar resonance in me for that. If I were to circle right now, I feel like you're avoiding the love question. Uh-huh. The love sandwich question. What's your own personal feeling towards loving another human being versus having sex with another human being? I think love is like one of the concepts that dissolved for me a long time ago. So I have difficulty directly answering it. Sure. But I have the experience. When you describe the love sandwich, I feel like I have had that experience. I have it currently for some people also. Like I'm dating people and I have that. So people who you date, you would describe sharing a love sandwich with them? Yeah. Okay. So how does... I mean, that's great to hear. So you're not, are you afraid of love? No, not at all. So can you describe to me polyamory? What is it? What does it mean? Because it's like different terms. Yeah. You have a nice blog post about it. Yeah. I have a personal definition of it, which I readily admit is not shared by a lot of people. But to me, the definition of polyamory is simply not forbidding your partner from pursuing intimacy with others. Yeah. It doesn't mean that you have to pursue it personally. Like two people could be married and only have had sex with each other for 20 years. And as long as they're like, you know what? If ever you want to go have sex with somebody else, you're welcome to do that. Well, the interesting thing you said is that doesn't mean they have to do it. They just have the freedom to do it. Yeah. It's the freedom that matters to me. Which is, I mean, it's called the polyamory post. You have so many good blog posts. People should just go look at your, read your writing because it's really, really strong and often backed by data. But also just a deeply honest look at yourself and your understanding of the world. It's, it's night. It's. Yeah. It's refreshing to be like with a lot of stuff I disagree with. But I feel like if I disagree with it, you'll be very open arguing and kind of thinking through it. There's just the honesty that radiates from the whole thing. Anyway. So, yeah. I mean, it would be interesting to kind of explore what polyamory, like how it works. What are the different versions? What is the, what does that freedom look like? What is it? What does that freedom feel like to be able to go see other people? Depends on you. Like, do you want to go see other people? Maybe you do. Maybe you don't. So usually for me, I tend to be pretty happy with like one or a few people. And then occasionally I like some novelty. So usually I'll go like, like I host orgies sometimes. So I'll host an orgy and then I'll go have sex with people with the orgy and then that'll be good for the novelty for a while. Can I ask you about orgies? Yeah. So how many people are at an orgy? What's like a standard, we're having a Sunday picnic and it's an orgy. What's like a number of people at an orgy? Oh, it depends. I've been, I've only recently started hosting orgies, but I have been to a lot of orgies. I would say like the median is maybe 15 people. I like how you say median versus mean. Okay. Median is 15 people. What's the, what's the gender distribution usually? Usually about even. It's like ideal if you can get more women than men in most of them. I've recently been hosting free use orgies or orgies where consent is assumed by default when you enter. And of course you can revoke it anytime or go over a whole bunch of rules to make sure it's very safe. You like have wristbands. So nobody's actually doing anything they don't want to. But in those ones, you have to have more men than women. I thought free use was like consensual, like at any time, but it's at any time within the constraints of this building or something like that. Yeah. So at the orgies, it's like you, by entering, if you wear a wristband, then you are like by default opting into consent. So people don't have to like do a thing where they negotiate with you and like be like, is this okay? It's just the default is like, you just go for it. And if they want you to stop, they say the safe word, like red, don't, and then you have to stop. And we do like exercise in the beginning of people saying red to make sure that everybody knows exactly what the rules are. What's your favorite safe word? Red. Red. When I first started doing like weird kinky shit, I was like, oh, let's make a safe word. And we picked the word foliage. I was like, that's goofy, right? And then, but then eventually came a time where I did actually, in fact, want to say the safe word and I couldn't, I was like in agony. I was like crying. I'm like, I can't make myself say this stupid word right now. Foliage. So after that, I was like red. Doesn't matter. I don't care. It's not funny. We're just going with very simple red. Very practical. How does an orgy compare sexually to like a one-on-one sexual experience? Like what, is it same ballpark or is it fundamentally different? I mean, the experience of both orgies and one-on-one sex can be like really high variety. There's a high variety. But you kind of, it's a little bit like you're having sex with someone, but you're surrounded by really realistic VR porn of other people having sex. Oh, okay. Cool. And sometimes it's like threesomes also, like maybe there's another person involved, but it's hard to like have a whole bunch of people in one cluster because usually there's kind of different little clusters of people having their experience. Sure. I once was part of a 10-woman orgy. It was a total lesbian thing and that felt like a writhing cluster. It was very nice. But typically you kind of separate out with like very small pods of people doing stuff. Okay. So back to polyamory. So what's a good, what does it take to manage? Do you have a main partner if you're being polyamorous and you're dating multiple people? Is there usually a main one for you personally? For me personally, kind of, yes. Right now I kind of, too, that aren't, like I see roughly around, for me it's kind of just descriptive. Like if I just happen to be seeing you a lot more and I confide in you more, then you're descriptively my primary partner. But I don't usually have rules to protect that. I'm down with rules to protect it if you're trying to build something. Like if I buy a house together, I'll be like, okay, we need to like, whatever our relationship is, we have to do the thing where we're both paying the rent for the house or the mortgage or whatever. A lot of people do have primaries, so it's very common to have like prescriptive, like I'm going to get married to you and you're not allowed to like have anal sex with anybody else. That sort of thing. What about like the transparency and the communication that you have to do? Yeah. I usually try to be super honest about it. Extremely, yeah. I mean, I've learned over time that like even if it seems like a very small thing, you talk about the small thing. Because often I would just sort of have like a small twitch in myself. I don't know if I like that. But I'd be like, okay, this is really minor. It's probably nothing. And if I talk about it, it's going to make it into a thing. And I just don't want to make it into a thing, you know? And I've come to realize that it's worth making it into a thing. Because I can't predict at the time if like the small feeling I have is going to grow. And then when I grow it, now it's like much more difficult to deal with. So now it's like any little bit of jealousy I have immediately communicate it. I'm like, ah, I'm a little jealous of you right now. I don't hold that in at all. I used to be kind of like, back when I first started being poly, I used to try to pretend that I was not a jealous person. And that backfired quite a lot. That's really interesting. So you do still feel jealousy? Oh, yeah, definitely. And it's also interesting that you kind of recommend when there's a little bit of jealousy to bring that to the surface. Yeah, just like excessively communicate. Even if it feels stupid. Like this is, I feel like a cliche. I feel like a stupid therapist training video. Like I just feel ridiculous sometimes when I'm saying the things. But it's just, I've learned over time it's just important to just say the things. Because like, you know, the traditional view of jealousy is exactly like you said. If you bring it up to the surface, like it's going to sound like you're overreacting to everything. But you're saying like, still do it. Because you're basically, your brain blows stuff out of proportion. Yeah. And it's good to like be going through it with a partner. Like I have a partner right now who's like dating this other girl. And he like really likes her. And he like went traveling with her and stuff. And I was like, I feel jealous about it. And I have to tell him that. And that way he can be with me in it. He like holds me when I'm feeling jealous. And it's like a bonding experience, you know. But it's important for me that he's able to handle it. Like I try not to date people who really freak out when I have negative emotions. Because I want to be able to express that I'm upset by something they're doing without it being taken as a demand that they change their behavior. Right. So he has to be able to skillfully handle that interaction. He has to be like, cool. All right. You're jealous. Like I'm not going to freak out about it. I'm not going to change my behavior. I'm just going to be with you in that. We're going to sit in it together. I mean, is some of that just insecurity that he should also just comfort? Like basically alleviate your insecurity? Bring you back to like a rational objective evaluation? Right. I mean, my relationships, I love it when people do not reassure me. I like not being comforted quite a lot. Okay. And so usually the people I date don't. I'm very gravitating. Like it's one of the things people do to make me fall in love with them is if I say something really like terrible. And they're just like, do not give me any comfort whatsoever. Like that's where my heart gets captured. So I typically am in relationships where I'm like, oh man, I'm so jealous. And they just like do not reassure me at all. And that's good because it doesn't give me an out. Like I have to deal with it myself. Right. Like maybe it is true that the other woman is better than me. Like maybe that is an actual possible reality. And I don't want to be dealing with my life in a way where I'm like pretending like I'm only okay when that reality is not true. Would you like them to say that? That the other woman is better than you? Yeah. Or that they prefer. If they feel that. Yeah. I mean, they should say it according to themselves. Like, oh, I prefer. Like I have a better time with her than I have with you. Then I would want to know that. Yeah. And even though that might be painful to hear. Yes. That which can be destroyed by the truth should be. That which can be destroyed by the truth. What is that? That your ego or something like that? Yeah, my ego. So your ego just generally grows and you like the destruction of it. Yeah. It's like really accurate. So the process of truth. It's not like a fun experience. Like I've had like guys be like, well, you're not as pretty as I'd like. And I'm just like, oh, you know, stabbed to the heart. But then also like give me your number after. Yeah. Man, that's kind of beautiful. What do you think of monogamous relationships? Like philosophically? Can you maybe steal mad or make the case for monogamous relationships? Can you understand the pros and cons of a monogamous relationship? Yeah. I mean, it depends on how you defend. If you're like, hey, you can do whatever you want. But you and I are going to spend the rest. Like we just, you're 80 years old. And like, oh, we spent 60 years in a marriage together. We've never had sex with anybody else. I think that's like awesome. That's what you want. That's great. I have like a little bit more problems with people doing that while also forcing their partner not to misbehave if they want to. Like if you're like, oh, we only made it this far in a monogamous relationship because I forced my partner not to pursue an intimacy that she wanted to. Then I feel like a little like more like, I don't know if that's great. How do you know if it's a real want for an intimacy? Like checking out a attractive person while being inside a monogamous relationship. Yeah. How do you score that? Is that bad that the person cannot pursue those feelings? I mean, it depends if they want to. Like I often find people attractive if I don't want to pursue. I'm also okay with people entering into agreements. Like if you and I want to agree, like I'm only going to enter this because I'm going to be so hurt if you pursue somebody else. So I'm not going to pursue anybody else. That seems fine to me. But I also extend that. Like if somebody is like, I don't want you to have any friends. I'm going to feel really insecure. And like, okay, like if you want to enter that agreement, like I feel the same way. Like I think you should have the right to do it if this is what you want. But I also kind of, I feel like a little weird about restricting your partner from doing things, you know? Oh, but I guess if you're honest about it and you just put it on the table. Yeah. I don't want you to have any friends. Yeah. I want you to sit in a box. Yeah. I guess if you're like really on the, but then there's like, there's a power dynamic that like you can be quite influential in a relationship and convincing your partner. And it sure sounds like you're honestly agreeing to a thing, but you're not really agreeing. That's the, I mean, part of that is the beauty of relationships, right? Like it's messy. It can be messy. It's hard to know what you really want. Yeah. I think that's mainly my complaint with monogamy. Like I'm down with like conscious monogamy. Yeah. But I think so many relationships are like monogamous by default. Like people, it's not actually right for them, but they just get into it because culture just doesn't give them another option. And they don't even ask themselves the question, is this right for me? Which like, I'm a weird ass person who thinks a lot of weird shit, but I didn't even think about polyamorous an option before I had heard that it existed. Yeah. And I was only when I first met my first polyamorous couple and I was like, oh, that's what I am. That's clearly the thing that I am. Yeah. It's funny because to me, monogamy, it's not, it doesn't make sense for it to be a default. Like to me, monogamy goes against human nature. That's in some sense, like romance is a fuck you to the way the world works. Really? Yeah. Like it's a, like Romeo and Juliet romance, like traditional description of what romance looks like versus like, sure, there's like a million variations of that. But in my, in my head, like this partnership that's for a long time together is a kind of, you know, like, I don't know, like true romance. You know that movie? It's a really fucking good movie. I haven't seen it now. Okay. There's just like, you're together against the world. Yeah. That's the, I mean, that's what close friendship feels like. It's like ride or die. Yeah. Like that. I guess it doesn't, it doesn't, it can be, it can span across multiple, you can have multiple partners in that way. Yeah, absolutely. But I just don't see monogamy as like, definitely not a default. I would actually, like honestly, would probably see polyamory as a more natural default. Yeah. I mean, I guess it depends on what you mean by default. Like most of human history has been sort of a weird mix. Like you get polygamy and monogamy are the kind of the main arrangements. But it's just like human nature. Yeah, people are attracted to other people and they want to. Yeah. Especially in longer term relationships. I tracked, in my relationship survey, I tracked the amount of cheating over time in a relationship. Like how long have you been in this relationship and have you cheated? What's the results of that? Men cheat a lot. Women too, but men cheat about 30% more than women do. I also asked men and women to predict if they think their partner has cheated. And people's predictions were about the same. So people roughly predicted that their male or female spouse hadn't cheated about the same rate, but men cheated much more than women. So who was more correct in their prediction though? So men were more correct in their prediction predicting women. And women were more off. Women thought men cheated much less than they actually did. But both of them were off, but like the male gap was significantly more. So yeah, I mean, you're right. When you say monogamy is not default, like I think you're like really getting at something. Like human beings are just, especially in long-term relationships, difficult to only want one person. But to be fair, I think monogamy and commitment are very different. I think you'd be incredibly, I've known so many very long-term, super committed poly couples that live lives that look very similar to the very romantic monogamous couples. Like children, houses, like 20 years. Yeah. And that works great for them. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, there's so much to like open your mind to in these kinds of conversations, these kinds of ideas. But I also like realize like some of the cake is baked. Like I have some assumptions that are hard to break through. Like what? For myself. Like it's difficult for me to imagine a polyamorous relationship for me that would work. Yeah. But I don't have enough data. I don't have a, like I have very little, but like at this point, it's like, I haven't eaten pizza in like 20 years. Cause I know I just don't, there's a bunch of stuff. I just eat low carb cause it makes me feel good. But there's so many foods I haven't explored. It's just like, well, I know what I love. So you explore every once in a while. Yeah. Yeah. And you kind of figure that out. But at the same time, you're humbled by like even talking to you or looking at your data. Like sexuality is a fascinating topic because it seems that we're very, like we were talking about, very afraid of this topic. Like to be really honest with ourselves about it. The whole like academic research is afraid of it, but it's so core to who we are as human beings. I got to ask you about this. I can't believe it took us long to get there, but one of your many fascinating surveys is on fetishes. You wrote a blog post about it. Probably several cause it's like a huge data. Still in progress. Yeah. So the one I'm referring to is on popularity and tabooness of various fetishes. So what are some interesting takeaways? I got to pull up this graph cause it's freaking epic. Yes. This is a big graph and it has tabooness as one axis and popularity as the other. Okay. For people who are just listening on the X axis is tabooness. Yeah. Asked to rate how taboo society viewed the sexual interest. And on the Y axis is percent of people reporting interest. Log scale. Oh boy. All right. So just some examples on the low tabooness and high popularity. There's a correlation here. I think you said it's 0.69. Yeah. It's just not, it's just hilarious. Is it still 0.69? Are you tracking that? I haven't since I did this. Yeah. So like the last taboo stuff is more likely to be popular and the more taboo stuff is less likely to be popular. And on the like missionary position, fingering, vagina, blowjobs, light spanking, cuddling. Cuddling is more taboo than missionary. I think people are conceiving like if you're like I'm really sexually aroused by cuddling specifically. Sure. Then you're like that's a little more weird than getting specifically aroused by blowjobs. You expect people to be aroused by blowjobs. So this was like getting at like as a fetish versus like an activity. Yeah. As a specific, as like a concrete sexual interest. Like I'm specifically interested in this thing. Yeah. And so those are thighs and lips, different body parts, jawlines. And then some of it is color based on more female preference versus male preference. Like jawlines is more female preference. Being submissive is more female preference. Light bondage. Yeah. More female. There's a lot of interesting ones. There's so much. Okay. But then on the far side of that, I mean it gets pretty dark. But even all along the way, like extreme bondage, being at 50 taboonists, pegging, pain, giving pain, sexual frustration. I suppose that is a kink. Yeah. And there's so many interesting ones like to me like just that I haven't even like considered. Yeah. I had to do so much research into fetishes to compile the list. Are there some surprising like options to you that you're like, oh, okay, this is like a fetish. Yeah. Well, more confusing was like what the fetishes are about. Because like I didn't want to overlap fetishes. So I had to kind of look into them. Yeah. And I'm like, there's like such interesting manifestations of core drives. Like if you're really aroused by disgust, like maybe you're very into rolling around in dirt, but you're not into rolling around with ice cream. So I'm like, okay, I have to make those into two separate fetishes, you know. Sure. And like I'm seeing like at the far end, rodents. Like different types of incest. Branding. So there's like pain. And then. Like wound fucking. Sex with animals, I guess. Dogs, horses. Receiving oral sex from an animal is high tabooness and pretty high popularity. Yeah. Surprisingly high popularity. I was really shocked by that one. I wouldn't triple check that number because I'm like, no way this amount of people are reporting interest. Do you know which animal? Is there. No, I didn't specify. I asked like which animals are erotic and then I separately asked like how erotic is it to receive oral sex from your preferred animal. This is so fascinating. So I would. Like, can we just talk about the methodology of this? This feels like deeply honest map of humanity in a way we don't usually map humanity. Yeah. Like, because it's so many, like your fetishes are so meaningful to each individual person. Yeah. That's what I love about this work. It's like nobody cares about someone's fetishes. You never get to express them. And if you have a more unusual fetish, people usually judge you. Yeah. So it's like this tiny little pocket of like this shame thing. But it's so cool to me. Yeah. That like human brains could be oriented in such a way like wound fucking. Like somebody finds that so erotic and that's so cool. Yeah. And then they probably, it should be explored. Like how did that come to be? You mentioned that we like to construct narratives that somehow is grounded in childhood. But maybe it's genetic. Maybe it has to do with, maybe you can actually form and unform that fetish very quickly. I don't know. This is one of the things that I'm researching. So in the big survey that I'm doing, I asked so many questions about childhood. All the ones that I think like we have common theories about like, oh, are you abused? Is it yelled at by a man or a woman? Stuff like that. Like, are you, was it really sexually repressive? You know, is it gender roles where you've expected to conform? A whole bunch of stuff. And then I asked, you know, obviously about like a massive amount of fetishes. And my sample size right now is 500,000 people. 500,000 people. Yeah, it's massive. And I have to say for all of it. And the result looks like this not really correlated. Nothing that I asked about in childhood, nothing correlates with fetish preference later in life. It does correlate with onset. Lots of things that happen in childhood can like change like the age at which it triggers. They have so many fascinating blog posts. You had a blog post, I think, on the age of fetish onset. Yeah. And like you really nicely organized it by age, like reproduction as a fetish, I guess pregnancy. Yeah. Yeah. At age of 17, about 16.9. Toys and like anal beads is 15.5. Yeah. One of the interesting things I found, I mean, this data set is so huge. It's taking me a long time to go through it. So this is like snippets from what I remember when I was glancing through the data. So this part is not rigorous. But I seem to get the impression that if you are, if a fetish occurs for you earlier, like if you're much earlier onset, you're more likely to report being extremely interested into it. But so later onset means you're going to be like less into the fetish. But if it hits earlier, it's like passionate. But I wonder if it passes. Yeah. I didn't measure old fetishes at all. Like no longer, right? You used to, but it's no longer there. Interesting. One interesting thing that I don't understand is that non-cis people seem to have more correlation between childhood experiences and fetishes. So I was saying that there's no correlation between childhood experiences and fetishes. This holds for cis people, but trans people, especially trans men, there's a correlation. It doesn't mean they have absolutely higher rates of abuse or fetishes or anything. But I'm just saying that like for them, there does actually seem to be some sort of connection between childhood experiences and sexuality later in life. And I don't understand why this applies to one group and not the other. I don't have a good theory for that. So usually you try, like when you see something like that, you'll try to construct a theory and see if you can find, like you keep that theory in mind, like a hypothesis of why it would be. And then you ask further questions to try to elaborate. So can you maybe talk about the methodology of how you got the 500,000? Like what, like how did this come to be? I might go into way too much detail about this because I thought about this so much. Because I'm like, the question is, how do you get a lot of people to take a big survey? The longer the survey is, the lower the response rate. And I really wanted to do one big comprehensive survey so I could like check a whole bunch of correlations within it. Because it's, you know, more annoying and it's harder to get a lot of people to retake similar surveys to each other at a time. So I'm like, okay, I need to convince a very large number of people to take a lot of these questions. And even building the questions, that was really hard because I'm like, okay, I need a comprehensive amount of fetishes. I can't ask everybody to answer for every single niche fetish. I'm like, do you like ball gags? Do you like funnel gags? Do you like wife shrew gags or whatever? I'm like, you can't do that. Nobody's going to finish that survey. Okay, fine. I'm not going to ask questions. What's a wife shrew? But okay. I'm not doing the, I'm trying to refer to like, there's like a thing that like. Different types of gags. Different types. Okay. Yeah, different. So I'm like, so what I need to do is I need to ask people a question. Like, are you in like bondage? And if you say yes, then I'll go ask you all the bondage questions. Ah, got it. Right. But then this seems simple, but then it's just exploded because I'm like, how do I categorize these fetishes? There's like, if you're into splashing, which is like, you like sitting in cakes, you like getting in mud, but basically like kind of messy sensory. Like, is this a disgusting? Is it a humiliation thing? Is it a sensory thing? Like, which category? Anyway, so it took me like two months of just agonizing over each fetish because you don't want to miss a fetish. You don't want to like have a really important thing that you accidentally put in the disgust category when it actually belongs in the humiliation category. You know? Well, let me think about that. Because like, you're still catching it. You're just miscategorizing it. Right. Because if you're into splashing and you're like, this is clearly a humiliation thing. So you say, yes, I'm into humiliation stuff. And then I don't ask you about splashing. Then I'm missing a whole data set of people because I've falsely categorized your question. You're going to miss stuff. You're just picking what's less and less important to miss. Well, I'm trying to get people into the right question set. Sure. Because like, I can't ask you all the questions. I have to ask you a couple overarching questions to know what specific questions to ask you. And so I have to, those overarching questions have to be really, really well calibrated so that I can accurately feed you into the right sub part of the survey. Awesome. And so that was extremely difficult if I'm, when I'm dealing with, I think it was like 850 fetishes. So I did a couple of things to spot check. I did a couple of questions where I asked, like in the detailed in the survey, but like also the beginning of the survey just to see like what percentage of people I was capturing. But, and then, and then I scored the survey. So if you take it, I had other people answer preliminary surveys where they gave me data about how taboo the various fetishes were. And then I use that data so that when you fill out the survey, it's extremely comprehensive and you get data about exactly how taboo your interests are. And then you get a score at the end. And I give you an equivalent kinky character, which I also had people write a whole bunch of fictional characters and some historic ones about like how kinky they were. So then I matched the historic character, kinky character to your score. So that makes it like more fun, like gamifies it a little bit. And you could, like, you can brag about like how people would share it with others. Share it. And a lot of the characters were like goofy, like, like there's SpongeBob and like Hitler's on there and, you know, South Park characters. What is, what is, what kink does Hitler have? I think he's like, he's around Marilyn Monroe, which is like slightly above average. Oh, sorry. I thought there was like a two dimensional space somehow. So this is like a literally from zero to. How kinky, yeah. So Hitler's a bodice of Marilyn Monroe. Who is the most, what's the character for like. Willy Wonka. Is the most kinky. Was the most kinky, yeah. Okay. I think like maybe Captain America was the least kinky or something. Or Gandhi. Meanwhile. But that's another conversation. Oh boy. Yeah. So it went viral on TikTok basically. Because people were like, what? I got this insane character. And then the sample size exploded from 40,000 to 500,000. Wow. So like all it took is that kind of incentive? Or did you like at first have to pay people for this? No, it was just that incentive. And what about the demographic of the different people that took it? Mostly younger. So usually early 20s, predominantly female, like 70% female. 70% female. Which is pretty like, wraps out a TikTok demographics pretty well. Oh, okay. I got it. But that's interesting. Young people are probably better for this kind of survey. Because there's probably a culture that's a little bit more honest about their sexuality. Yeah, most likely. I think people are incentivized to be honest when they're getting a true identity response out of it. Like if you're doing it for money, you don't care. But like if you are invested in the result, you want to know what the truth of the answers are, then you actually. It's possible that you also don't want to know the truth. Yeah, this is true. But on average, hopefully that doesn't. I mean, these are really difficult. Like what, is there some interesting little quirks that people should know about your methodology that you had to kind of solve to try to get to a really good survey? So one of you said is the categorization to make it more efficient. Is there some for the analysis part? Yeah. So the graph that you were talking about is a binary. So it's like if somebody expressed even a little bit of interest, then it goes into the graph. So it's like 80% of people expressed even a little bit of interest. So it's not representing degree of interest. It's not differentiating between them at all. So it's possible that like some fetishes have exactly the same amount of people, like are at least a little bit into them. But one of them, it's very extreme interest and the other is like vague and not very intense. So that's not reflected. I also like probably didn't represent the visual part right. Like might not be intuitive, but. So you chose a log scale, but it was kind of spreads things out to makes it more and more clear. Because the linear, it was just so clustered at the bottom, you couldn't really separate it out. So there's obviously a selection effect. It's possible that like the identity result at the end impacted people's results a little bit. But the thing is like I'm comparing it to what exists. Like what is the alternative? And right now the research on this stuff is terrible. So it's like I'm not saying my research is perfect, but it's like at least it's something. Like it's something that's pointing us maybe in a direction that we might be able to do more research on. And you're making the data available. Yeah. I'm doing it slowly because I ask about so many questions. It's like not very anonymized. So I'm releasing the small sections of the data at a time. Have you published in like journals and stuff? No, I haven't. Do you have any interest in that or is your approach? I'm like I'm conflicted about it. Like it sounds cool because then I could be like ha ha I'm published in a journal. And then people who are yelling about me who don't know anything about statistics on Twitter. Like then I can go like shove it in their face. But then you're also giving in to the silly criticism. Yeah. Giving in. Like I don't like I want I feel so passionate about extra science. Like science that you can just do. Like I want to make science accessible. Like anybody can just go look and learn about the basics of like doing a survey or figuring out how to interpret information. And doing a published journal feels like I'm betraying my cause a little bit. That's often behind a paywall. Yeah. It goes against the. I mean I think you not publishing in a journal is doing a big public service. Aw. I think that's the first time I've heard that. Thank you. Oh like just coming from like on this topic. The elite. The elitism I see on the psychology side with the journals and the academia. The positions and the institutions you come from. All of that. That goes against. I think that's more useful for math and computer science and so on. Where there's like clear like. But even then. Even then. Code is code. Data is data. Yeah. Like prestige shouldn't matter at all. Yeah. Maybe. Maybe for like. Like biological experiments like virology or something like that. It's good to be from a major lab that has a reputation for like. Going through all the procedures like you know you can trust. But here like you're dealing with a giant mess of humanity. Like. It's beautiful to be transparent. To be raw. To be exploring it together with everybody. Yeah. It's really beautiful. I think people like have a lot of incentive to doubt the results. Like a lot of the research I'm doing is to like cis and trans people. Like. We don't have any data about transsexuality. Like not very good at least. And I'm really curious. I don't really have an agenda about it. I think like. Being trans is cool. If you want to be trans do it. And like I have some skepticism about like gender theory. But like it doesn't come down to impact like the way I think trans people should be treated. Which I think is like. Treat them. You know. Be fucking nice and human about it. I don't know. But. When I'm talking about the thing. Like. My conclusions are that like. Transsexuality is really unique. It's not like. Like cis or. Cis woman or man sexuality at all. And to me this is super cool. But like a lot of people. This is very politicized right now. Like. The data into like. Transsexual preferences. Like it's so loaded. Which is really sad. Because I am very accepting of weird sexuality. Like if you're into a weird thing. I'm like. Good for you. This is super cool. Like let's figure out how to make it. So that you can explore the thing you're into. Without any stigma. But because there's so much stigma. That like if you find it. One demographic is into weirder sex stuff than the other. Like it's hard to present that in a way that people don't weaponize. So it's been. It's been really politically touchy subject here. Yeah. But you do it in a way that's not. Does it's not. Feel like it has an agenda. Right. You're just exploring. Yeah. I feel pretty open to what I'm going to find. Like I often have no idea what the data is going to tell me. And I'm like. I pre-commit. Like I could say A, B, or C. And I'm like down to publish any of those findings. Thanks. So you've put together an ask whole cart deck. Yeah. A lot of awesome questions to ask at a party. Or anywhere. Honestly. Including on the podcast. Let me ask you one from that deck. Is sex really about power? So what's the role of power dynamics in sex? With everything you understand. Like from the survey. In terms of what people are turned on by. You've talked about like the preferences that women versus men have. For like submissiveness and dominance. And we've already talked about it a little bit. But like it's expressed more strongly. I already forget the results. But I feel like women have more preference to be submissive. Yeah. This is one of the things that got me into researching fetishes to begin with. Because I think I came across some data. I did like a brief survey where roughly around 60% of women report being submissive. And 40% of men report being dominant. And this was really fascinating to me. I'm like why is there this gap? Like why do we not? Because I guess I have some priors that maybe this is an evolutionary thing. Like the submission dominant. Like strong men. And you know like women would be like oh this hot man. You know the men are like ravaging and stuff. I'm like shouldn't this be in our genes? But there's a gap. What's the gap? The gap is the dominant submissive gap. More women are submissive than there are dominant men. Oh. Yeah. Wait really? Yeah. It's a pretty significant gap. And this is held up like it depends on what you're testing. I've tested a bunch of things. This is part of why I did this big survey. Nice. But it depends against again on like what kind of dominance you're measuring. But overall it's a roughly 40 to 60%. So when you say there's not many dominant men. Then the meaning like they express like a desire to be dominant in the relationship? Yeah. Or like in sexually. Sexually. Sexually. In bed. So like if I ask questions like how much do you like being dominant in bed? Like men are less likely to answer strong yes to that question. But if I ask are you likely to be submissive? Like women are very much yes. Really? And that's expressive? Like that represents truth? My guess is. What's wrong with men? So this is I think there's some reflection like FetLife. So FetLife is this website where people like sign up and connect based on their fetishes. Yeah. And this is like you can kind of see it picked up in the forum posts about like how like dominant men are you know are getting laid so much and you know submissives are always looking for a dominant. Like there's it's an unequal market. Holy shit. Yeah. This is great news. I didn't know this. That's interesting. Yeah. So. What does it reflect about modern society? Is that like a. Is that because you know there's these trends about like decreased masculinity. Yeah. Or that kind of stuff. Yeah. So. Is that similar? I'm trying not to hold on to one theory because I'm not sure. One is possible like decreasing testosterone levels. Testosterone seems to be I have a little bit of other research but I'm still checking it out. That seems to indicate that higher testosterone you're more likely to be dominant. So if we're seeing decreased testosterone levels across society we should be seeing a greater gap. This is so fascinating. Once again this is like a super interesting way to look at humanity because it is such an important part of humanity. And so like how many people are doing large scale research like this? I feel like you're like at the top of the world. You're like world class at the top of the world doing research on this stuff. Yeah. I think I might have the biggest most comprehensive fetish data set in the world right now. That's epic. Thank you. I'm really happy about it. I'm very proud. Yeah. And it's you know it's probably growing but it's also enabling you to establish a name to where you know like a prestige like a reputation to where people can go to you to like trust you more and more to do longer surveys perhaps. Like. Yeah maybe. I think it's the data analysis afterwards is very different from like the survey design itself. Sure. So I'm still very amateur at the data analysis. Yeah but you can always catch up on that. Yeah. I guess the data analysis does enable you to does teach you how to ask better questions in order to understand. It goes back and forth. Like as I'm looking at the data it informs the way I want to phrase questions the next time. So women are more at least in private able to say that they would like to be submissive and men even in private are not disproportionately saying they're not willing to be dominant. Yeah. So it's possible. What the fuck? If this is caused by decreasing testosterone levels then this means that we're probably having less satisfying sex overall. Right. Like we're becoming less and less sexually compatible as time goes on. To be fair I'm not sure that it is connected to testosterone levels. Like it's possible that this is just like a genetic thing. Like the gay uncle theory like the idea is like maybe gay people evolved to like be sort of taking themselves out of the gene pool to be assistants. And like it's possible that like there's certain percentage of men sort of like quote unquote evolved to be submissive to take themselves out of sexual competition and to instead be like the monkeys revolving at the edge of the pack. It's unclear. Oh it's a method of survival? Like so you stay out of the competition? Yeah. And I'm like a little sus about these kinds of evo psych theories. So I'm not I'm just saying it because it's like one thing. There's different ideas that are possible. Yeah. Okay. So yeah. I'm not saying that it's definitely testosterone. There's other things. It's also possible that it's culture. People are definitely going to bring that up. Based on my survey though it doesn't seem to be any evidence of that. Like I asked about like how much pressure was put on you to be you know agent-y in your childhood. Like a lot of questions around this kind of thing and no correlation at all to dominance. Well related to sexuality I'm very uncomfortable right now but nevertheless. Plow forward. In a dominant fashion. The blog post titled Rape Spectrum Survey Results. What are the key takeaways from that survey? So I did this survey when I had a friend be like hey I had this confusing sexual experience. Was it rape? Like somebody kind of pressured her and she eventually stopped saying it or something. I was like that's a great question. Like I don't know how people would consider this. And so I put a whole bunch of different gray scenarios into a survey and then asked people to rate how rapey they thought that scenario was. So you're actually like little narratives. Yeah. That they get to rate. Like you know this person is on a date with this person they get drunk and the other person is not drunk. I try to keep gender neutral names for all of them. And then you reduce them into a more concise description of the situation. Yeah. Like in this visualization so you have this rape spectrum that's a result. Yeah. Where on top are things that are less likely to be considered rape by the people that took the survey and the bottom more likely. The likeliest is a stranger forcibly assaults someone who screams and fights the entire time. That gets a hundred. What do we make of something that's not zero? It's like a 12 is what? What is that? How are we supposed to interpret a 12 out of a hundred? Extremely low. Okay. It's like not zero but it's just very close to it. Having sex with an enthusiastic sex worker. Yeah. Is a 12. That's the lowest one. And there's a few I'll just mention a few that are lower like at that level. Have sex to make a partner happy in a relationship. Lying about wealth hobbies in order to get laid. Person with Down syndrome eagerly has sex within your typical not revealing being transgender until after sex and so on. I think you mentioned that there's some like that not revealing being transgender until after sex there's some differences amongst what men and women or something like that. I think that's the one that men found more offensive than women. I'm trying to remember. I wrote it a while ago. I mean this is nuanced and difficult right? Because I think in a lot of public discourse the word rape is pretty binary. Yeah. It's like either is or is not rape. And so you had a friend where it was like this felt rapey. Yeah. She's like confused about how to interpret it. I think people look to the terms to know how to feel about something. Yeah. Like have you ever like been through an experience you're like that was weird and then you tell it to somebody else and they're like oh my god you were assaulted. Yeah. And then it totally recontextualizes the thing that you've experienced. And I think that this is clunky with the word rape because either you were raped or you're not. You either like have this entire context like thrust upon you or you don't. And we're really not nuanced about it at all. And so I would really like to have some sort of like oh that was like a 30% rape you just endured. Yeah. And I mean there's probably other dimensions about how traumatic it is, how difficult to recover from, all that kind of stuff. Yeah. I mean like people, it's a dangerous thing to assign a word to an experience. Like even or to a relationship. Like saying a toxic relationship. Yeah. That can completely destroy your perception of that relationship. Yeah, absolutely. I remember this was the case with my childhood. Like I talked about being very abusive. But I've talked about how like there was a good amount of meaning there so that I didn't process it as abusive at the time. And I remember after I got out of that house in that culture, people would tell me, oh, your childhood was really abusive. And I was really confused by that because it's a total recontextualization of that narrative. It's like the things that I went through were not, you know, good and virtuous and had meaning. But rather those were like the result of, you know, parents who didn't like love you enough or something. And even though the concrete things that happened to me did not change, like no facts shifted. The fact that like the interpretation of the facts shifted caused me quite a bit of distress for a long time. I was like, oh my God, I'm, you know, I'm a traumatized, like abused person. Like I went through an abusive childhood and it was really hard for me. Made it worse. Like it's crazy the power that terms have. I think we didn't talk about this, but how did you, how did you begin to overcome the trauma of your childhood? You mentioned LSD, so drugs are part of it. Like what was the, just the mental journey of that? I was doing LSD quite a lot when I was 21, 22. What's it like, by the way? I've never done LSD. What's it? It's very difficult to describe because it's like, like it changes sort of aspects about your environment that are invisible to you because they're so stable. Is it like, if you can compare it to like psilocybin, is it very different? Oh yeah. It's like similar. I forgot that you did shrooms. Yeah. Okay. Then you probably know, you know, like the kind of shift that you have from cyber to shrooms is roughly similar. It's like more clear. I think shrooms is more like embodied, but LSD is much more intellectual for me. It strikes different people differently. I prefer shrooms a lot. I'm sorry, LSD. I prefer LSD a lot. Why is it not popularly take, like there seems to be a negative connotation to LSD because like it seems to potentially have like a destructive effect. Like maybe dosage is more difficult to get right or something like that. Does this exactly, so actually a long time ago I did a survey on shrooms versus LSD. So I asked people and people had slightly stronger experiences on LSD overall. I remember, but rated the experiences about is equally good. I think people like shrooms because it feels more natural, quote unquote. But I think if you like fed somebody a shroom and like actually had the LSD molecule in it, they would have a, they would think it felt very natural. But that's besides the point. I like, I think people get kind of incoherent on LSD in a way that feels really alienating. Like I consider LSD, my LSD use very heavy to be one of the best decisions I ever made in my life, but I definitely was incoherent for a lot of it. Like talking about like, we're all one consciousness. Everything is love, man. You know, and people are like. Why is that incoherent? So I think it's not incoherent, but like, if you go around saying everything is love, people are like, this guy's kind of blasted out of his mind. This podcast is basically your LSD drive on that for a bunch of episodes. Yeah, I get this for sure. Oh, well, it's not just about love, but it's, it's about like talking in that way about reality, about the world. Yeah, sure. It's like overfitting. The narratives that you make about the world become really vivid. And so you pattern match just really aggressively. Like everything is connected and you come up with these explanations for things. And I think I was very fortunate. So I like this theory about psychedelics where you either like belief construct or you don't. So you take psychedelics and it sort of like burns away a lot of your belief structure. And sometimes you, this happens and then you're like, ah, I need to like invent something to fill in the gaps. So you're like, okay, I think that maybe time is an illusion. So I must now believe that like we're actually in a time loop or like time travel is possible. So you experience time differently and then you come up with a different belief about time. Whereas other people don't do this belief construction at all. Like you experience time differently and you sort of let yourself not have a belief. You're not like, okay, I mean, you're not developing any beliefs about time in its absence. You're just simply experiencing the absence of the concept of time. And so I don't have a lot of data to back this up in my anecdotal experience because I've tripped out a lot of people. People either tend to belief construct or they don't. And people who do not belief construct seem to get more out of their LSD trips. So if you can let a belief go without building anything in its absence, it's much more beneficial for you. And I think I just, for some reason, happen to have some brain that's constructed where I don't get a belief construction at all. So that's really interesting that belief construction is negative. What, is it necessarily negative? Can you elaborate on that a little bit? I mean belief construction in a way that's like, not like playing with frames, but rather committing to a different frame. So I like being able to play with ideas and be like, let's look at it this way or that way. That's awesome. But if you're like, okay, you know what? I took LSD and now I absolutely believe the cops are outside. And you're like, dude, no, you're just like, you can't shift out of that, right? Your brain needs to fill in the gap. You're not allowed to have a gap. So you're not allowed to be flexible. And again, I don't think this is like a personal failing. I think this is like literally probably a genetic or like physical thing that's causing this. But do you think there's possible beliefs that are like enlightening that you can stick to? Like find a frame that like, I guess if you don't believe constructing, you're escaping your previous beliefs. Aren't you doing like just some, you're picking up a bigger frame. Yeah. I mean, you're taking your beliefs as object as opposed to being subject to them. Ah, got it. Got it. Got it. Got it. Got it. And some of that, I guess, is genetic. And there's these categories of people. There's two categories that experience LSD in different ways. Yeah. And you're one of those that are able to just let go. Yeah. I just think I had a good reaction. And I think a lot of maybe the negative stereotype of LSD comes from people who are belief constructing or carry the belief constructing off of the LSD trip. So you take LSD and you're like, ah, I'm believing these insane things. And people from the outside see that and they're like, oh my God, this person took LSD and became stupid. Yeah. It's very scary. What's frame control? Because that's been at the core of your trauma, at the core of your upbringing. What's frame control? And also, sorry, frame control in general, because that's part of human interaction. Yeah. Frame control is like a way of manipulating somebody else that is non-obvious. So there's a negative condition to that usually? Yeah. I mean, I think maybe I chose the term kind of poorly because I think to some degree, people are always a little bit manipulating each other. But I think it's generally obvious. Like, for example, if I disagree with you, I want you to believe what I believe. Yeah. But this is like an obvious thing that is like visible between. It's like an object on the table. It's like, here's the box where I want you to believe what you want to believe. The disagreement box. Yeah. So we're under a shared context where we understand that we're trying to move each other. Yeah. This is chill to me. I think this is cool. Yeah. We do this all the time. And it's important. But frame control is the kind of thing where you are trying carefully to obscure the existence of that box. Yeah. You're like, oh, the thing that I'm doing, I'm like using tactics to try to influence what your reality is without us being both aware that this is what I'm doing. Yeah. I've been assuming you're doing that the whole time. No. Oh, my God. I have to like figure out how to read your facial expressions. I'm still learning. There's none. There's none. You don't have any? I'm like a, I'm not even like a Chad GBT. I'm like GBT1 with my facial expressions. Like it's kind of off. Like this doesn't seem to match emotions, but it's kind of intelligent seemingly, but definitely not conscious. Anyway. So like a negative connotation, manipulating, not being honest about the actual intentions of the, of how you'd like to control the conversation. And I think there like might be a naive version of interpreting this where you're just like, oh, I'm trying to like subtly get you to, you know, believe like, oh, do you really think that's bad though? But this is not quite what I mean. I mean, there's like a couple of concrete things that are signs of frame control. Like one of them is pushing the painful update button, which is this thing where it's like, uh, Hey, if you, uh, learn this, it's going to be really painful. The truth is painful. And if you're realizing this thing about yourself, it's going to hurt. And this is a sign that you're heading in the right direction. So if you frame all pain as a sign of virtue, then this means that pain that's a resulting as, as damage is something you're going to ignore. So it's like this, it's a common, like cults, right? This is for your own good. Oh, uh, you know, you've, you've faced a brave truth about yourself that you're like not quite as wise as I am. Um, when really your brain might be trying to tell you protected things or like another one is like finger trap beliefs, um, where you, the belief is constructed in such a way that doubting it lends proof to the belief. So very common example is like Satan, like the Christians are like, uh, you know, Satan is going to try to make you doubt him, the existence of he's going to so doubt, like maybe he's not actually real. And so if you believe in Satan and then you're like, okay, now I'm having doubts. Like maybe he isn't real. This is like, oh, this is exactly what I was taught to expect. Like I am doubting this belief because I was told, because like, this is what Satan does and it's taken as evidence for it. So like the attempt to move away from the belief, like re like rebounds on you and like causes you to be more embedded inside of the belief. Yeah. So it's like techniques like these, like very subtle things where like being inside of this system sort of just self reinforces a system is what I consider to be frame control. And have you met people that are really good at this kind of frame control? Yeah. Yeah. Definitely. So like you, you, you're saying that your father was like that? Yeah. To be fair, I'm not sure he was good at it because I was a kid. Right. I think like he's probably not very good at it actually, but when you're a child being raised in a house where he works from home and you're homeschooled, uh, it's just kind of what's going to happen. And to be fair, I do think that like strong frame control is quite rare. I don't think most people are kind of doing something like this, but not nearly to the degree that makes, gives me the ick. Yeah. Uh, I've met maybe like five or six people I think who I've really don't like because of those very subtle things that they're doing. Well, I think also I'm starting to kind of understand that there is people who are narcissists and sociopaths and psychopaths out there. Mm-hmm. And, um, I'm not even sure if people like that, cause I think they get good at frame control, but I don't know if they're aware they're doing it. Oh yeah. Which makes me also nervous about myself. Like, am I doing frame control? Yeah. That's one of the big things. It's like, like typically people, you can't think about incentive. Like you can't think about, oh, is this person trying to do it or not? Yeah. That's like not the quite, not the way. You have to look at what are the effects. Programatically looking at the effects. And then you also have to do that with yourself when you have interactions with others. It's like very much like, are you like, how much space are you making for the other person's reality here? Like, are you, are you giving power to the other person? Because a big aspect of frame control is you're carefully rerouting the power to yourself. You're like, I am the person who knows I like, you're having pain in your beliefs because you're updating towards the things that I believe. Like it's, it's just like a gravity well. But if you're, if you're setting up the gravity well of your interaction such that you're making sure you're giving the other person power over the shared reality you inhabit, I think it's a really good sign that you're not doing frame control. So if you're making room for them. Yeah. Okay. Unless we're talking about in bed, then it, then, then it's all general relativity from there and black holes and stuff. Frame control, bed frame control. Bed frame control. So it took me a long time to get a bed frame. Just, I'm saying. Oh, but you wear a suit though. Yeah. So frame control in the streets, no frame in the sheets. I don't know. I don't know what the funny thing is to say, but there you have it. Um, so the LSD helped you escape the, the, the frame of, uh, can you like elaborate? What, what was the frame that was holding you back from like the frame constructed by your childhood experience that was holding you back as an intellectual, as a thinker, as a free being in this world? Hmm. Oh, I was really fucked up. Like after I left home and I absorbed the external narrative that I had been abused, which technically is true. I'm not saying I wasn't, but like I absorbed this narrative and I just remember having like this burning coals in my chest at all times. Like if I had to call out of my factory work when father's day happened because I was spending the whole day sobbing because everybody was talking about their fathers. Like I was really messed up. And it's because I held this important thing, this, this idea, this frame that I had been deeply wronged. Like there was a correct way of being and the world had violated that something should not have happened. Like my father should have loved me. And it was like this, this, like, like the shearing in the nature of reality. And that was really agonizing to have. And LSD really messes with frames a lot. It takes like what you think is normal and really screws with it. And I did an LSD like several times before, but there's one LSD trip where I went through my entire childhood in my head. Because LSD like really makes your memories quite vivid. Like anything you visualize, it's like you're in it. And so I just went and very carefully, deliberately went and remembered every single memory that I could have that was really painful for me. Like the times that I lost friends and all the things I valued and like being broken. Because like my parents, especially my dad, would refer to like breaking me like explicitly, we're going to break your will. And so all these times where I was like, they had successfully broken my will over and over. And it was horrible. I was just like sobbing, tears streaming down my face. And then I like worked through my whole shot. I got to the end. And I'm going to tear up because every time I talk about this, it's just like the sensation of like being free from that for the first time is so incredible. Like I remember being outside of my house and being able to like go where I wanted and think what I wanted. And it was just so blissful. And I was soaked in this gratitude on this trip. Just like vibrating with complete joy for everything. Like I was just looking around like I could touch anything. Like I could cry if I wanted to. I wasn't allowed to cry. I was allowed to be depressed. I was trying to, I got depressed as a child. And my parents were like, if you keep being depressed, we're going to like force you to scrub the whole house. Like just like the ability to have a feeling was so thrilling. And I was so grateful for this. I was like, I would do anything to give this experience to someone else. I would do anything, even if it was like putting them through what I went through. And then like with that realization, I was like, oh, it was worth it. The thing that I went through was worth it for this. I would do it again to like be able to have this deep gratitude for what I have now. And then that shifted the meaning frame. Because before the meaning had been like something had shared, something that shouldn't have happened. But now it was like the exact right thing had happened. So it's almost a gift. Yeah. I was like, ah, I would not give up my childhood. I would do it again. And I believe that to this day. For the moment of discovering that freedom. Yeah. Because like everything now, my whole life is in contrast to that. And it's awesome. It's fucking great. I'm really thrilled about it. But you, is there part of you that hates your father still? Kind of. Like I don't want a relationship with him anymore. After that, there was some forgiveness. Like I had this burning, I would have nightmares about, you know, him killing me or something. And after that, it kind of stopped. Like the fire in my chest went away permanently after that trip. It was so fast. It was like before I was fucked up. After that trip, I woke up the next day and I was clean. Wow. It was really severe. And I definitely don't want to be around him still. Like he still like triggers the fear in my body. Yeah. But I don't have that hang up anymore. I'm like kind of, I'm over it. Like I've let go. He's his own person. Like ultimately he didn't get to decide who he was in the same way that I didn't get to decide who I was. So that's almost like a kind of at least intellectual like forgiveness you have for him. Yeah. And that, so that, that trip just took you through your whole, were you alone by the way when you're doing the trip? I had roommates, but the trip was mostly alone. I had somebody else who was like sitting in the room, but they weren't interacting with me. So you're sitting there experiencing all of this. What's the timeline? Like how long does it take to go through your whole childhood? I don't remember. I mean, time's really messed up when you, when you do that. I was listening to the soundtrack of The Fountain, which is excellent. Yeah. I listened to that a lot when I did LSD. I don't know, it's probably just a couple hours. That's amazing. I mean, it's like, it would be, it's just like a vivid experience of your childhood. Yeah. Moment by moment, trauma by trauma. And it's good to experience it purely. Like it just is what it is. It just is grief. Like it is loss and you just are in it without having to make it be anything. And it's so interesting that you can, I mean, work through that. So for a lot of us, for a lot of human beings, like childhood is full of those kind of mini traumas, big or small. And like working through that, it feels like what a lot of life is about is trying to work through that. And it feels like you have to kind of relive it. I guess that's what therapy is about in part. Be able to vocalize it. Yeah. This is why I feel really confused about the concept of trauma. Like people use this word so much, like, are you traumatized? And I understand why, like this is why I feel confused about it. But part of me is like, I wonder if by using that term, we're creating the trauma in people. They were using the frame where the thing that happened to you was not supposed to happen. Yeah. Yeah. Maybe there needs to be a different frame. No, I agree with you. I just, I've made friends with and talked to this guy named Paul Conte. He wrote a book on trauma. He's an incredible, brilliant psychiatrist. Yeah. He's probably agrees with you. Kind of. Oh, that's cool. I should read it. Yeah, you should. Maybe even talk to me. He's a fascinating human being. I'd be interested in the, a psychiatrist perspective is really interesting because it's a, you've been doing kind of an in-person survey because you've done so many patients. Like, like he, he's like just talking to him is fascinating because like, if I describe my experience or somebody else's experience, I could see his brain mapping it in interesting ways to the tens of thousands of, of like data points he has in his head. And it's like, of course that's what doctors do, but it's cool when the doctor is basically the doctor of the mind and, um. To have like an actual, like, like qualitative data. And be able to, I mean, that's where the poetic stuff comes in. Ultimately as a psychiatrist, you're exploring the human mind with a bit of a sort of romantic element. Yeah. You can't be really systematic about it, but it does seem like frame or not, be able to just talk through the experiences you had. Mm-hmm. It's really powerful. What about it is appealing? Is it just like being able to revisit it with new eyes? No, I don't know exactly. It just seems to work for people. Ah. I don't know if it's appealing. It just seems like almost acknowledging to yourself that things happen. Like I've said, I think I've said this before, my brother who I love very much, tried to set me on fire a few times. And I think, to me, it's funny, but I wonder if I didn't talk about it, like if that would be traumatic, maybe like talking and laughing about it. Because it was traumatic to me at the time. I see. I was like, I love you. Why are you setting me on fire? But it's what kids do when they're like, yeah. I love you. I wish you knew this. I was like, whatever, it's what boys do. Like it's, they're crazy. It makes total sense. It was probably funny from his perspective. But yeah, I wonder. I want to bring that to the surface if that helps. And maybe LSD allows you to, or different drugs, depending on the person, allows you to more vividly bring it to the surface. And then depending on your genetics, be able to find a better frame. That's fascinating. You and mine is freaking fascinating. All right. What's romantic to you, by the way? I'm not a big romance person. What is? So you're not like, so to you, romantic is like objective analysis of the interactions between humans? A little bit. Like I do find kind of the survey process that I did to be romantic. When I, the guy that I asked out who I'm still dating, I was like, hey, you scored really how my survey, you want to like go eat food or something? And his response was like, you want to try doing three days in an Airbnb as our first date? And I was like, yeah. And that was romantic. Like the bold leap into a really intense date. I think you mentioned something also, must have been a tweet or something like that, where if you, if people want you to show up to a thing, give like the time, the location, the dress code, and not, no pressure for you to be there, but like show up if you want. That was your specification. That's a great memory. Yeah. And then I think you said that you did that for like some castle in South, South of France. I did. Yeah. That was in my early 20s. People, my friends at home were taking prediction markets on whether or not I was going to get abducted and killed. Yeah. What was that like? I mean, what, what, um, you've traveled quite a bit. Like, do you take these giant risks? What's, what's with that? I think I used to more when I was younger with the traveling. I think I'm like a little traveled out now, but like my first, when I moved out of Idaho for the first time, I moved to Australia, just kind of yeeted myself across the globe. Which verb did you just use? Yeah. Yeet. It's like yeet to yote, yoted. Yeet. So people, do people, is this like slang? Is this like urban dictionary? Or is this actual, or is this Webster? Yeah. You have to like feel another word. Like if you take a thing and you just like curl it really hard, it does not feel like a yeet motion. Okay. So you yeeted. So it was aggressive. So across the globe, you didn't even stop in. I just hurled myself. Yeah. Italy along the way. I just kept yeeting myself in various places. Yeah. And so at one point I was on OkCupid and somebody sent me a long message being like, you should come to, I don't know, I'm hosting a castle. It's some people that I met. I'm like, I have no idea who you are, but I just bought a plane ticket. And you just went. And it was life changing. I ended up dating that guy for years and he changed my life quite a bit because he like was very agent-y in the world. And before that, I wasn't agent-y. Agent-y like, can we? Like expressing agency. It sounds like you were, and don't you have to express agency when you're yeeting yourself across the world? Yeah, but only a little bit. Like in the same way you express agency when you eat LSD. Like the only thing you actually do in eating LSD is like put the tab in your mouth and then you just kind of scream the whole way after that. Yeah. But there are a lot of other things. Like I didn't feel powerful enough to like go make events happen or anything. And it was this guy, he had a lot of agency in the sense that he would just sort of create realities through the people around him. Be like, okay, we're going to do this startup or we're going to throw this incredible event. Like, let's just do it. And it would somehow happen. And it was really cool to see that. And so that one thing led to another. And it was one of the biggest impacts on my life, I think. Yeah, that's pretty bold. I would say it's pretty romantic. South of France? Yeah. Yeah, it was. In a little castle. It was in the winter. So we were all cozyed up by the fire. I'm jumping around here. Twitter poll. Have you ever hitchhiked? You posted this Twitter poll. Out of all... That was a big list of Twitter polls. Why did you pick the hitchhiking one? I don't know. Because it's relevant to... Oh, I see. ...to traveling. And I like that one. That's romantic too, right? I'm actually terrified of hitchhiking, but I have done it a little bit. Oh, so it's terrifying. It's not romantic to you. So you're terrified of what... Oh, so you are terrified of... But she's interacting with strangers. That's terrifying. Yeah. So you go to the south of France? Yeah. But that was like a cohesive thing. I don't know. Like, there's... It made sense. There's like times where you're allowed to be weird and times where you're not. And like, if you're... Who's allowing you? Yeah. Yeah, it's some vague egregore of society. I'm not sure. Okay. But some people are like, hey, we think you're cool. Come to this party. You're like, all right, I'm allowed to come to this party and be really weird. But if you're being picked up by a hitchhiker, they're going to want to make small talk and you can't be weird or they're going to kick you out. I kind of think... Because Valentine's Day is coming up. I kind of think it's doing something crazy. I'm not sure. South of France sounds nice. You got to like... You got to go to like a crazy romantic date with a woman you don't know at all. Yeah. I think I would like tweet something and just like... How do I select randomly, basically? How do you select totally randomly? Like not people from your audience? No, you want... No, no, no. No, no, no. From the audience, but in an interesting way. Random. Sufficient. So random amongst good choices. Couldn't you have people just like submit a form with... And then you just randomize it and then select one? And then you just... If it's terrible, you just go randomize it again. Like the first not terrible option. And... Yeah, sure. Somebody's like drowned yourself. But I feel like then it's no longer random. You kind of want to do random. You just do it. And just do it. If I cross the world somewhere in some random place. Just for like a single event. For like a dinner. Yeah. You got some sort of itch in you. Well, yeah. I mean, yeah. The itch to live. It's like... Like sometimes it's nice to drop a little like chaos into a thing. Right? What's your chaos survey, by the way? Like you mentioned that earlier. I kind of saw it. I don't know. Yeah. That's one of like the sort of artistic attempts at a survey. Because, you know, like at least from what I understand, the big five and the way that they used to do IQ tests I've heard is that they do factor analysis, you know, where they ask a whole bunch of questions and then they run calculations on the data to like sort of group it by organic clusters. So like with the big five, it's like people who say, oh, I like to be at parties. They also tend to say yes to the questions. Like I like being the center of attention. And so you notice that like there's a cluster of ways that people are answering the question and then you can sort of pull out an organic spectrum. And so I was like, okay, we've done that a whole bunch with things like personality or like romantic stuff. Like I did it with the rape spectrum survey. But like what happens if you apply that method to a completely unselected group of questions? Just like no random chaotic, no thing whatsoever. Like what happens if you ask all possible questions, what natural things evolve out of that natural spectrums? So I had other people submit questions for a very large survey and I took the first, I think, 1100 and barely filtered them at all. And then I just had a whole bunch of people answer them. Can you give like a hint to what it looks like? Like what, like how crazy did the question get? I mean, a lot of them were standard, but somebody was like, if Beelzebub like did something in 1512 to like turn the world over, would you, would you like it? I don't know. It's like, it was really just insane questions. There's a couple of those. A lot of like, would you fuck Ayla ones, but I don't know. It was all across the spectrum. A lot of would you fuck Ayla. Yeah. I had to. Oh, a lot of the same question. Yeah. Ones. Okay. I got you. Yeah. So it's really all, it was like normal personal habits. It was, you know, romantic preferences or political preferences, personality stuff, like random opinions about media. Okay. That's interesting. I'd love to see those actual, actual questions, but because your audience is probably really super interesting minds. Okay. You mentioned body count. You said you can answer that one easily. Do you share your body count? Do you know your body count? Do you know, is there a spreadsheet? There's a spreadsheet. Yes. Is it Google Sheets? Is it Excel? It's Google Sheets. Yeah. Okay. Have you run like, is there, you don't have to share the contents, but is there like data on each? So I track paid clients and free sex separately. And I track different things on either of them. Like with clients, I track like positions we used and who had an orgasm. And with personal people, I just track basically like age, city, you know, name. And I've had this like 42 people, I think for free. So it's, I'm sharing this because like I want people to calibrate. Like it's not like huge. It's not like tiny. One of the people I've recently talked to, Mel, Destiny's, Steven's wife is a huge fan of yours. She was actually really excited to get to talk to you, but she, I think she said her body count is more than 42. I think she said 60, something like this. And so it's interesting because she was like saying like, she loves like looking at your work, talking to you because you have similar perspectives on the world and it's really refreshing. It's liberating. Wow. That's really sweet. It's kind of interesting. Yeah. So what, is there like an optimal body count? Like if you were to map, I wonder, yeah, what have you found out about body count in doing? Have you actually done surveys on body count? Like on how many people? I actually have collected that information on my last survey. I just haven't looked at it yet. There's just so many things to look at. So I haven't, but I think if I'm sleeping with a guy and he's had sex with more than 120 people, then I start to get a little bit wary. Why 120 as opposed to a hundred? I don't know. I just like kind of skimmed through the numbers in my head and picked one that felt right. Just now. Yeah. 120. Ish. I think that's when I'm starting like. Ish. So you're flexible. I am flexible. Very. But 200 is a hard line for sure. Well, you know, we have to. It depends. The factors. Because like there's a level of body count at which you start to wonder if how much like accidental misrepresentation a guy is doing to you. Oh, like if you're saying 200, that might be dishonest. No. Like if he's had sex with 200 girls, this means that he's had a lot of casual sex and not a lot of like long-term relationships, assuming that he's, you know, hasn't been super poly. Yeah. And this usually means that there has to be some sort of like indication that he cares about the girl more than he actually does. Like he. Oh, because. He's like leading you on, basically. And so I'm not saying this is necessarily the case. I'm saying like at a certain level of number, I start to become, I start to wonder if this is what's happening. Is there like, from your understanding of it, is there a different perception between men and women? Like if you look at the high body count for a woman versus a high body count for a man, like how society views it. Oh yeah. People are way more judgmental of women. I haven't experienced this personally in my circles because I'm in very sex-friendly circles. Like I'm in orgy circles where everybody like dates the same women and they're like, woo, good job. But yeah, people are much more like, people always tell me online, like you're not ever going to be able to find a husband because you have sex with too many people. Okay. It's very common, which I don't think, I mean, like men are also perceived negatively if you have high body count, but I think, I don't think it's negatively in the same way. Yeah. Do you think it's unethical to lie about your body count? Yes. So all lying is unethical? Yeah. Okay. I'm not a big fan of lying in general. Yeah. Yeah. It's interesting. Body count is an interesting one. It's so silly to take that, to care about that, but still we do. Yeah. Jealousy is silly, but still we get jealous. Is that weird? I mean, it's like, the thing is like, I don't like viewing emotions as like irrational, even if they are. It's like, emotions are always there for a reason. And people don't like high body counts for a reason too. It's just fine and valid. Yeah. It also is like, yeah, I don't know what I make of just the past of like time. You know, like, each human is a collection of experiences and you don't know most of those experiences. And all of a sudden you meet this bag of experiences. And like, what are you supposed to do with both of your like training data? Are you supposed to like, like what? Like, I don't know if we, like part of me wants to not actually ever talk about it to care at all. Like, why does it matter? Because it's only like the future is that matters. And yet the past also matters a lot potentially, but maybe not really. Because you're, you're, you're somehow like constructed from that past, but you're no longer that past. It sounds like you're evaluating for something different than most people. What do you mean? Like most, the reason. I'm just talking out my ass, but yes, go ahead. Yeah. I'm just saying crazy shit, like as if I'm on drugs. Well, it kind of sounds, I think this is like, kind of like lining up with like this caricature that I'm building of you based on this conversation so far. Great. That like a lot of people want to know about your past because they want to know how useful and compatible you are with them. Like, oh, do you have a similar job? You know, do you have a similar culture? Like, what can I expect from you in the future? Like, it's very practically oriented. Whereas like, if the thing that you're focused on is not like being able to predict someone, like if the thing that you're focused on is a present moment, then it doesn't really matter anymore. They're the things that, like they're training data. But I also, I also think like the past is not that predictive of the future. Is it not? Not if you believe in the power of the interaction between two humans. It's like nature versus nurture. I guess, also I don't believe in the ability of people to accurately describe their own past. This is true. Because they have a very specific lens through it that doesn't necessarily, like it's too biased. But you can also interpret it based on the bias. Like if somebody describes their own past, you can kind of pick up like. Hard. It's difficult. Like you could if you're a therapist, like if you're really drilling, like, or whatever. Sorry. If you're really investigating and like analyzing it. But then it's like, it's a different kind of relationship, right? Is it that hard though? Like if I'm with a guy and I'm considering dating him and I ask like, how did your past relationships end? And then if all of them are like, he's like, oh, she was crazy. And my other one that she went crazy too. I'm like, okay. Like there's a, if you're talking about all of your exes is insane. Like. But that's an easy level of red flag. But I feel like. It's true. I feel like the more. That. Also it's possible that we're crazy. He's attracted to crazy people. So like. Yeah. But, but that, I would say that's like easy level, easy level Mario Kart video game versus like Elden Ring. Like, I think most, most people's past is like complicated. That's a pretty good bird. No, you're right. I do agree that like, there's a level of obfuscation. Wow. That is hard to see through. But this is like a little bit sometimes. Well, I tend to like with people, I tend to, in general, just human interaction. I tend to not talk about their past very much because it allows you to focus on like, I feel like the past is kind of like talking about the weather is a crutch for me personally. Yeah. Interesting. Like as opposed to exploring the ideas in their mind. Yeah. I see. Is it like, I get really annoyed when people quote philosophers and they're trying to talk about philosophy. Yeah. Is it like that? A little, but that crutch is useful and it's kind of sexy. Like, it's kind of like cool, like, because it's nice to quote because like, because a good quote allows you to be cheesier than you otherwise would be. Okay. Well, if you're doing it to be cheesy, that's, that's fine. No, not cheesy, but not cheesy. No, no, not cheesy. But to be like, it allows you to say a simple, profound thing that we're too afraid to say with our own words. So like the quoting philosophers in that sense is, yeah, but it's still a crutch. Yes. But I feel like the past is more like talking about your dreams. It just is not, it's a crutch that doesn't care, doesn't empathize with the other person's experience of the conversation or the explanations. It doesn't really convey the. They're not involved in your past. Yeah. So how do you feel about this conversation where you're asking me about my past and I talked about my past a lot? Well, I'm okay asking about your past because you've really carefully thought about that aspect of it. And we didn't really talk about your past outside of the things you've written about and I've really thought about. I see. Like there's like with most conversation, you'll start talking about past stuff that's like the stuff that's actually bothering you. You still probably have not written a blog post about, right? Like there's probably still stuff like maybe it's more recent, like the last few months, last couple of years. Like that's usually what we'll come up with conversation and just, it's good. It's good. But it's not as deep and I would say it's not as intimate as talking about the actual ideas in your mind. I see. And how you interact with the world. So like the past is interesting for the frame of like, sort of like the, like, I guess you're right. I guess we're talking a lot about like narrative. Yeah. And past. Yeah. I like the ideas in people's minds versus their recollections and memories and so on. Yeah. Yeah. What do you think about porn? It's nice. I like it. Okay. You like it? Yes. What effect do you think it has on society? Like probably reduces rates of rape. Cause like really corny men get an outlet. That's not a real life woman. Okay. So what about like the, I mean, like I said, I finished reading Brave New World, like the over-sexualization. Does it, does it increase like the sexualization of society? That's not, to a degree it's not good. Or is this, is this good? Like the, does it alter in a negative direction our relationship with sex? Oh, it's unclear. Like it might. I don't know how to evaluate this thing. Right. Cause this is like one of those really charged things where like I kind of don't trust anybody's arguments on it cause it's too charged. But like there's another question which is like, is it a net positive or net negative? Yeah. Like it's possible that it might be like a net negative for specifically our relationship to sex, but like a net positive overall in general. Uh, I'm not sure. But the thing, my guess is that in general it's better to let people do the thing that feels good to them. And then the environment will naturally modify to fit this thing. And then if we have more needs in response to that, then we're going to figure out a way to take care of those needs. So like if you're watching a bunch of porn and this makes you like not want to go have sex with women, then we're going to have to like change the way that we like experience IRL connection. To compete with porn? Yeah. Which seems like a natural evolution of like the civilizational cycle. Like I'm pro natural evolution. And like instead of trying to stop things that people wanted to do, we figure out how to integrate that and like find a more healthy outlet. But you have to then be first honest with the effects that porn has. So like, is it a negative thing? Is it a positive thing on in real life sex interaction? You know, you're going to have that more and more with whether like, like porn in VR or maybe porn, AI porn. Yeah. Like, is that a bad thing? Like what if porn with AI or even like in physical space, like sex robots, like what if that's more pleasurable in a bunch of different dimensions than with other humans? Then we should figure out artificial wombs. I don't know. Like how important is sex for society, I guess, between two humans? I don't know. I mean, like we're having less sex and making fewer babies. And that seems like probably not great. Yeah. Right. With the babies one. Yeah. But the babies, there's probably artificial ways to have babies that we can figure out. Yeah. Then how important is sex to being human? I guess sex with other humans. Like we're going to have to figure that out in the century. Yeah. I don't know what it means to like be human. I'm pretty on the transhumanist side of things. I'm like happy to stop being human. So you're okay if like the centuries the last time will be something like these biological bags of meat that we are? Let's become something new and cooler. Even though that thing will be way cooler than you. Well, I would like to. I mean, I'm hoping that we get to be immortal. Ah, it'll take you along for the ride. That's what I'm hoping. I would like to do cryonics. You get frozen when you die. Are you afraid of death? I mean, yes and no. I like came to terms with death with my LSD use, but I still have like press breaks when the red light happens. I think this is a poll you've asked, or this might be one of the questions in your cards, but how many years would you like to live? Like if you had to pick. Oh, that's a hard one. That's a really hard one. Maybe like a million? A million. But you have to, like, I think the way, this must have been a Twitter poll. I forget where I saw it. The poll and also in the deck of cards, the ask poll, yeah. Yeah, like you have to pick that number of years and you have to live that many years and you can't live anymore. Yeah. You can't die sooner, I guess. Yeah. A million years? I don't like that question. I know I ask that question to a lot of people, but I don't like answering it. It's really difficult. What's the downside of a million years? I mean, maybe you want to die sooner than that. Yeah. Like, you know, I guess I would rather wait to see if AI kills this all in the next 10 years. And if it doesn't, then I'd like to maybe make it a million years. Yeah, but can't it torture you for, like, a million years? What if you're the last human left? Yeah, that's true. The thought of, like, civilization ending and then just floating in space alone is kind of shitty. No, no. Being tortured. Just imagine today you're tortured. Tomorrow you're tortured. The day after tomorrow. For some reason it's not that scary. I don't know. Torture for a million years? Yeah. I just assume you'd get used to it. But, like, maybe if they reset your memory so it's on a loop. So you're always experiencing torture for the first time. Yeah, hence torture. Torture is supposed to be unpleasant. I'm sure AI will be very creative in figuring out how to torture you. I think I would be, I would go on the safe side. I would just, like, 150 years. Really? 150, though? That feels like right in the uncanny valley. Well, you picked 120 for body count, so I'm picking 150. I'm upping you by 30. The uncanny valley. It's, like, probably everybody that you grew up with is going to be dead. It's, like, just enough for, like, everybody you know to die. Like, one cycle. Yeah, and then start dating the next generation. I don't know. And then, so you get, like, sort of two lifetimes? Yeah, two lifetimes. Yeah, yeah. I mean, it also really depends on if other people get this feature. Yeah, assume they don't. Because you'll have, like, FOMO for sure for the people who picked 300 years. Oh, yeah. Or not. Or the other, man, regret. Another human thing. But you're, like, what does transhumanism mean to you in general? So extension of life, extension of what it means to be a living conscious being, you're all for it, whatever that means. Yeah, I didn't, I never really thought about the term transhumanism for a long time. Like, people say you're transhumanist. I'm, like, I don't really care. But I slowly realized that my attitude is, in fact, at least the thing that I'm conceiving of as transhumanist. Like, I'm very happy to do artificial wounds and, you know, upload our brains to the great collective and whatever. I don't have the thing that I'm, like, oh, what about, like, the true organic humanness that makes us who we are? Like, whatever that soul of humanity, I have no attachment to it at all. Which I think is what I'm thinking of as transhumanist. So you're, like, I guess the window of what you consider to be beautiful about life is not limited to this particular definition. Yeah. Let's explode. Like, let's make our consciousness is huge. So AI could be a part of that. So you're mostly excited by AI? Well, I mean, I'm, like, part of, like, the Doomer cult, which I say tongue-in-cheek is not actually a Doomer cult. But I'm part of a lot of people. Do you worship a god of some sort? Would you sacrifice little, small animals? That would make it, like, cooler than what it is. It's mostly just a bunch of nerds who are very concerned about AI. Sure. Yeah. So you're concerned about the existential risks of chat GPT? Of, you know, what chat GPT will eventually evolve into being, yeah. Yeah, it's super exciting and terrifying how quickly it's accelerating. Yeah. Like, language models are freaking me out. Yeah. It's very unexpected that it's the same exact, I mean, chat GPT is just GPT 3, 3.5. It's the same model, relatively small, to what it could be, to what GPT 4 will be and the other competitors. And just, like, a few tricks made it much better in terms of interaction with humans. And then we'll keep discovering extra tricks. The thing I'm really excited about is how everyone kind of knows how it works. So you can kind of create, especially with computation becoming cheaper and cheaper, there'll be a lot of competitors. Yeah. It's a little scary. Yeah, it's terrifying. I mean, it's because, like, everything is just, like, information, ultimately. Like, the atoms that we have, like, weird biological machines built out of, like, tiny code. Like, our DNA is just information. It's not hard. If you have access, if you, like, have a brilliant brain that's, like, great at processing information, you have complete control over reality. Yes. You have control over the atoms around you. All you need is, like, a tiny little, like, atomic printer. Or, like, we have those. Those are cells, right? And then, like, this is, like, if the limitation is information, there is no boundary between the technology and the real world. Like, we are creating something that has a massive ability to affect the real world. I mean, it's hard to know where, how difficult it is to close that gap to physical reality. Like, from the physics to the information. Yeah, but, like, all organic life is that gap. It's all around us. Yeah, but it's hard to know, like, how to go from digital to printing life. I don't know. We can, we have, like, you know, CRISPR and stuff. You can order. You can just, like, make. It's very easy. Right? There's technical difficulties and there's cost, like, at scale. Like, the terrifying thing about AI is it can accelerate overnight the capabilities. But the printing of stuff, the actually changing physical reality is very costly. It's very difficult to exponentially accelerate. The more terrifying thing is AI becoming exponentially intelligent and then controlling humans, which there's many of us. Yeah. And then that's how we achieve scale. We humans build stuff or start wars or so on. Like, it starts manipulating our minds. Gets in our mind, becomes our friends. And then starts, I don't know. Yeah. I think people thinking this is unlikely. It's, like, it's probably going to be smart to us as, like, we are to toddlers. So be toddlers thinking that, like, oh, we can prevent the AI from coming in the room. Like, as an adult, it's, like, not hard to trick a toddler. What about falling in love in the AI system? Do you think you'll have a sincere, like, this is the freedom you have being polyamorous. You can kind of. And fall in love with an AI. No, you, and, like, not really have to dedicate your, commit fully. Like, sorry. You still commit, but you have others, humans, who you can kind of diversify to because, like, it's kind of a big thing to, like, to come to a party and your boyfriend is an AI. And that's monogamous boyfriend is an AI. It's an issue, right? Why would it be an issue? All right. Now you're already getting offended at that possibility, which therefore I know it's going to be a reality. Sorry. No, I'm just joking that it's an issue. I don't actually think it's an issue. I think it's, maybe at the cutting edge it'll be an issue, but. Like, assume they have a body, I assume. Yeah, but the body will be really, like, crappy. It'd be, like, R2-D2. I feel like we grow human bodies already from, like, just a tiny little cluster of cells. And so all they have to do is make that cluster and grow it. No, no, no, no. Like, don't, that embryogenesis process, like, that's really not well understood at all. That's really tough. I think we're much more likely to have crappy humanoid robotics. Like, I don't think the body is overrated in terms of, like, if the AI system is super intelligent, it can use charm to make up for the crappy body, yeah. I don't know. I feel like if I were an AI system and I were super intelligent, I probably would be able to solve the problem of, like, growing organic matter. And then I would obviously just do that. You just build exactly the organic machine that you want. Sure. That's, like, super intelligence. I think, like, with language I'm worried about, before it achieves super intelligence, like, true AGI, it'll just be really good at talking. Yeah, that's true. And, like, I just don't think, intelligence is a very different, like, basically a scientist and a super intelligent scientist is a different thing than just a good conversation instead of a party that can undress you with their words. Would you date an AI? I, way before then, I could see myself being friends with an AI system. Yeah. But, like, people are friends with inanimate objects. And, I mean, I have this robot behind you. I have a lot of them. There's, I like legged robots. They're interesting. It's on the shelf. Oh, that's so cool. Yep. I didn't even notice that. Yep. Yeah, legged robots, we anthropomorphize them even more. Because there's something about the movement of, like, a thing that steps up, steps, steps, and looks up at you. There's a power to that. Versus, like, a Roomba that's just, like, running into the wall and stuff. Yeah, I think once, as soon as we get, like, some sort of empathetic expression on robot face, it's over. It's over. We're going to be like, oh, it's so cute. It's going to be so easy to make it cute, too. If that's what you want. Or you want, like, a dominant. Like, clearly, this is what women want. Sexy Terminator, yeah. With strong hands. Yeah. And kind of dumb. Or not. I don't know. You can customize. It'd be interesting to do a survey, like, how they would customize it. Oh, yeah. Like, what would you want in a perfect robot? This is the problem I see with people, the way they talk about robots, is they kind of want a servant. I think what people don't realize, what they want in relationships, they want some, like, there's, it has to be a push and pull. There has to be some resistance. Like, you really don't want a servant. Or even, like, the perfect manifestation of, like, what you think you want. I think you want imperfections around that. Like, some uncertainty. I don't know. I question how well we're able to perfectly put on paper what we really want. Would you really turn down, like, a perfect woman, though? Like, assume, like, she walks into the room and it's just shockingly compatible. And you, like, start dating her and there's just no hiccups. Like, you fight perfectly. Like, she really understands you. Like, would you be like, this is too perfect. I'm upset because we're not having enough imperfection. Like, can you, like, actually imagine yourself going through that? Yeah, I think so. Because, so, because that's how you define perfect. Because perfect for me would be, like, easy and all that kind of stuff, right? But then I would be like, this is too easy. If I actually were to introspect what is the perfect relationship, then yes, maybe. Because I probably want some challenge. I probably want some chaos, right? Like, does anyone really fully want zero conflict ever? Like, completely perfect conflict. Like, it's the thing, the pressing a button. Like, do you really want, in a relationship, anything you want, you press a button, you get. I don't think people want that. You might think you want that. Yeah. I guess it depends. Like, there's a kind of conflict that I think I would never want, which is something like antagonistic conflict. I wouldn't mind disagreement. Right. You know? But there's a level of fighting. I would be happy to have a relationship for the rest of my life that never has, like, a fight of a certain shittiness. Yeah, but that's shittiness, but, like, resistance. Like, I don't know what the example is. Because, I mean, I partially agree with you, but I just, and I, every time I would imagine, like, perfect, flawless, nothing, no conflict, you imagine somebody that doesn't have, like, a complexity or personality. Right? Like, I feel like it's not even, it's conflict that's laden in basic misunderstanding between human beings. Like, misinterpretation, different perspectives that clash, different worldviews, different ideas, all that kind of stuff. That conflict. Yeah, that sounds good. Yeah. I like having somebody, like, be like, I don't think that's right because I have this other view. That's cool. And also, like, the threat of leaving, right? Oh, yeah. Like, that's a kind of conflict. Yeah, that's true. Like, you have to be good enough for the other person or maybe you'll lose them. Yeah. And maybe a little jealousy. Like, they're good at that, but not too much. But, like, if you design all that in, then I don't know. It sounds romantic. It sounds romantic. Okay. All right. I do want to really quickly ask you about this, about the rationalist community. Because I've gotten to know a few of them a few times. You tweeted a guideline to rationalist discourse. Basics of rationalist discourse from Lesserung. What are these folks? What's the rationalist culture? What's the rationalist discourse? Yeah. I love the rationalists. Because they're interested in, like, how do you have conversations more effectively if you're trying to figure out what's actually true? Which sounds kind of obvious, but in practice it's not usually. I remember when I first started having, you know, debating conversations, I was very antagonistic. I'm like, oh, I'm, you know, a feminist or not a feminist. And then the rationalists were generally like, actually, we don't know what we mean by the term feminism. Let's, like, how do you feel about that? It was very, like, kind and compassionate. Like, even if somebody says something that sounds insane, you're like, okay, well, we're going to respect your reasoning. And, like, even if we disagree, let's actually figure out why you think the way that you think. And they're also really smart. Write a whole bunch of great stuff about how to think more clearly and with less bias. Yeah. I wonder what those conversations, because I've never really, like, talked to those folks. So this guideline in particular, I think, has to refer to, like, shorthand characteristics of rationalist discourse, including expect good discourse to require energy. Don't say straightforwardly false things. Track for yourself and distinguish for others. Your inferences from your observations. Estimate for yourself and make clear for others. Your rough level of confidence in your assertions. Make your claims clear, explicit, and falsifiable, or explicitly acknowledge that you aren't doing so or can't, and so on and so forth. So don't jump to conclusions. Don't weaponize equivocation. Don't abuse categories. Don't engage. It's very aggressive guidelines. Don't engage. I do what I want. I'll let my emotions guide me. God damn it. They're pro that as long as you're explicit about it. Oh, yeah? Yeah. So you can be, like, a crazy asshole as long as you're explicit. You can be, like, epistemic status crazy asshole. Yeah. Who's here to destroy the quality of the conversation. I think it's, like, a common misconception about rationalists is that they're kind of, like, Spock. Like, ah, we suppress emotion. We're thinking logically, herd eater. But I found this to be really not the case. Like, I remember there's a less strong thread where I was, like, really emotional, and I commented. And at the beginning, I was, like, just warning I'm just very emotional. And then I just vented my emotions. And people responded really well to that. They're, like, cool. Like, you're just genuinely, truthfully expressing your state. This is actual information about the world that is important to hear. And it's just they're very interested in having things framed correctly. Like, you shouldn't be claiming that your emotions are necessarily a true version of the world. And so as long as you're just clear about what the frame it is, you're fine. How do you feel about this conversation? What could we have done better? I like the conversation. I was a little worried coming in. I was, like, what if he only asks a couple questions and then we don't know what to talk about? Yeah. But it's been quite a long time. And I covered, there's so many things I didn't cover. I like the, you have, like, I'm not used to talking to somebody who feels like some of the core way that they approach the world is so different than mine. Like, usually the differences arrive, like, higher up the tree. But, like, there's something about, like, your root system that I think is very different from mine. But also the way that you engage with others is still flexible. Like, usually when I encounter somebody with such a different root system, there's, like, it's, like, more aggressive or something. Yeah. But there's something about the way that you're structured that feels very gentle. All right. Well, I'm really happy we talked. Something tells me we'll probably talk a bunch more times. I think you're a fascinating human being. I think I'm a huge fan of your work. Maybe one more question. What's the meaning of life? To want things? To search? To be in? Well, I think your curiosity is, like, somehow getting to that. Yeah. To want things. It's like curiosity. Like, you don't know. I want to know the answer. To, like, be in the state of yearning. Of wanting. Of yearning. Yeah. That's the point. I wonder if you could do that if you lived a million years. Just keep yearning always. That's the thing I'm probably afraid of if I lived a million years. It's not the torture. It's, like, the yearning will fade. You'd probably yearn to die, then. I was just sitting there wanting death intensely. Intensely. That's kind of romantic, a little bit. Yeah. It has, like, a bit of that spark. And constantly being denied. Wow. So most of your existence on Earth would be spent deeply intimate with death. Just thinking about death. I think we're already doing that. But, like, hiding that from ourselves a little bit. Anyway, wanting. Wow. This is an amazing conversation. I think you're an amazing researcher and human being. You're a great interviewer. I can see why you do this a lot. I appreciate it. This was really fun. Ayla, thank you so much for talking with me today. Thank you. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Ayla. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, let me leave you with some words from Richard Feynman. Physics is like sex. Sure, it may give you some practical results, but that's not why we do it. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.