Hello everyone and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday 11 at 20 November 20th and I'm your host Cara Santa Maria. I'm actually recording this right now in Melbourne, Australia. So I apologize if the sound quality is just a little bit different. I am talking to you from under a blanket in my incredibly loud hotel room. I also don't have access to Patreon right now for some reason the website is down. So I apologize that I can't give a shout out to all of my current patrons but I promise I'll do that again next week. Remember if you want to support the show you can visit www.patrion.com slash talk nerdy. You can also support the show in other ways by visiting my direct website Cara Santa Maria.com. You can shop in the talk nerdy store. You can rate and review on iTunes or Stitcher or any of the other pod catchers that you use. Lastly, just tell your friends about it. I think that's one of the most important ways to spread the word about talk nerdy. Alright guys I'm really excited about today's episode because I get to talk to Mora Aaron's Mealy and she is this amazing woman who wrote a book that really speaks to me personally. Let's see if it speaks to you too. It's called Hiding in the Bathroom. An introverts road map to getting out there when you'd rather stay home. It does doesn't it? Alright guys without any further ado here she is Mora Aaron's Mealy. Well Mora thank you so much for joining me today. Hi Cara. Hi. I'm excited to talk about your new book Hiding in the Bathroom. An introverts road map to getting out there when you'd rather stay home. It's a little bit of a departure from my show which is partially why I'm really excited about it and it also speaks to me in the most deep way possible. Tell me. Yeah right. So you like me you're a podcaster. You have a podcast with Forbes right? Well it used to be with Forbes. It is now no longer with Forbes. That's a whole other story. But yes. So tell me about your podcast first. So my podcast is also called Hiding in the Bathroom and I started it around the same time as I was going to write my book. I decided in the right on Christmas time 2015, you know I'm part of this great women's entrepreneur community online and we were all like making goals, you know, New Year's resolutions. And I said I want to grow my business and not travel. Like I want to be able to figure out how to earn more money this year and see people less. And I started listing all the ways that I have done that over the years and that I thought I could continue to do it. And it became this email conversation and then I wrote back an email with the subject line, do you hide in the bathroom at professional conferences? And it was like, oh these people just started emailing me in the community. How did you know? I hate them. I'm on beta blockers. When I speak, I have social anxiety. Like the floodgates just opened and I thought, this is my book. Wow. And then a producer for Forbes, it was really Kismet saw, she was part of the community and she saw that email and she was like, this sounds like a podcast. We can talk about being introverted and anxious and having all these feelings at work. So that's how it all started. And ironically now I want to do a podcast about the patriarchy because I'm so upset about everything that's going on and I want to highlight people who are like smashing the patriarchy in their own way. Oh my gosh. That's my new podcast idea. Yeah, she has to do that. I will do that. That's being worked on as we speak. But I love podcasting because it reminds me of what blogging used to be like way back when I first started blogging. And so it's just a happy medium for me. I don't know about for you. Oh my gosh. There's so many things about podcasting I love. I love that I can do it on my schedule. I love that you don't really have to have a whole lot of skill to get started and sort of learn as you go, you know, which is great. And I also really, really love that when you podcast, people listen to the words that come out of your mouth and they don't focus on how you look while you're saying them. So because I work in television, most of my income comes from being in front of the camera. And as a total freaking introvert, it sucks the life out of me. And I like, I'm exhausted by my work and I have all this time where I need to recover after. And podcasting is so great because, you know, people comment on the content. They don't comment on like the way your boobs look in your shirt or like the way you had like mascara underneath your eyes because all of your male producers didn't point it out throughout the whole interview. And so that makes me really, really happy that it's just, especially for me, I do a mostly science show. And it's really infuriating when I go on somebody else's like YouTube show and I see all the comments underneath and we're talking about this really intense science story. And they're literally talking about my lip ring as if that matters at all. I have got to tell you, Cara. I feel for female broadcasters like yourself. I did an event with a CNN broadcaster a while back, Brooke Baldwin. And it was actually an event about women's rights and human trafficking and really serious stuff. And then there was an online part of it. And all the comments were like, wow, Brooke, have you been working out? Your legs look really muscular or wow, Brooke, you're so tan. You look amazing. I, on her behalf, I wanted to scream. I don't know how you handle that given what you're talking about. And I never thought about podcasting as a way to separate being judged for your looks from your content. But of course, it totally is. Oh, it's the best. It's for me such a great outlet. And you know, not to like hijack the conversation because my listeners have heard this story before. So I'll do the super short version. But I was working on a TV show that was a live daily show with the most sexist, just horrific executive producer I've ever worked with in my life. And he was absolutely gaslighting me. It was kind of in the middle part of my career. But still early enough that I was questioning whether or not I had any talent, whether or not I was, you know, deserved to be in the role that I was in. And just it was the subject of every therapy session for like a year. And yeah, I was insane. And I went on Joe Rogan's podcast and he really urged me to start a podcast. He was like, Kara, like when you do this, you're going to be like, you're going to be this year your own producer. Nobody is telling you how to dress, what to say. Nobody's in your ear, you know, cutting you off and like fucking with your head. And so I tried it. And it was like my lifeline. You know, I do all these other shows. And you know, for the most part, I'm incredibly thrilled. Like I work for National Geographic and I work for Bill Nion Netflix. And it's amazing. And these are really warm, wonderful shows with great crew and staff. But I still am doing their stories. And when I do my podcast, I get to do my stories. And I love that. That's so true. I love that. And so that must have been a real release for you in writing a book. I mean, that's something I've always wanted to do. One of these days, maybe I'll get around to doing it. But it really is such an intense dedication. You know, it takes a lot of time, a lot of work. But it's all you. Like this book is your deepest darkest. It's your emotions. It's all the things that you want to talk about and you're letting them out for the world to see. Can you tell me about the process? I feel like people are sort of embarrassed for me because it's a business book. And they're always like, oh, you're so candid. You're so open. I, you know, sort of like, oh, dear, should you really have said all that? And I, first of all, I don't care. And I think part of that is also because I have worked for myself for enough years now that I realized I don't care. Like I thought, you know, could anyone fire me if I talked about how nuts I am and all of these? Hey, parents of Gen Z, lively technical college is perfect for the tool belt generation with professional skills focused training, fast track to high demand careers and low debt for big rewards, lively technical college for the tool belt generation, higher learning and higher earning. Looking for excitement? Chamba Casino is here. Play any time, play anywhere. Play on the train, play at the store, play at home, play with your board. Play today for your chance to win and get daily bonuses when you log in. So why are you waiting for, don't delay? Chamba Casino is free to play. Experience social gameplay like never before. Go to Chamba Casino right now to play hundreds of games, including online slots,ingo, slingo, and more. Live the Chamba Life at ChambaCasino.com. No purchase necessary, VGW Group void for prohibited by law, 21-plus terms and conditions apply. Crazy things I go through and what it's like to not really want to see people when you run a business. And then I thought, maybe some of my clients could fire me, but I don't think so. And so that, it's like the podcast. It's incredibly freeing and I would encourage listeners if you have that voice in you. I mean, like I said, I'm an old school blogger. When I was at the very first blogger conference back in 2005, one of the very earliest mom bloggers stood up and she said, Mommy blogging is a radical act. And that is true because the idea that women could take their voice online and talk about the most mundane, like diaper changing and dealing with toddlers and postpartum depression and all the stuff and that people would read them and take them seriously and then advertisers would pay them, right? And they could build audience. I still think about that every day when I think about podcasting or writing a book like the thought of taking your voice and just letting it go is powerful and tough because you might get trolled and there's all this horrible stuff and we live in a patriarchy. But I would encourage people if they feel like they have something that they have to say to pick a medium and some people it's a book because a book is a little bit more. It's private, like writing it as solitary. It doesn't become public till you bring it in the world, which is scary. And you can also kind of wait until you're ready. You know what I mean? Whereas blogging and podcasting, sort of like I mentioned, you don't have to be very good at it at the beginning and part of that is evolving with your audience. So you kind of put yourself out there and knowing that it's not perfect. You know, like the perfect is the enemy of the good when you're actually working in the media. 100% yeah. Well, and you should feel, I mean, Andrew Sullivan, who was, you know, he's the political writer and he was an early blogger and he said every time I hit published, I feel a little bit like I want to throw up. Right? And you still feel that way because am I going to be judged and people are going to think, I'm dumb, I'm I being crazy. But there is, I feel I have found it very freeing the podcasting and having a book and just letting it be in the world. Warts and all has been, it's been amazing. I'm not sure I want to do it again, but it's been amazing. So I want to talk about your actual company because I think I understand what it is that you do. But I'm not sure it's completely clear to me because the business world is like a total black box and I really don't understand corporate America. But it's so important, I think for, you know, people, I bet you a lot of people listening to my podcast are either in academia, they're in science communication or they are involved in corporate America in some way or another because they have, you know, a normal person job. And so like, and I don't have a normal person job and I never really have. And I, I don't know, it fascinates me. I also have to admit that one of my best friends who's like this really strong, amazing woman who has a PhD from Caltech is moving over into the sort of, what is the world that she's moving into? It's a little bit of like the startup VC, but also the sort of management consulting world. And so she tells me all these stories and I'm like listening as she's, you know, discovering this aspect of American economy and it fascinates me, but also like is so alien. So okay, you have this amazing company called Women Online. And what is Women Online? Women Online is a social media agency at its heart. I mean, we are not quite an ad or a PR or even a digital agency. We create campaigns that mobilize women for social good. And we do that by creating Facebook campaigns and having Twitter chats and engaging amazing influencers, you know, who are either mom bloggers or YouTubers or who run online communities. You know, we are all about bringing issues that women care about, which let's face it are pretty much every issue to the right audience and then allowing women to use their storytelling and their platforms to get it out there. I actually, as we speak, I'm in Atlanta, I just came from spending time at the CDC, which your audience is probably very familiar with with a lot of their health communications folks trying to figure out, you know, for example, antibiotic overuse. Something that thank God the CDC is very focused on, but something that we all need to think about day to day. So then my challenge as a strategist is, okay, how do I create online messages, engage social media influencers, create the Facebook live and the video and the whatever strategy to get that message to consumers. That's where I come in and it's very rewarding. I mean, I definitely don't have a real job either because I work from home in my yoga pants most of the time. But yes, which is like my dream and why I left corporate America now gosh, 11 years ago, but the honor of my work is that I get to come into places like the CDC and help figure really cool things out and then go back to my home office and actually do it. That's amazing. It's fascinating and it's something I feel like a lot of people need help with, you know, I get so overwhelmed even with my small podcast and some of the work that I do in TV and now I'm working on my PhD and so I'm like really spread then. I actually have. Yeah, I have help with my social media, you know, I have somebody that I pay to basically I pick all the stories, but she does all the hard work of like matching images or or gifs to the stories and like scheduling all the tweets and the Facebooks and things like that because it's important to me to provide content through my social media like sometimes I use it as a platform to say, hey, I have a new podcast episode. I probably don't do that enough, but more often it's like, hey, look at this cool new thing that happened in science, but it's like a full-time job. Well, it is and I think that that's why a lot of people, you know, my girlfriends and I call it blogger disease. Like we get a lot of friends who say, I can't get up and go to work anymore for the man. Like I want to do my own thing. I want to become, you know, like Carol, like you are a true influencer, right? And you work for yourself and you call your own shots, but it is the sheer act of creating the content. It's like feeding a baby bird that never gets enough food. I mean, it is honestly, right? And it's like there's never enough. When people ask me, how do I get more Twitter followers? I say, well, it tweet more. I mean, it is, it's a volume game. I mean, obviously you need to be interesting and good, but it is truly a volume game. And that's where it's also coming back to the introvert thing. I have a really hard time with that. I don't have a ton of Twitter followers. Like I'm not one of these people who is sort of out there in social because it makes me feel very naked and it feels like a bit of an invasion of my privacy. So I have to run, I don't know about you, but I have to run my social media on my terms, which is weird because I'm very candid also, but I don't feel comfortable just being out there all the time and I don't want to engage that much. I'm kind of the same way. Like it's about, you know, my biggest advice that I tell women who are starting a blog or getting on YouTube or starting a podcast in this kind of science community is that it's okay to read comments and comments can be really beneficial, you know, because they really do in some respects hold a mirror up to your work, but you have to read them when you are feeling like you have the mental health status to do so. Like it's okay to take a few days off. It's okay to take a few weeks off. If you're not in the right headspace, don't be a masochist. Like just don't read them that day because it's not going to be healthy or beneficial. No. And then the other layer of being a woman, right? I mean, you can't escape it. It always goes to a place that, you know, it doesn't go to for men necessarily. Yeah. I'm always amazed by how many, you know, every so often I'll look at my Twitter. I'm much more active on Twitter because it just feels more natural to me. Facebook feels a little bit more, I don't know, artificial and it's like so many so much work and I don't really do it on my phone. So really I only go on Facebook once in a while on my computer and go to chumbacacino.com. Step two, collect your welcome bonus. Come to Papa, welcome bonus. Step three, play hundreds of casino style games for free. That's a lot of games all for free. Step four, unleash your excitement. Chumbacacino has been delivering thrills for over a decade. So claim your free welcome bonus now and live the ChumbacLife. Visit chumbacacino.com. No, for just necessary VGW group void for prohibited by law, 21 block terms and conditions apply. That's probably why my sorry guys if you've sent me Facebook emails lately, I'll pile them. But Twitter, I'm kind of always looking at my Twitter feed because it's also my news feed. And so I'm engaged with it more. But the other day I went into my settings and I was like, whoa, I've blocked a lot of people. And I don't even remember doing it. But you know, there must have been a reason. Oh my gosh, I heard Lindy West, you know, the amazing feminist writer explain, she was on Terry Gross on NPR and she was explaining what her life was like when she was on Twitter. And it sounded so scary and stressful because she's an outspoken feminist. I thought, no, like no, I never could do, I couldn't, my mental health could not take it. Well, and it's so weird how like, you know, the really base comments actually don't bother me as much. And somebody's like, you look like you've been eating too many pizzas. You're like, okay, whatever, scream you, right? But it's more like the people who are the thoughtful people. So, you know, as a person who does science work, but I also am really heavily involved in the atheists and the skeptic communities. And there's like a weird faction within the atheist and the skeptic communities that's like a harder sort of libertarian faction that is like not, I don't think profoundly anti-woman, but has these weird tendencies. So what ends up happening is these people who are sort of quote unquote on my team, all of a sudden will be offended that I'm being a quote social justice warrior. And they use that as a pejorative. And I'm like, hell yeah. I'm a social justice warrior. Do they call you a snowflake? Sometimes I've seen the snowflake thing, SJW a lot. Like that's a very big kind of pejorative that the weirdest thing ever because it's like that is so not offensive to me. But what offends me is that we can be so aligned ideologically on all these other things. And then you're like really disappointing me as my fan base, you know, or as a very small percentage of people within my fan base by saying that I should never talk about women's rights issues or minority rights issues because you literally think that we live in like a post-race society. And you're so out of touch with reality. It's a bummer. There are so many people out there that really do think that all of these issues, these feminist issues and these ethnic minority issues like aren't relevant or aren't necessary or that somehow because that all happened in the past and were well beyond, you know, Jim Crow or were well beyond women's suffrage that somehow these things don't matter anymore. And it's just I think a lot of people haven't gotten that memo. And I think the other thing, I mean, you know, like we I'm very big and with my own children, if I give them one skill, it is it is being able to take other people's perspectives right into account and and and have some critical thoughts. Not just do everything you think, you know, what's that bumper sticker? Don't anyway. The point is is that and social media, further's that because we live in our own filter bubbles and we are algorithmically trained to see people who think like us. And so I think every once in a while, it's actually really healthy to sort of detox or step back from the firehose of social media and and be quiet in yourself, you know, that is something that that I have done because I'm because that's how I am. But it only occurred to me a few months ago that that's actually one of the ways I get things done. And that's how I wrote my book. It was because I just had to be quiet and away from all of the literal and figurative noise for a while. Oh, absolutely. That's social especially. It's so important for your mental health, you know, I was I co-founded and co-run this retreat once a year called psychom camp, which is like a sleep away camp for grownups who are interested in or actively working in science communication. Many of us are freelancers. Many of us don't get to see each other face to face because we all know each other online. And so it's this really great opportunity for people of various levels to get together in like a kind of rustic camp style environment and just learn from one another. And we have keynotes and workshops and all the wonderful things. And we did sort of AMA with the founders and with a couple other kind of successful science communicators at our last one. And somebody asked each of us to go down the line and tell them like what does success mean to you? And it was a really like jarring question. It's like oh geez, you know, like I think we often say like it means making more money, you know, and that's sort of the first place we go. And yeah, it's obviously that's important. But I was sitting there thinking about it. And ultimately my answer was a little out of step with some of the other answers. And I feel like it was so definitive of me as somebody who has publicly talked a lot about struggles with with major depressive disorder. I basically was like listen, success for me means being able to prioritize my mental health. Because I think the truth of the matter is when you are in a rat race and you're working so hard that you can't take care of yourself emotionally, psychologically, or you're not making enough money to be able to because prioritizing your mental health, unfortunately, in America is expensive. You know, going to therapy once a week if that's what you need, being able to keep up with your psychiatric medications, if you're on them, being able to do these like check ins, like you were saying, taking maybe many vacations, little retreats for yourself, going to yoga, whatever it means to you, meditating. It's sort of a privileged thing, you know, and it's unfortunate that people who are still just struggling to get food on the table, struggling to feed their children, struggling to make rent. It's very hard for them to be able to prioritize their mental health. And it's unfortunate. I mean, I urge everybody to do it. I think that the core things that you need in your life are like food and water, shelter, and mental health. It's fundamental and I urge you to build it into your budget at that very basic level. But yeah, for me, that is what success is. And I don't think that as a culture, we prioritize it in a way that we should because we still really stigmatize it. Not only do we stigmatize it, we actively create systems that hurt people, right? And that's funny. Yesterday on my podcast, I interviewed Ashley Ford, the writer, and she was saying that growing up as someone with mental illness in a really working class black community, she felt she wasn't allowed to have depression or anxiety. Oh yeah. Nor did she have the resources. I grew up in the opposite. I grew up in New York City, Jewish culture where everyone lives at their therapist. The expectation of neuroses almost is undermined too. And I think all that to say that, even still recently, there's been a lot of debate about self-care and it's only snowflakes who need self-care, right? I've actually seen that in me and like, oh, all you liberal snowflakes, you need to take care of yourself after the election. That's bullshit. And frankly, if employers in this country were smart, if they had a clue, they would build in ways for us to take care of ourselves a lot better. I mean, many are, right? Whether it's reimbursing your gym membership or allowing people to work from home sometimes, so they don't have to commute. I mean, paid family leave would go a long way better house care. You know, great to see some of them are doing it. But like, some of them are, but it is a culture are so, I would say, actually toxic to what humans need to take care of ourselves mentally and physically that it's really a problem and so much so that if you write about this stuff, people are going to make fun of you. And, um, yeah, it's such a bummer. And they'll like, we undermine it. They give you this like feedback of kind of like, you're just not trying hard enough, this idea of like, you know, that depression or anxiety or any of these mental illnesses are like illnesses of will as if you can literally will yourself out of them. And I think that we dangerously have this culture of like the power of positive thinking, you know, it's so dangerous. All of these books and all of these like self help gurus who are basically like, if you just think really confident, more, yeah, exactly. Then you'll get all the money and all the success. And it's like, yeah, so the world, the chips aren't really stacked that way for a lot of people. You know, it's like, come on, it's not a skill game. Like, this idea that people literally have that everybody has a level playing field, they're born into the American dream is such a bullshit lie. It's such a bullshit lie. And, and you know, the other thing is that, um, I mean, I love conferences. They're wonderful. And certainly with friends online, they're an amazing way to reconnect. But I think that the the conference industry is a multi billion dollar industry. There are hundreds and hundreds of networking and professional conferences a day. And we're all going to them. And when we go to them, we get those messages, right? We see the keynote speakers. It if only we tried harder, if only we networked more, if only we had a personal brand, like, if only if only if only if only. And that's not true for for structural reasons, for societal reasons, for racial and gender injustice. And also temperamentally, right? As I write about in my book, like, I was not cut out to climb the corporate ladder. I have anxiety. I'm a hermit. I'm an introvert. Like, I couldn't do it. I could not be on all the time. So I think that in a weird way, like, the modern leadership success culture is baking in these messages even more. Oh, sure. They're totally exacerbating them. I think that's part of why I find so much kind of refuge and solace in our little sleep away camp that we developed because it's for science communicators, most of whom are hermits and most of whom are really introverted. We like, bacon. So it's a really small gathering. We, you know, do um, smores around the campfire to that kind of a thing. It doesn't feel very like traditional conference center, conference, and there are just certain things that we do that I think make it really special. Like, a one of our breakout workshops is called the freelancers support group. And we literally just sit around. It's like therapy and talk about like our different methods for dealing with writers block or for chasing money when nobody, when we haven't gotten paid or for knowing how to assess the value of our time. You know, all these things that are really hard for people. It's amazing. Um, oh my god. I have a whole chapter of my book about that about scope. First of all, scoping. Hello, because every freelancer I know, and I'm not a freelancer anymore, but I feel like when I run a small business, either rains or it rains or it's drought, right? So you could have all this money come in, all these clients, you're so busy, and then they end, and then you're like, oh shit. Yeah, you're like, I'm never going to work again. It's why it's so hard for me to keep like, I have an incredible assistant, but I don't need her help all the time. Right? You know, because it ebbs and flows. Like, there are times when I'm like, I need help being able to pick up my dry cleaning. I'm so busy. It's going to sit there for a month gathering dust. And then there are other times where I'm like, what business do I have paying somebody to pick up my dry cleaning? That's crazy speech. Like, I'm just sitting on my ass all day. I mean, but you know what, though, here's the thing. I, I have learned to love the downtime. I still have bad lady anxiety. So don't get me wrong. I mean, my business is always really slow. January, February, March, like we are always really slow. And there's always a moment around March 28th when I turned my team and my business partner, I'm like, this is it. We're done. Yeah. What I decided also is to like, try to plan better so that I can enjoy the downtime, right? Like, surely there's a way, and some people, some freelancers are really good at this, where you can get to a point where you can build in the downtime because it restores you or like, I wrote my book during a quiet time at work. I decided to put my anxiety away. I had some money stashed away. And I'm like, I'm going to take three months and do this. So I think that part of part of what anxiety can do to us also is, is tell us messages that are not true about how we're never going to eat again, we're never going to get hard again. And I think the part of the challenge is being able to know what's true, know what's not, manage your cash in a real way. Like, let's face it, right? And then and try to take advantage of the time because it's a gift that we also have as freelancers to have a little bit of a break every once in a while. Oh, it's so true. And I think you're so right. Like anxiety can be this voice that's a little bit kind of dysfunctional and can tell you things that are like a twisted version of reality. And for me, you know, I don't struggle with anxiety as much as I struggle with depression, but I do have a history of college. I used to have panic disorder for a while, but it passed. But for me, I think what my anxiety does is tell me that I'm lazy. And it's really frustrating because yeah, right? Like the time when I do actually think I need to be recuperative, I'm beating myself up for being so lazy that I slept in that day or being so lazy that I'm just like sitting on the couch with my dog staring out the window when I could be being productive. Right. You could be getting out there, right? You could be meeting your next big gig or your next big TV show. And again, that's where all the cultural message come in because the truth is, and I mean, I, oh God, I know this from experience, like having kept my business really small, no one is going to cheer you on if you do less. I mean, this is this is the other challenge. Like you're accountant and your boyfriend and your whatever are not going to be like, Oh, I'm so proud of you. You sat on the couch and took a nap. Like, and so I think that there's also a piece of it. I mean, I always call myself a reformed over achiever because I would never have dreamed of not giving a billion percent all the time. But but again, it's amazingly restorative to sometimes do nothing. And it's how smart brilliant people get their work done, you know, all the data. Absolutely. I feel very lucky that the woman that I mentioned before, Crystal Dillworth, she's been on the podcast. I think a couple of times now. She is sort of my number one ally in that respect. Like she always promotes. She actually recently went on one of those podcasts or TV shows like web series that's all about like getting her done, you know, like that one of those like total like put, you know, butter in your coffee in the morning and take on the deck. And she was like, Oh crap, what am I doing? And so, and she basically had her answers to everything she was in her mind. Like this is not what they want to hear. But like, she had this whole thing about like sometimes it's good for you to just take a Netflix break, you know what I mean? Like binge an entire series in a day and never put on work pants. That's okay. And the fact that she is that little voice in my head is really helpful to me. It really, really makes me feel better. Like if I'm having a day where I just got nothing accomplished and I text her and I'm like, I need noodles and I got nothing done. I'm feeling really shitty about myself. She can really help me understand why I needed that and why it was quite healthy. I think that's right. And I think if you have depression, I have some days where, and because I work at home, this is hard because I don't have like a forcing function that gets me out of the house always where I am sad and I can't get out of bed. And I know there are days when I think, okay, it's okay, but there are days when I know it's it's the depression talking not me coming back to the lies. And so I have my pep talkers who, you know, will also say to me, get out of bed, like get out of your head, you know, just take one step. And this is where actually one phone call, leaving the house to go go to cup of coffee, just doing something very simple, can really lift the fog and get you back on track. And I think I think that that's also a real challenge too is when do I really need to break versus when is, at least for me, when is my anxiety and my depression and all my feelings keeping me sort of hostage from doing what I need to do? Absolutely. And that's why I think that networks are so important. Like whether you work from home and you really don't get an opportunity to see people in person and you have a sort of network online or whether you have a really important group of kind of social support in your community, those kinds of things can be hugely beneficial meeting people who are like where you are in your process, meeting people who are a little before where you are or in front of where you are so that you can learn from one another and and do it on your terms. It is Ryan C. Crest here. There was a recent social media trend which consisted of flying on a plane with no music, no movies, no entertainment, but a better trend would be going to chumbacacino.com. It's like having a mini social casino in your pocket. Chumbacacino has over 100 online casino style games, all absolutely free. It's the most fun you can have online and on a plane. So grab your free welcome bonus now at chumbacacino.com sponsored by chumbacacino.com. Coming back to your book, I am a classical introvert and people are always surprised when I say that because I'm on stage all the time. I don't struggle with stage fright. I don't struggle at all with being able to get up in front of thousands of people and have a quick chat. That part of it is really easy for me, but the minute that afterward I'm standing there and all these people are coming up to me to talk to me, I am like just withdrawing into the bushes, you know, like the beam. It's just so hard for me to do. One-on-one easy, but the minute that I'm in a really social situation where I'm out there, I don't know what to do. I like sit, I'll be at a party and I'm sitting in a chair against a wall like on my phone. So what do you do? Do you leave? I mean, I'm curious. Do you have a sit-up in place? Yeah, so it's hard because I think sometimes I can't leave because I'm there for an event where I'm either expected to be there or I'm there with the skeptics guide to the universe, my other podcast, and so there's the four of them and we all have to be there. So sometimes I do literally just text on my phone or I'll pick one person and sort of have a conversation with them one-on-one. That is a good comfort zone kind of thing for me, but I'm very gracious. Like I take pictures with anybody and everybody when they come up to talk to me, and if I can engage with them in a real way, everything else falls away and I don't feel so stressed, but when there's like a reception line of people just waiting to talk, it's really hard for me. It's, I find that really challenging. I mean, I think one of the things that I've found and it seems to be a good piece of advice in that situation is I joke that I'm a dog if I have a job to do I'm fine. So if I'm in that situation and I have a job, so my job is to connect with two of the people in the room and get their business cards or my job is, you know, I just spoke and so, you know what, I'm here, I'm working. This is because I also have social anxiety, so when I start to get into trouble is also I'm tired and I'm drained by all the people, but then I also start to get anxious like feeling almost like I'm in middle school and no one will sit with me. Those kinds of feelings, which is crazy, I know, but it comes back. I say you're here to work, this is work. It doesn't matter if people like you, like you have half an hour more and then you can go be alone and then to literally be that strict and try to manage my time and energy and then also literally to go take a break and hide in the bathroom. I mean, I think it's fun. Literally, there is nothing wrong if you are if you are at an event or in public and you feel like you are Superman and the crypt night is literally draining that last piece of energy out of you, goes flash some water on your face, go take five minutes, check your phone, like it's okay. People sometimes think you're snobby or you don't want to be there and that's the thing that's hard when you're an introvert, I think. But yeah, people are getting better at that. And also, I'm sure if you're in your community, people understand. Oh, absolutely. You know what we did at this last psychom camp and it was my co-founder Sarah Curtis's idea and then myself and Jason Goldman, my other co-founder, we're like, oh, that's okay. We'll see if it works. I don't know. And then it was like the most geniusing ever. Is we had this night time event we called it a science carnival and it was really fun. We had booths set up all the way around this big kind of dance hall and the booths had fun things you could do like microscopes. You could look at bugs or we had a herpetologist come and bring reptiles. You got to cut and we had somebody doing science tarot cards and somebody giving science temporary tattoos and it was really fun. But we also had a stage with like a talent show and then we had just music playing in an open bar and then all these tables where people could hang out. And we knew some people will want to dance but some people will not be able to get past the social anxiety. They, you know, these kind of party mix or things are really uncomfortable for a lot of people. So we printed a bunch of science coloring book pages and we put them all over the tables and we put crayons out. And it was like the most popular thing is people would be sitting there coloring and they could have a conversation with the people at their table and really connect because they didn't have to have like intense eye contact the whole time. Yeah, and they were like a small talk. Exactly. They were able to talk when it was relevant and otherwise focus on what they were doing and it really brought together a community in a fascinating way. I feel like in the science community we're lucky because there's already sort of a stereotype that we're all introverts and like super weird and so we can feed into that a little more. Freaked me out. I can't believe you had a challenge. I don't just scare me to death. There were only five people who actually performed but they were amazing. I'm super impressed. Well, that's the other things like I've been having I've been flipping networking events on their head. So I do I've been doing networking events for introverts and there is no milling around time at the front end of the event. I don't know if you all listening. Like to me if I show up at an event and I have to either stand there looking like a doofus or go talk chat with people or like make my way over to the bar and try to make friends I can't do that. So what I've done at these events is like none of that upfront. You basically it's hard because people are late but try to manage it and I have greaders. It's like being at a bar mitzvah. We have dance motivators. I have greaders and give people a book. Give them something to do upfront. Minimize that upfront time. Then have a program and then do a fun activity and then at the very end have hangout time because by then like you've all spent time together. You have stuff to talk about. You've sort of bonded. I think that like simple tricks like that can make professional and networking events which we all have to go to. Just a lot more humane and so on. Absolutely. Yeah. Absolutely. Because I feel like the really traditional conferences are the hardest. In the science community it's the professional like society for neuroscience or whatever your science area is. There's all of these and you're required to go off and as a student or as a professor because you have to present your work. It's really really important and those can be the most stressful but also in like the business world they have their versions in the writers world they have their versions. Everybody has to go to these really college traditional conferences. Exactly. 300 days in the US. And half of them don't have harassment policies in place. They don't even think about we have a big talk at the beginning of psychom camp that's all about like guys like the whole point of this is that it's about like having a community and finding allies and if anybody feels excluded if anybody feels uncomfortable like we're going to do what we can. And if you want to be excluded and you don't want people to talk to you like I want everybody to feel the most comfortable they possibly can. So I am here 24-7 come up to me if you have an idea, come up to me if you're having a frustration or you can send us an anonymous email by going through this link. And online we have a harassment policy posted that's got very clear rules. I think these kinds of things are important and it's weird to me that a lot of conferences don't do that. Well I think a lot of conferences are sort of like known to be places where people can be naughty right. I mean traditionally and so oh geez you know. And it's all dudes like so many conferences are just penis everywhere like they're penis and sales. I mean one of the things that I'm obsessed with is changing how we think about sales because sales always was certainly like I came up in new media sales right. It was such a penis fest. It was state clubs and strip clubs right like that's what you did you entertain clients and oh right first of all even a lot of men don't want to sell that way you know selling is about solving someone's problem it's not about showing them a good time and convincing them that you're like a fun bro to hang out with right. Those stereotypes extending to conferences are still really powerful. Yeah it's weird I don't know if it's just because it's low hanging fruit or we sort of are you know socially programmed to just do what we've always done but it's funny to think that the people who look like they're enjoying it might not even be enjoying it. Heck no. So funny. Maybe they'd be rather be watching Netflix I mean probably yeah they're like I just want to go back to my hotel room and call my wife and kids like everybody's putting on airs which is so interesting. You know I'm looking at the work that you do and of course it's called your business is called women online and you have so much of this like a women and work um that's even your website womenandwork.org this focus on sort of feminist ideals sort of you know changing the paradigm so that not only are women more included but women are you know um I guess empowered in a way that historically we haven't been and so I wanted to ask you sort of about the work that you do you know with some of the digital marketing and things like that do you like to specifically focus on helping have a stronger female audience? Um I don't know I mean I don't only work for sort of classic women's issues organizations I mean we do work with with Planned Parenthood for example I mean we're very proudly pro choice and pro health but here's the way I look at it for almost since the beginning of marketing companies mostly led by men and advertisers also mostly led by men have made a lot of money off of female consumers right advertisers are obsessed with female purchasing power and um that's why originally online influencers who are women and the mom bloggers in particular you know made a lot of advertisers really excited because they thought oh man here's all these women who can talk about my new brand of diapers and I sort of got to a place and I'm not alone in this where I got sick of women who use their voices being only seen as marketing vehicles to sell more shit you know women vote more we give more to charity we don't give as much money to mend as to charity as mandu because we don't have as much money but we actually give physically more we advocate more we obviously drive health decisions I mean women are the key to everything when it comes to change and yet we're still stuck in this sort of feminine mistake paradigm where we are seen as people who buy things which of course we buy things and I love my fashion and mine I mean I'm totally but we're more than that and so we are exactly and so you know there it seemed to me that there were all these powerful communities and powerful women it is Ryan here and I have a question for you what do you do when you win like are you a fist bumper a woohoo a handclap or a high fiber if you want to hone in on those winning moves check out chamba casino choose from hundreds of social casino style games for your chance to redeem serious cash prizes there are new game releases weekly plus free daily bonuses so don't wait start having the most fun ever at chamba casino dot com no for just necessary bgw group void for prohibited by law 21 plus terms and conditions apply men who were blogging and writing and creating video and creating photo and yes talking about their kids and talking about what they had for dinner and what they bought but who also really cared about everything frankly and are now really pissed off in part of the resistance as we saw in the most recent election where you had more women than ever especially new women and in places like Virginia running and winning like just because you're a mom just because you care about fashion doesn't mean that you're not like a hard-ass advocate and so that's really the fun that like driving force behind my business is you know women's voices are powerful and we're not only about consuming and selling stuff absolutely I love that I think that that's so incredibly important it's something I really struggle with here on the podcast specifically because when I look at my demographic breakdowns you know I do a science podcast and science has historically had a really built-in male audience and it's really interesting to me a little frustrating but also kind of illuminating because I talk a lot about women's issues like feminism is a big part of my show it's a big part of who I am right so I don't try away from it and also really progressive topics yet my my audience is 80% male but there's this like with you but that's the biggest thing I feel like they're feminist men that listen to my show you know but it's it's really interesting to me because I'm like you know I do struggle to be like why why don't more women listen to my show but at the same time I am really proud of my male audience because I think that they are the progressive very kind of ally type audience that exists and that we need you know I am sometimes I feel a little bad when I'm like oh it's all dick because I'm sure they're like hey I have a dick and I'm nice I'm gonna say this like I love men and I think men get a bum rap and I have a wonderful husband I have two sons I think that men are as stuck in these paradigms as we are you know I'm obsessed with flexible work and working from home and having the audacity to say I need some space to finish this report and can I please leave this busy open plan office right and that gets pinned as a mommy issue right that's true if a man says that it work like he is not gonna be you're doing well but guess what the majority of remote workers in this country are men actually so I think that we're all stuck in these toxic paradigms and I think it's awesome that men listen to your show and stick with I'm so sorry for all the male bashing I'm really not male bashing I'm I'm bashing a system that doesn't work exactly it's not about whether you have a penis or not I swear I agree yeah I agree it's you know it's it's it's an interesting thing that I just wanted to kind of I don't know bring to light yeah it's yeah it's it's a little frustrating I think podcasts have a difficult time anyway podcasting as a medium historically more men listen to podcasts than women but I do think or I do see that changing which I think is really exciting but we we really struggle in the science community right like there's so many incredible female scientists and I think the younger cohort is actually more and more female like you see actually really more yeah more women getting PhDs more women in sort of the earliest stages but then it's that leaky pipeline problem where still most of the tenured professors are men so it's it maybe it's one of those things that's changing maybe it's one of those things where we don't have the institutional protections and place for women to be able to thrive it's very hard to first get a PhD and then do all of the work that you have to do to get a tenured professorship and it's almost impossible to do if you have children or if you you know have to deal with what we think of these like kind of quote traditionally women's issues it's changing but it's changing slowly so very slowly and it's and it's and it's and it's really sad you know and and all of the talk of diversity and you know all the wonderful commercials companies are producing about women and STEM aren't going to change it if the workplace is still toxic and the systems are still rigid and and you know and again flexible work is a huge piece of that oh my gosh oh my gosh absolutely you know I was I was out of a conference CS icon psychon last two weeks ago maybe which is the the Center for Skeptical Inquiry it's this amazing organization that was co-founded by Carl Sagan you know many decades ago and it started out as like one of these skeptic debunking like oh somebody claimed they saw UFO let's show how there's like a reasonable explanation but it's really expanded into a much more like scientific organization and I was on a panel about problems in science and we were talking about you know the the sort of time came in the panel to talk about harassment and and all of the difficult things that women deal with in science and I wanted to open the conversation up and and kind of remind people that this is a societal problem not really a science problem like it's rears its ugly head in science just like it rears its ugly head in in production as we're seeing right now in in Hollywood um but it's the fundamental issues really go back to societal issues and I pointed out and I felt really bad because I threw them under the bus a little bit but I tried to say like we should use this as a learning experience and I'm not trying to be shitty to anybody but there was a costume contest the night before and the people who one second place were dressed as a pimp and a hoe yeah and I was like first of all like you're go you're celebrating sex trafficking like can we talk about the fact that like let's think about what a pimp and a hoe are and then second of all the conference actually awarded them and oh you know they said oh that second place it's a great cost you but then I was like listen let's take a step back yes it's it's everybody who is involved in this process is at fault and I think we need to use this as a learning experience to to understand that this is not okay to glorify you know sex trafficking sex slavery but also the fact that you can go to a costume shop and buy a pimp costume in a bag or a hoe costume in a bag is kind of the problem right like it's bigger than us it's the whole society doesn't understand even why that's bad and this is the kind of thing I talk about when people call me a snowflake right and they accuse you of having no sense of humor I know and it's like have you ever met somebody like you were just saying you you know did that that one-on-one that panel talking about these serious issues I've done reporting on that for a local show here in Los Angeles so Cal connected where I interviewed you know women who were sex trafficked and I talked to them about their issues and once you've been around that culture in that world which is very much kept hidden from view you start to realize that maybe throwing those terms around and glorifying it as if it's a choice that these women have when they're brought into this x-trade at 12 years old you know it's just like it's just a whole thing that we've got to keep our minds open and we've got to use empathy well we could all use a little more empathy right don't you think that underlies so many of these problems yes yes oh my gosh so waking up to the news this morning and I know this is going to air in a couple weeks so it'll be old news by the time it airs but that Louis CK and I think we all kind of knew that it was coming out because we had heard the grumbling stuff it but that Louis CK there's a big expose in the New York Times that he like whipped his dick out and masturbated in front of a couple of comedians and that he's like the latest in this long line of these sort of harassers it actually really depressed me because I really like Louis CK I know it was the first one where I was like it it bums me out like it was really the first like the Harvey Weinstein it was like yeah gross but like it was kind of the worst kept secret in Hollywood right and then you hear like Brett Ratner like of course like there's all these people you're like yeah of course but then I'm like no not you Louis because he's so insightful and he's so he has so much depth and he's a father of two girls and I don't know it's I and of course I haven't read everything there is to read because it just happened right now and whatever but it's I don't know it made me sad it's like not you too like I feel like that's always lately my mentality no not you too it's horrifying because you think about all the men you know and you know some of the men we know by just they're probably they've probably done things like that and it but it doesn't I mean this is the hard thing is that there's still people we like and I'm sure I'm sure part of them are still good people I mean yeah I'm not an absolutist like that you know I and and I and I do I find it I find it incredibly sad and and just very confusing yes very confusing it's like as a student of clinical psychology you know all my background is a neuro and psychology I the first thing I always go to when I hear about like somebody who kills a bunch of people or just like it kills one person or somebody who is like a rapist or somebody I always go to this like again this empathy place where I'm like what was their motivation what was their childhood like you know how did they find themselves in this place and that doesn't absolve them at all I mean I still think of them as people who like need the justice system to you know to do its thing and also probably need you know some amount of kind of mental health care but that's where I go to so I'm thinking of Louis CK and I'm like what was the context when this happened and why did it happen and how did it happen and all of these questions just start spinning around in my mind and it's not because I don't want them to be guilty I think it's because I can't sit alone it's very hard for me to just sit with the idea that like should happens like I'm always like yeah but why but how like I need to understand it you know and as a as a student of psychology you know that these things are learned over time or some I mean you know I think of my babies and and then they don't know anything bad like that it's yeah yeah no it's really really tough oh Moira I have to say that I've just had the best time chatting with you I know that you have to leave because we had we had a quick hard out but I could honestly talk to you for hours and hours more and hopefully we'll be able to connect again what do you say I would love that I admire your work so much so keep at it gosh and I yours everybody hiding in the bathroom and introverts roadmap to getting out there when you'd rather stay home is available now anywhere you can buy books I I highly urge you to pick up your copy and guys who are listening right now thank you for coming back week after week I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk nerdy hello it is Ryan and I was on a flight the other day playing one of my favorite social spin slot games on chamba casino.com I looked over the person sitting next to me you know what they were doing they were also playing chamba casino everybody's loving having fun with it chamba casinos home the hundreds of casino style games you can play for free anytime anywhere so sign up now at chamba casino.com to claim your free welcome bonus it's chamba casino.com and live the chamba life sponsored by chamba casino. no purchase necessary vgw group void for prohibited by law
