 If you're looking for a new spacious SUV, stop. Please don't pay more for less. Buy from Warnakia and save thousands. Interest rates as low as 0%. Or no payments for six months. Upside down on your tray, get up to 4,000 over KBB from Warnakia. Test drive the Kia's Sarentha with rugged good looks, advanced technology and luxury. If you haven't already made the switch to Warnakia, now's the best time. Get all the details at Warnakia.com. Oh, make that switch, make that switch to Warnakia. Strike gold this March with the luck of the drive event at Warner Hyundai. Hyundai offers more style, comfort, safety, and tech. And you're in luck because this event offers even more savings. Test drive the 2025 Hyundai Palisade, a perfect fit for any family with its seven available trim levels and three rows full of comfort and convenience. New Hyundai's come with owner assurance with America's best warranty, a 10-year 100,000 mile powertrain limited warranty. Nationwide, feeling lucky, visit Warner Hyundai.com. Hello, everyone, and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, December 6, 2021. And I'm the host of the show, Cara Santa Maria. And this week we are going to dive in with Dr. Sarah Olsen from the Wildlife Conservation Society. But before we do that, I want to thank those of you who continue to support Talk Nerdy week after week. Remember, Talk Nerdy is and will always be 100% free to download. And that's because the show really does rely on the support of listeners just like you. You make it possible to offset the cost, you know, to make sure that you fund the expense behind making the show each week, so that nobody is forced to pay to listen. This week's top patrons are Daniel Lang, Mary Niva, Rob Schreck, Brian Holden, Christopher Pitts, David J. Eastmith, Dutus Infinitas, Gabrielle F. Haramio Gonzalez, June Separa, and Ulrika Hagman. And if you're interested in supporting this show, all you've got to do is visit patreon.com slash Talk Nerdy. And you can pledge your support any amount over $2 actually gets you an ad-free version of the show. All right, so let's talk about what is going on this week. So as I mentioned, I had the opportunity to sit down with Dr. Sarah Olsen. She is actually the director of the Wildlife Conservation Society Health Program. And she specifically focuses, well, on a lot of things, but specifically on emerging zoonotic pathogens. So she studies bats here in North America and across the globe. She's looked at white-nosed syndrome. She's looked at Ebola virus. And also, of course, the Wildlife Conservation Society is looking at coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-2, in addition to wildlife trafficking, the global wildlife trade, and how all of these different things contribute to potential pandemics, global warming, environmental degradation, all of these things are related, and we're going to dive deep into that. So without further ado, let's have her take it away, Dr. Sarah Olsen. Sarah, thank you so much for joining me today. It's great to be here with you today, Cara. I am excited to talk about, well, I mean, excited, yes, I am excited to talk to you today, but I'm also, you know, wary and interested, yet concerned about, you know, the work that you do, especially on zoonotic pathogens, on on emerging infections, and on sort of the relationship between humans and animals and species and other species that wouldn't usually come into contact in the wild and how that can sort of lead to exactly what we've been experiencing within these past couple of years, pandemics, and, you know, everything in between. So I don't know, there's so much to dive into. You specifically focus on bats, right? Is that one of the bigger sort of species that you tend to spend time on is white nose bat, or I'm sorry, is North American bats? I focus on a couple of different species when it comes to bats. I do a little bit of work both in North America, and we have a program in Republic of Congo where we've been working on fruit bats there and potential, and the potential of these species to potentially harbor Ebola viruses. So that work goes back to 2011, and then working across, really, you know, being based in WCS, a conservation organization, coming to this question with a conservation lens. So we work also on wildlife trade, and this issue is while thinking a lot about how landscape and land use change can increase zoonotic disease spillover risks. And so I touch on a, you know, couple different aspects of this problem. And yes, we are all very weary at this stage with COVID-19 going on and trying to continue to do this work, which WCS has been doing and leading on going back to the early 2000s. So, so white nose syndrome here in the US, Ebola potentially in bats in, you said in the DRC, right? And then also, you know, work even about what's going on with COVID, how did COVID get started, how is it spreading, you know, where it's natural reservoirs? All of this is, as you mentioned, from a conservation lens because of your work with the Wildlife Conservation Society, before we dive into your specific work, I'm curious how you sort of got to where you are now. Like, what did you study in school? What was your specialty to kind of get you into this place where, you know, this is your research? That's a great question. I have been fortunate to, you know, just have been brought up, I think, with a curious mind, raised by teachers and so I did a undergraduate in microbiology with a strong interest in doing a lot of lab-based research, a lot of bench research and came out of that, you know, not sure where I was going but tried out Peace Corps and teaching before I jumped, you know, fully into a more academic mind of work and came back from that really interested in thinking more about population health and the growing field at that time was called EcoHealth, where you're bringing together environment, human and wildlife. And it's kind of merged now into a bigger, you know, other names, one health or planetary health, but really thinking about optimizing the health of all living things on the planet is the end goal. Getting a little bit out of the traditional environmental health work, which you know is water and sanitation, air quality and things like that. And I was really compelled to kind of dive into that space and I was fortunate to do a PhD on deforestation in malaria in University of Wisconsin and looking at the connections of how deforestation alters mosquito habitats and shifts, you know, which mosquito species are in the Amazon. And it kind of was a springboard from that into my postdoc with WCS where I had, you know, kind of done my homework on environment and my homework on human health. And I was seeing this as an opportunity to get my feet wet and here I am completely submerged. I did all things wildlife conservation and I can't bring myself to leave. So a diverse kind of, you know, career trajectory, but really really thankful to have arrived where I am and to be in a place where I hopefully we can, you know, move in the right direction when it comes to one health and conservation. Yeah, it's interesting this concept you mentioned of one health of this sort of like global perspective on health because I think so often I don't know if this is a Western perspective. I don't know if this is an American perspective. I don't even know if this is the dominant perspective, but at least here in the US, what I observe is very much a short-sightedness about, well, how does this affect me? And if it doesn't affect me, I'm not sure I'm terribly interested. And it sounds to me like you're taking a much more global lens of how do all of these different conservation issues affect not only human beings globally, but also the ecology of the individual species. Yeah, it's a big space and we need more expertise and people cutting into this field. It is about climate change, it's about social justice, it's about biodiversity loss and the foundations of what make life possible, right? Like the health of wildlife, the health of plants on earth is what makes our economies run. And so it does come full circle and it is hard to make that connection. If you are just going about your day and seeing those bigger forces, but it is about living sustainably on this planet and living, you know, for the future generation. So they have just as many resources as we enjoy today and it comes full circle to thinking about, you know, what are the trade offs? How do we live sustainably with these constraints and preserving the biodiversity that we have? So big challenges and small steps hopefully I kind of don't want to get too tied up in the vastness of the challenges we face, but to kind of break it down and define ways we can make progress across all of these issues. Yeah, and truth be told, these issues are really all interconnected. So when we talk about climate change, global climate change, when we talk about deforestation, when we talk about, you know, other examples of environmental degradation, this is directly connected to things like zoonotics spill over to things like, you know, pandemics, global pathogens, all of these things that we think of as sort of being separate issues, really speak to one another because so much of it has to do with, I guess, human intervention, human action without a thought of the ramification. Without a thought of how, you know, my clearing this forest or pouring this concrete or building, you know, these structures is affecting the wildlife and the biodiversity that used to exist in that place. Yeah, there's a colleague of mine, Craig Stevens, who calls the situation in inter-problemary, like there's all these problems are interconnected. And then then they're in recognizing that there's hope that if we can bring kind of multi sectoral approaches, you know, recognizing that these problems are not just siloed, you know, they span wildlife people ecosystems and livestock. That we can, you know, navigate towards solutions that are inter-inter-solutionary, I guess, is another way to think about it. Yeah, but yeah, it's, it is challenging space. Absolutely, and it sounds like, as you mentioned, you know, even small steps, even, you know, the cool thing, I guess, you could say about this space, which is so challenging and feels so huge and feels in many ways, insurmountable, is that we sort of know a lot of things that could be done. We're just not doing them. And so, you know, the, the, I mean, we are doing plenty of things as well, obviously, but there's so many more things that we could be doing that it seems like there is room for growth. There's room for improvement. There's room for solutions within this space and, you know, step by step, piecemeal by piecemeal, like we really can affect change. That's one thing, the other aspect of one health is really is an approach. It's an approach to bring people together, people working on wildlife, people working on livestock issues, people thinking about climate change, and to bring everybody into the same space and to approach these issues from these different perspectives and figure out where the winds are. Yeah, so let's talk a little bit about some of the research that you do as I'm actually looking at some of your, your published articles, I made a mistake early on when I was sort of trying to summarize where you've been focusing and I said the DRC, but it's actually in Congo, Brasoville, right, where you've been doing some of this research on Ebola. Yeah, there's two Congo's and I, you don't want to fly to the wrong one. Yeah, yeah, so there's the DRC, which is where Kanchasa is, and then on the other side of the border, it's the Republic of Congo. Sometimes, yeah, kind of colloquially referred to as Congo, Brasoville, because that's the major city there. And so, so you've been doing research. It looks like with, you know, colleagues in Congo, Brasoville, with colleagues across here in the US and even in Germany, looking at, yeah, this idea, of, you know, where is Ebola hanging out? Because we know that Ebola is one of these, these viral infections that we cannot eradicate. It's not like polio, because it has natural reservoirs. It's hanging out in nature. It's, you know, existing in animals. And it takes a spillover event for it to sort of induce either a very small epidemic or hopefully not anything larger. But, but we're going to keep seeing it pop up, right? So we need to understand what these animal reservoirs are. Yeah, yeah, the animal reservoirs are the ones that trigger these initial outbreaks. There is some new really crazy work that's being done on, on how humans can maybe harbor the virus after these outbreaks. And that those can, you know, trigger subsequent outbreaks. And that's what's maybe been happening the most recent outbreaks like in the last year. Oh, really? A really interesting fact is some of these cases where people have harbored the virus and then triggered a new outbreak once, you know, kind of, you know, the body kind of packages that viruses into a small corner and somehow it breaks out. But yeah, my work is more in the space of, you know, that spillover from wildlife to people. And with this research, we're really focused on building kind of a long term study in a site where we can readily access one species of bats where we've seen the antibodies against Ebola in these bats. And we've also seen another work, not a nor study yet, but we've seen small fragments of people of Ebola virus, the genetic material. So it's a it's a putative reservoir, meaning nobody has, you know, definitively identified the reservoir for for many of the Ebola viruses. And so that's why we are we're continuing to do the work there. It's, I was looped in at an early stage. I mean, I was originally hired more to just sit at the desk, but they're like, go into the field, Sarah, and you know, figure out how did you better data collection. And this was my kind of my first job when I got to WCS. And I was just really fortunate to get on an early stage of this sampling and study working with hammer headed fruit bats there in Northern Congo. And they're just fascinating species. Yeah, tell me about them. I've never hammer headed fruit bats. Yeah, I'm like hammer head sharks. Well, imagine a moose head and put on these adorable ears and kind of an, you know, Yoda like expression on their face. And you get to hold them in your hands when you're when we're doing the sampling. I get to hold them for about 15 minutes. And, you know, we kind of have a team there that that carefully samples them and then they're released. Their wingspan, you know, if you put your left arm on your right arm out, you know, can reach a meter across. And they weigh about the females are coming around 300 grams and the males around 500 grams. So like a really small cat. And the males have like I said, this huge nose like like the think moose. And they congregate around a leg. So it's kind of like this mating arena. And that's where we sample again because we can get good reliable numbers of of bats when we use our misnets. And the bats make this honking noise to attract the females. And so you're sampling under this canopy of, you know, of of trees and this honking noise is just raucous at times. And it doesn't keep us up at night because we're working at night. We're already awake. But when you fall asleep at 3 o'clock in the morning, you know, it's just this cacophonist kind of echoing and re. And so they make this one sound and you can it's like kind of like the call and sound. And then they shift the call when they're performing for a female like a female is close by. So you can kind of just in your head, you're imagining what's going on. In the trees above you as you sleep. But it's a really a special place. So I'm curious, you know, you mentioned that there's only a only a a punitive reservoir in that it's not really established yet exactly where or exactly what organisms are holding on to this Ebola virus and potentially spilling it over. But you've been studying these bats for for quite some time. And you know that they carry it, right? Yeah, the studies point to the fact that you can find these, you know, genetic small genetic pieces of the virus. And we can see that they've been infected because we can see that there's antibodies there. But yeah, nobody has it, you know, gone back and fulfilled Cox postulates when it comes to Ebola virus. That is sample animal. How do we know kind of for a fact? Like what is sort of the smoking gun here? Yeah, so to kind of get the smoking gun, you need to isolate the virus from the free-ranging species that you're targeting. In this case, we're looking at, you know, different bat species in Africa. You need to isolate the virus and then pass it through culture, which is hard to begin with because, you know, we don't have a lot of bat cell cultures out there. And then from that cell culture, reinfects the bat species and cause, you know, and show that it infects that bat species. I see. So, so you've got to be able to isolate live virus, show that you can have this virus live outside of the species and then reinfect it almost in like a laboratory version of a spreading of the disease in the wild. Exactly. And the funny thing is with some of these viruses that bats carry that can cause so much sickness in people, they don't appear to cause any sickness in bats. So, there are people who have tried to infect bats in laboratory settings and the bats act as if nothing's happened. So, we're still on the hunt for exactly, you know, how these viruses infect bats and why their immune systems don't seem to be as susceptible to these viruses as people. Right. But wouldn't that actually be a kind of a discerning feature of a good animal reservoir in that it carries an infection without dying from it? Well, exactly. And we think, you know, just as, you know, it seems to hide and people is what we're learning in these most recent outbreaks. You know, where does it hide in bats? And figuring that out is a big ask. It's taking us a long time to figure out human immunology. But the eyes are on and the attention of different scientists are focused on understanding bat immunology now. And hopefully in the coming years, we'll have some more knowledge of exactly how that works. But it seems to be working differently than people. So, there's this tradeoff kind of, you know, what the host does to defend itself from an attacking virus. And what a host can do to kind of tolerate a virus. And for bats, the balance seems to be more on the taller inside, which is different than how our bodies respond. You know, we have this huge inflammation response, a fever response. That's not so much. Right. Right. Yeah. And I mean, this is a pretty deadly disease if and when humans do contract it, although not, you know, it not everybody dies when they get Ebola. It can be quite survivable. But but if you do get sick enough to get to that phase where where, you know, the hemorrhagic fever sets in, you are, you're in a lot of pain. You're, you're really showing some severe symptoms. Yeah. Fortunately, there are some vaccines for people now. And they're doing a really good job. DRC is just impressive in their ability to get in the field and start doing ring vaccinations when there are outbreaks now. And, you know, hats off, I think a big awareness for those vaccines was due to the 2014 Ebola outbreak that was in West Africa. And from our side, it's still a threat. We know, and the reason, you know, why is WCS conservation organization interested in the human health issue like Ebola? Well, it turns out it's also an issue for great apes. When this first spilled over in the early 2000s, we saw really high mortality, around 96% in populations that were being observed. So we had eyes on these kind of wet marshes. And, you know, knowing individual gorillas and they noted 96% declines in these populations. So that's another already an endangered species that's so threatened. Yeah. So these Western rolling gorillas are, are, you know, the populations are sustainable. But if something moves through in addition to other threats with reducing habitat and so forth, we, we, we, we, as a conservation organization also have an interest in keeping our eyes on how this impacts and could, um, impact threaten great apes moving forward. Yeah, you mentioned that these, these sort of gorilla populations are somewhat balanced now. But I can imagine that they're, you know, significantly smaller than they have been in the past. And we haven't seen these in the mountain gorillas, fortunately, figures crossed. Like those, the mountain gorillas are a different subspecies. And those are the ones in like Uganda, Rwanda that are only in the gorillas. Yep. So those are on our radar considerably for, for risks. One of the things we have been doing in Republic of Congo is working with community members. And this started up, and again, in the mid 2000s after those initial outbreaks, asking what can we do both for human health but also for conservation. And we developed kind of an outreach program that sends our teams to the communities and talks with them about what to do when you find, um, when you find a dead carcass. And so that's how species, that's how the outbreaks were happening in the 2000s. People were encountering carcasses and consuming meat they found dead. And that meant that, you know, these communities just didn't have the right information. So, sharing that information saying, hey, if you find something dead in the forest, give us a call. Don't touch. Don't move it or anything. And we have a response team that comes in and samples those carcasses and then reports back and says, no, it was negative. Unfortunately, all of those carcasses we've tested going back now are negative. And so it's, it's a way to kind of benefit both, and it's really in the spirit of one health, you know, information that benefits human health and conservation initiatives. Absolutely. Yeah, I guess the idea being that it seems like an easier source of calories, you know, as if another animal had taken it down, but really it likely fell because of disease. And that's, you know, quite dangerous to human health, especially because we are genetically so similar to great apes. And there's a lot of potential for spillover infections with great apes, as we've seen with HIV AIDS, as we've seen with Ebola, as we've seen, you know, etc, etc, etc. Yeah. And it opens up our ability to understand what's going on as well with, you know, if we diagnose, okay, it's not Ebola, but we can get in there and get more samples and better understand what might be causing a die-off in great apes. Mm-hmm. Gosh, I can imagine that that work when you're there boots on the ground as opposed to being in the lab looking at samples, you know, looking at blood samples, looking at things center in the microscope. But when you're there boots on the ground working with, especially, I mean, working with bats is one thing. I think there's, you know, there's obviously potential risks, but there's also excitement and there's, you know, it must be thrilling, but working with great apes, is there not like a deeper sort of sadness when you do encounter, you know, a felt animal? They're so much like us. And I think that we have a very strong emotional reaction when we encounter these sort of like genetic cousins. No, it's really moving, and I've had the fortune opportunity to spend some time with our programs that are doing research with habituated populations of great apes, and it is really moving to be sitting still in a forest and to be seeing the expressions on their face, and just even gestures that you see, you know, in society and people using, you know, those same gestures and the care that they show for the young is really, really moving. And, you know, being based in the US, I'm more of a support position, but I was on hand for a time when we responded to a carcass, great aparcus, that we were sampling. And I think, you know, what I wasn't ready for was the sound. I think I heard it first, it was just the flies, there's such a congregation of flies, that was the first sound that struck me, and then the smell, even being, we remained a good, safe distance away, we have a whole protocol to keep the sampler safe that we've worked out with partners at TNIH to make sure we're following best practices. So the primary concern when we're arriving is just to keep yourself safe and and then just the, these are large animals when they do die and making sure that we carefully and safely sample them. And that is, it's just, it's seeing and seeing those species in the wild is always incredible. And it's unfortunate when we have to sample them under less, you know, when they're dead for these reasons, but it's nonetheless still really a moving experience. Yeah, yeah, I mean, it, yes, it's an animal carcass, and yes, you know, most of us have experience with species that are, you know, native to where we live. And so we're used to seeing, you know, animals that have died, but it's true, a great apar, it's a body, like when you encounter it, it must feel very, it must feel a lot more like what would happen if you encountered a dead human in the wild. And that would be, you know, incredibly, I think affecting at the same time. You know, I wonder if this speaks to a larger issue that I'm sure you've encountered. And I'm curious about your take on, which is our emotional reaction and response to things that look like us, to things that have faces, to things that are furry, to things that are warm and, you know, complex from a sort of biological body plan perspective that we tend to want to protect the elephants and the apes and the, you know, big fuzzy charismatic megafauna more than perhaps the bats or the insects or the other forms of biodiversity that are, you know, equivalently important to the greater ecosystem, but we don't have this sort of human relationship with. Yeah, it's fascinating because I wasn't a bat person first. I mean, and I think this one thing about the hammerhead of root bat is they hammerhead of root bats is a great like charismatic bat species because it brings people in. You look at that species and it just pulls you in. Unlike, you know, I've worked with the North American bats on threats that they're facing due to white nose syndrome. And a colleague of mine has, you know, done some work on, you know, how people respond to images of bats and you go to a human health webpage on, you know, your local, you know, resources and to talk about rabies and those threats and the bats have their teeth are buried and they look really scary and they look so foreign. Flipside, you go to, you know, a page from, you know, your local department of, you know, wildlife whatnot and talks about white nose syndrome and the threats to bats that they're facing and there, you know, you get these more cuddly images, you know, the teeth aren't buried as much. They're much more kind of neutral photos and how different, you know, sector is view bats differently is just one example in this space is and finding a way to to blend both of those messaging. Yes, bats carry rabies so we need to be careful and alert for when you have, you know, come in contact with the bat or bat has come into contact with you. You don't want anybody dying from a preventable disease like rabies but on the other hand, we also need to take steps to protect these species that are being encroached on by, you know, a fungal disease that apparently we introduce climate change which is altering their habitats, reduced habitat, you know, reduced wetlands, a huge drop in insect biodiversity for reasons still we can kind of, you know, fuzzy, fuzzily explain but really no solid, you know, this is the silver bullet and to find kind of some some harmony there so that, you know, we're looking at bats for what they are but not over, you know, over, I don't know how to say this like that we're not overcompensating one way or the other, you know, it's not just a human health threat, it's not, you know, we don't want to be cuddling up to these species either but we need to find a way to live together and yeah, so yeah, it reminds me of sort of like a bigger the larger issue at hand and kind of trying to follow me for a second because I'm going to a lot of different places in my mind but I'm thinking back to a lot of guests that I've had on my show in the past and of course I had like Merlin Tuttle on the show and he was like, he's like a bat evangelist right so he's like, he's on the bat, he's always on the bat so that was kind of nice, you know, having that perspective on but then I've also had individuals like my dear friend Beth Pratt from the California Wildlife Federation or Wildlife, oh gosh, is it Federation, California Wildlife Society? I think it's Federation and she really is responsible for sort of giving our local mountain lion who lives in Griffith Park, P22, like a personality like she gave him a Facebook page and you know, he's the lonely bachelor and he's sort of this story of what happens when you cross multiple freeways and can't get out and and you know, all about, you know, and so she's taught a lot of these bigger, important issues through this sort of character that is this big cat and early on she got a lot of hate from a lot of scientists for like really personifying this animal but we also see what amazing good it's done. She's raised multi millions of dollars for a wildlife crossing here in Los Angeles and it sort of speaks to this difficulty of trying to strike a balance. The other thing I'm reminded of is a woman who I had on my show named Joe Ruckston who was a producer on Blue Planet and worked really hard on this film and then later was having a lot of kind of regret about the fact that she made you know, she was involved in making this beautiful movie that showed the oceans as this like stunning yet pristine place and she was like that's not what it looked like when we were down there filming. This is very creative editing to show you guys a sort of aspirational view of the ocean and it led her to then work on a film called a plastic ocean because she wanted to show sort of the other side of that story and I think it's something we all struggle with in both science work but also on the other side of that the science communication and the evangelization of science is like how do we strike a balance between being aspirational and sort of being cheerleaders and promoters of science but at the same time being critical, be you know turning our eye in word and seeing where we're making mistakes and being honest about the tragedies that are happening you know across the globe like and in conservation that's a hard balance to strike because like the work can feel very heavy and very depressing. Yeah I think anthropomorphizing of course can make wildlife very relatable it's a great way to tell stories it's also interesting riffing off of your experience there's a thing about who is telling the stories. I think a lot of the stories are coming from scientists who are privileged and have been a received STEM education and there's a lot of stories that aren't being told in this space I think that's something to think about. It does just come down to making wildlife making you know as we started out you know making your understanding to where you are in the space and the actions that you're taking and the actions when you take as a society you know some of these solutions aren't going to be solved by individual actions they need to take societal steps they need bigger cultural shifts and changes to these global challenges that we're facing and you need to have a relatable we need to have that connection and that starts with storytelling. Yeah and you know we it's true savvy storytelling has an understanding well savvy science communication has an understanding a that humans respond to stories and be like there has to be a certain level of sort of social psychology that's involved in the storytelling like how do humans respond to stories how do we initiate action how do we get people to care and if you don't really utilize that savvy sadly a lot of these stories are going to fall on deaf ears. Yeah and then it's that translating that that individual buy-in to collective action to social and cultural change and I mean it can start you know like you pointed your example of the Cougar and Los Angeles there's you know efforts to track individual whales in the New York Seascape in Patagonia you know it allows some of those initial kind of on on ramps to some of these ideas I don't think we've got you know that conversion there yet I think people are trying to figure out how to how to get there and you know big climate initiatives and and outreach like cop and things like that there needs to be some sort of middle ground there I don't know what that is yet but you know that that between individual and some of these larger multilateral kind of actions that are moving in the right direction but you know we need that mid-level kind of conversion as well. Yeah yeah for sure I completely agree and it's it's you're right it's a very difficult it's a difficult balance but it's you know one that we can aspire to and I think it's one that obviously scientists across the globe including yourself are aspiring to especially within the conservation space you know there's something that you brought up earlier that I wanted to make sure I didn't forget I took a little note and wrote it down that you mentioned the global wildlife trade and how that has become a sort of a part of your overarching work is is understanding the global wildlife trade you know the human wildlife interactions that occur throughout the global wildlife trade and and you know I'm curious like what are some of your insights that you've made as some of the you know the problems that you've seen some of the potential solutions in front of us. Yeah and I'll take this back to kind of the zoonotic space which is where I've been more focused and we've done a lot of work of course on a legal wildlife trafficking across WCS but my little niche is working on these zoonotic disease angles. We had a study that came out this last year that looked at a live wildlife trade system. This system was in rats in the lower Meekong region so like southern Vietnam Cambodia and that region and we were able to do some sampling along the supply chain so you know not just at markets where a lot of focus has been put and recently in April I think it was the World Health Organization put out kind of releasing you know to clamp down on spill over risk we really need to focus on markets which is a great starting point but one thing our work showed was that the the prevalence of or the prevalence of detection rates so let's just take one family of viruses we focused on coronaviruses but usually a free-ranging wrote it anywhere around the world you know your chance of detecting a coronavirus and again these aren't SARS-CoV-2 viruses it's just run-of-the-mill coronaviruses that we don't know anything if they're most likely don't cause human health issues they're just kind of you know the coronaviruses that are out there right it's a big umbrella like even even the ones that cause human health issues it's not just COVID like there's a certain portion of the common cold caused by coronaviruses it's just there's a few that we don't know so it's a big it's a big net we're casting a big net here and that's around 2% of you know any road that you sample would probably come up with the coronavirus when we started sampling along with supply chain we looked at we looked at rat traders kind of initial kind of phase of the supply chain then we looked at large markets and then we looked at restaurants and what we found was kind of typical textbook disease ecology what you expect to find when you mix together different species different you know populations and you put them under stressful conditions and cages you know very unnatural conditions but those rat traders we saw about 21% of the rats were were positive for a coronavirus the large market 32% by the time the rodents were slaughtered just before they were served in the restaurants over 50% or 57% of the rodents that we were sampling we were picking up coronaviruses so it showed this amplification of how we're mixing animals live animals in particular and how their susceptibilities their immune systems are compromised they're shedding feces and and you're naving on each other how these processes can amplify coronaviruses which in nature are really low levels typically to some pretty substantial prevalences and so I was blown away by that and when we took that story together I was like really I mean I was expecting to see something but to the extent that it was over 50% was a really astonishing and it speaks to I think paying attention to not just markets but everything that happens along kind of these supply chains and we know for example there's a big trade in live penguins that move into the southeast Asia as well and there's connections as from work done in China on some rescue centers in penguins where we know they're carrying some viruses that are not SARS-CoV-2 but are somewhat you know near relatives and that just speaks to you know how some of these activities for the commercial trade not only bring people into contact with with with wild eyes so that's the first respecter but the process itself is amplifying potentially amplifying viruses because of the conditions of the trade itself and then a third way is you get mixing so you bring a population from one location and another population you're going to be having the potential to you know have two different viruses in fact one cell in that animal and that's where we get you know new genetic mixes of viruses and you know these rearrangements and reassortments that can happen and create you know new viruses completely so there's a lot of I think work to be done on wildlife trade and a lot of the work that we've done I think is showing that the risk involved especially with the commercial alive wildlife trade and needs considerable attention and that's another space I think we can start to act now where wildlife isn't necessarily being used for subsistence for nutrition needs where it's being sold for luxury you know this is a trade-off I think that's not a trade-off but this is a decision that should be pretty easy to make if you're looking for a new spacious SUV stop please don't pay more for less buy from Wernicia and save thousands interest rates as low as 0% or no payments for six months upside down on your trade get up to 4,000 over KBB from Wernicia test drive the Kia Sarentha with rugged good looks advanced technology and luxury if you haven't already made the switch to Wernicia now's the best time get all the details at Wernicia dot com oh make that switch make that switch to Wernicia press play on encore isalia and binge watch gorgeous blooms all season long encore isalia's rebuuum in spring summer and fall so you don't have to wait all year for the next big show more compact more sun tolerant and more cold hearty with vibrant bloom colors and sizes to fit your landscape encore isalia's are a must watch ready to add the number one best selling rebuuuming isalia to your watch list order direct to your door at oncoreazalia dot com yeah yeah remember once speaking with um a Rebecca atensia who is one of the like lead veterinarians at the chimpanzee wildlife reserve and talking to her about chimpanzee meat basically you know like if people who are consuming chimpanzee and and what the situation is there and I was you know I was trying to be really sensitive and so I remember saying something along the lines of um you know from a western perspective like we don't understand the pressures obviously on the ground and you know it may be difficult to communicate you know um not consuming this kind of uh these kinds of calories and and I remember her saying something along the lines of like yes there are examples where you know an animal falls in the forest and like you mentioned people may scavenge the animal but she was like poor people generally are not eating chimpanzee she's like this is a luxury item like that's not the issue at play here like chimpanzee is being traded for um you know people with means in order to fulfill certain needs in order to fulfill certain um ideas about you know uh like it's like a status symbol consuming chim chimpanzee and so you're right there are these examples or like traditional Chinese medicine examples where these things are being traded for their you know potential sort of you know and I'm putting this in quotes um uh benefit to the individual that that is not there to just serve basic caloric needs and that's a sad truth yeah and it comes back to the I mean with your example of Chinese medicine and much of that trade like you see a lot of movement of penguin scales and the penguin scale markets incredible like they talk about penguin scales in terms of tons which every time I hear that unit makes me pause uh but the whole process of moving pangolins to the point where they are processed is also bringing you know people and pangolins into unnecessary contact um and it's there's a lot that needs to be done in that space and that the penguin trade is just really unfortunate um oh god it's horrifying you know it it reminds me a little bit of I rewatched at the very beginning of COVID because I don't know I guess I'm a masochist I was like oh I'm gonna watch contagion I'm home alone I'm doing nothing I'm gonna watch contagion and I think a lot of people did that it was actually like trending on Netflix um and so for for anybody who remembers the film there were a lot of things that were really prescient in contagion of course because they had science advisors who are like you know working in the epidemiology space and they're like this would happen that would happen that would happen there are other things that are ludicrous like nobody at the um at the CDC was like wearing masks I'm like what are you doing this is ridiculous like like your art you know like it was like so much worse than COVID in terms of um infection rates yet everybody's like dude to do not wearing a mask it's like um but anyway we'll ignore that what I loved about the film is that at the very very end there's this very quick I mean blink and you'll miss it it's like a 30 second montage of patient zero and how she got to be patient zero and it shows like the bat flying pooping in the farm area the pigs you know sniffling it the butcher picking up the pig and it like goes chain by chain by chain of how this belowver event happened until it finally reaches the chef and then reaches the woman who's you know the chef shook hands with after he had been like handling this infected um pork and it's really cool to see a kind of cinematic synthesis of a spillover event because I don't think we often think in those terms of like you know a lot of things have to happen in order for a disease to spillover yet we are making a prime situation for that because we're taking species that never would have interacted in the wild and we're putting them in close contact yeah I mean that scene from the very end of contagion sticks with me too and it's a useful you know kind of like do you remember the end of the contagious look at that right we're talking about you know that and that example follows uh nipa virus pretty well where the bats were infecting the pigs and they had this amplifying host in the pigs and then it went on but we've seen that even since that movie I think we've seen Maris emerge versus the Middle East respiratory syndrome which is bats to camels to people um SARS was bats to civets or raccoon dogs in the trade one of the other things we found in that paper on the road and some other thing we shared was you know that these places where wildlife is farmed are not secure so you know where wildlife is farmed in Vietnam you know bats can fly over it's it's not like chickens in the United States where they're all contained in in a big roof scenario so there's a lot of potential for contamination like you see in contagion with with wildlife trade and yeah it's just the mixing of all these species and we've we've seen example like we've seen you know SARS-CoV-1 where we know it was raccoon dogs and civets we know it was linked to the trade there we know with Maris it came through bats and then it came through camels and now a lot of interesting information is coming out on COVID just um last week it was they found some really closely related viruses in bats in northern vile work can't bite I can't recall which but so we're there's lots of you know we don't have the smoking gun but the more we look the more we're finding yeah yeah I remember even personally might have been five years ago now six years ago when I visited um Hong Kong and southern China you know not in Hong Kong per se but when when we drove into southern China and really I spent a few days in sort of like the Dongguan region of southern China and I visited a market you know my friends who I was there with my colleagues were like hey there were locals in China and they were like hey do you want to come to like a kind of a classic Chinese market and I remember seeing all of the really fresh produce and it was like amazing and then you know some of the unique species that unique to us here in the west you know that that are consumed live frogs and things like that but I do remember walking on the outside of the market at one point and seeing things like dog meat and things that were like really confusing to me but also you know grappling with sort of my personal emotions about that and trying to really maintain a global perspective um and so that's one thing when you're seeing all of the meat hanging and you know you can purchase the meat just like you would see it a butcher here um but then you know going around back and being like that's a lot of birds and cages a lot of live birds that are all different species that are in open cages that are just stacked next to each other and then there's a bucket of frogs right next to it and there's a big cage full of turtles right next to that and like I remember being like this is how global infections start like I'm looking at these cages and thinking to myself that species and that species would never have come in contact in the wild and if they carry anything that is remotely infectious to one another then it has the chance to mutate and multiply and potentially spill over to not like this is what zoonotic spillover is like I'm watching it you're watching it in presence of it happening potentially yeah I mean we talked about how many layers there are you know force spillover to happen and there's done some great work done by Rain of Plowright and colleagues kind of showing the Swiss cheese model of all of these different barriers and if the holes are all lined up you know each layer of Swiss cheese you can kind of see how you know when everything lines up you can get something that drops through but in this case we're just adding holes to the Swiss cheese like we're blowing apart like these barriers we're mixing species we're bringing in the potential for mutations like you point out when you know one animal is infected with two different viruses it's really an unhealthy way to manage you know a commercial something that's being done mostly for luxury in these large markets in China and so there's an important kind of consideration there trading off what's thought to be I think a billion dollar industry in China but here we have maybe a couple trillion dollars on the side of a pandemic prevention or pandemic cost wow yeah it's interesting to think about the sheer numbers and like you know the sort of adage that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure and it just seems to always work out that way doesn't it like when you really start to add it up it's like good god when things start to kind of spin out of control the cost involved is just astronomical compared to the cost that it would take if governments would just step up and and you know basically put their nickel down on these prevention efforts and that that must be a frustrating thing working in the conservation space that you know big part of what you guys have to do is literally fundraise a bit you know that's why so many conservation organizations or NGOs it's why so many conservation organizations are you know struggling financially because I don't know if the political will is always there for this kind of work even though it's basically fundamental to our survival yeah yeah it's a hustle we're hustling now for example to work to establish national wildlife health surveillance systems you look at the World Bank report and they got feedback from about eight countries and those eight countries said we're spending about fifty thousand dollars a year on wildlife health surveillance what it's not a lot that's banana that's nothing it is nothing and another report just went through and looked at national plans and documents and said about 80% or more of national systems for wildlife health surveillance either don't exist or they need improvement so there's a huge space here I think in another you know opportunity if there's political will which hopefully you know following COVID if that's you know one thing that can come of this is you have political will to do something then we can start building up some national wildlife health systems that work with partners in the livestock sector that work with partners in the human health sector and so we can have this information flowing and monitoring eyes in the field you know if there's a die off of civets in a rescue center or a die off of penguins on in a in a market you know that we would have an awareness of of these things that are going on but also some eyes in the ears of just what's happening you know passive surveillance is useful at this stage as well you know similar to what we're doing in Congo when something dies in the woods let's go figure out what happened there and learn from it and use that information to improve surveillance systems for one health and to you know kind of tighten up these systems so that we don't have these gaps oh absolutely absolutely so Sarah you know gosh there's so much more that we could dive into but I know we're getting close to hitting that hour point and I don't want to keep you for too long before before we sort of move on to my closing segment I'm wondering if there's anything that we didn't touch on that you you know that you wanted to make sure was said especially since you have a captive audience right now yeah I mean I was able to mention the wildlife health trade work which I think is really important and it and it is a hustle we're really struggling it falls in this gap where there's attention and great you know funding resources for human health surveillance I think now especially because we're tracking all of the human COVID-19 cases there's an established you know system for livestock health in many countries and we're trying to make a pitch to show that there's this gap but there's also you know we know how to do this we've been working on implementing a system in a couple lower middle income countries in Southeast Asia and we're making progress and it's it's hard to make that transition like it's a it's a sustainability thing like we can bring in the funding outside funding and support like grants and contracts to build up something but it is hard for countries to integrate this into into their policy framework into their you know governmental framework and it's hard to do that with just a three-year funding cycle right like let's let's go build national wildlife health surveillance that's integrated and do it in three years and walk away and we're done no I mean it takes longer-term investments and a lot of times that those investments just donors aren't able to do that so it's a it's a hard it's a rock and a hard place but there are opportunities here and hopefully some more attention can be can be brought to this space with with more awareness of these gaps I think that's something that folks just don't understand I think you know we're here in the U.S. like oh yeah we have we have wildlife health systems in the states and at a national level it's there it's kind of taken for granted but really beyond many even the U.S. Canada couple countries in Europe there's really not a lot of support for wildlife health surveillance currently absolutely yeah no you're right you're right it's such an important an important area to keep our focus on so so Sarah listen before before we go I always ask my guests the same two questions and I'm curious about your responses especially given that you you spend so much of your time in this space so there's sort of big picture questions are you ready for them? All right so when you think about the future in whatever context is relevant to you so it could have to do with your work it could have to do with yourself personally it could be you know an individual to a national to a global or even a cosmic perspective so you can take this wherever you want the first question is what is the thing that is keeping you up the most at night the thing that you are most concerned about worried about perhaps it's even venturing into like pessimism or cynicism territory but then on the flip side of that to sort of end on a more you know obviously hopeful note where are you finding your optimism these days where are you genuinely and authentically like not lip service not saccharine like where are you actually finding your hope? Excuse me up at night is the threat of the next spillover that we're not going to catch it that we already have so many threats in the next you know 10 to 20 years between climate change biodiversity loss all of these factors we don't need another spillover event and we have the tools to you know prevent you know spillover if we if we choose to act if we choose to act on the commercial trade where we've seen you know SARS-CoV-1 SARS-CoV-2 emerge I think that that would be just got wrenching because as a conservation organization looking at this for the last you know 20 some plus years where we have the knowledge and understanding of what contributes to spillover that would be an easy win and that that keeps me up at night that we can't move fast enough that we can't get these systems in place quick enough that we can't implement while that health surveillance fast enough so that's kind of that that's those are the big threats and then the you know the bigger threats down the road are just climate change and biodiversity loss and you know navigating to a space where we have sustainability of humans, livestock ecosystems for future generations that's that's the big goal and I think we we have some easy we can't we can't have another you know can't have another outbreak get in our way of achieving those goals there's always it enough to deal with with the pandemic that we're currently in and as we see now you know the new variants that are coming out this is going to be with us for some time and and the hope is the same side of that like we do know what actions we can take we can stop the commercial trade and items that are you know just flowing to these luxury markets and we can do that in sensitive ways we can use different approaches but let's get moving on it now and I'm hopeful like we we can get there I think we we've got ourselves this far we can dig ourselves back out and I'm really you know every day I get to work with some amazing colleagues that are just as passionate and that gives me the hope there's a lot of other organizations out there that are also you know doing really good work and you know combine our forces and that's the other cool thing about one health you know we bring these sectors together we're more we're stronger together than we are you know working a partner silos and I know we can get there we just have to keep digging in and and finding those solutions and and building on the winds that we identify yeah yeah oh gosh well Sarah thank you so much for taking the time to sort of alert us or or re-alert us and and engage us with this you know massive problem but also show us that there is hope and that there are you know incredible people working on solutions and you know thinking about our global health and then the global health of the of the ecosystem of the planet thank you for the work that you do and for taking the time to speak with us today yeah and just to point out if listeners are interested there's a protect wildlife protect us campaign folks can look up at wcs.org and that kind of I think is the same vein of my closing statement there we really need to protect the earth protect wildlife and that will benefit by protecting us and and future generations absolutely protect wildlife people go go there and see how you can help thank you so much once again and to everybody listening thank you for coming back week after week I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk to you. Press play on encore isalia and binge watch gorgeous blooms all season long encore isalia's re-bloom in spring summer and fall so you don't have to wait all year for the next big show more compact more sun tolerant and more cold hearty with vibrant bloom colors and sizes to fit your landscape encore isalia's are a must watch ready to add the number one best selling re-blooming isalia to your watch list order direct to your door at oncour isalia.com press play on encore isalia and binge watch gorgeous blooms all season long encore isalia's re-bloom in spring summer and fall ready to add the number one best selling re-blooming isalia to your watch list order direct to your door at oncour isalia.com