Hello, everyone, and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, February 24th, 2020. And I'm the host of the show, Cara Santa Maria. This week is a really exciting, kind of a different episode because I got to record it on location in a very, very special place. But before I tell you about it, I want to thank those of you who continue to make Talk Nerdy possible each and every week. Remember, Talk Nerdy is and will always be 100% free to download. And that's because of the support from listeners just like you. So if you want to pledge your support, just go to patreon.com slash Talk Nerdy and you can learn more. This week's top patrons include Michael Gucia, Mary Neva, Pascuale Gelare, Sinai, Ulrika Hagman, Dutus Infanitas, the zombie drummer, Phil Tiber, Brian Holden, Daniel Lang, and David J.E. Smith. Thank you all so, so very much. It's because of you that Talk Nerdy can continue. All right, guys. I'm so excited to share this special episode with you this week. So recently I had the opportunity to travel all the way to Kazakhstan, to witness history and action. I got to watch 34 different satellites being launched into space on the Soyuz rocket from the Bikiner Cosmodrome. Now that took place on Friday, February 7th in the wee hours of the morning. The exact time was 242 AM local time. It was an early wake up call at midnight. It was an incredible experience and don't go anywhere after the interview that I'm going to share because you'll get to hear the actual audio from the launch firsthand. Okay, so before we get to that, I have the opportunity earlier in the day to sit down with the CEO of OneWeb satellites. Now OneWeb satellites is a joint venture between Airbus and OneWeb and their specific goal, the reason their company was formed was to design and manufacture the satellites for the OneWeb constellation. Now the OneWeb constellation is currently being built out in an effort to provide global satellite internet broadband service to the entire world. The launch that I witnessed was technically their second launch, but it was really historic because the last launch last year was really a proof of concept in which they were able to put up the first six satellites of the constellation to make sure that they went where they were supposed to go and that they were working. But the launch that I witnessed was the first large batch of satellites, 34, to be exact. I guess that I should clarify that it was a successful launch at that. So guys, without any further ado, please welcome to the show the CEO of OneWeb Satellites, Tony Gingus. First of all, I'm really excited to be here. It's very strange that we're both sitting here in Kazakhstan. Yes, very. Very. It's a little bit of a throwback to the 50s or sooner. Yeah, we're at the Sputnik Hotel, which doesn't feel very Sputnik-y to me. No, it's definitely an interesting decor. Yeah, I mean, I'm starting to dig it. So it's been a long journey to get here. And you, based on your accent, I'm going to guess, are American. I am from Chicago originally in 30 year Californian. Nice, LA are here, but originally from Texas. Oh, very cool. Yeah. So do you live in the US or are you in the UK? No, I live in the US. So I run the joint venture for Airbus and OneWeb. And so I spend most of my time these days in the Mayor-Dyland, Florida, where our factory is. Gotcha. Okay, cool. So that's kind of the biggest, most, I'd say, deceptively simple question that maybe we'll lead with, which is, why are we here in Kazakhstan? Well, I mean, I think it really just comes down to launch economics. If you look, Adrian Stuckel made a comment, I think of one of the earlier sessions about buying 21 Soyuz launches from Ariance Boss, who's basically the broker for the Soyuz launch vehicle outside of Russia. And it's really about launch cost and how many satellites they can get up on each launch vehicle. And I think if you asked Adrian bluntly, he would tell you they gave the best value for what they needed and basically dollar per satellite. And so tell me about the launch that is going to happen, fingers crossed, hopefully, tomorrow, technically early, early tonight. This is launch number two. It is launch number two. So launch number one was last February. So we launched the first six. We called them pilots. They're really equivalent to the same satellites. We're launching today. They were just built at our factory in Toulouse, France. These are the 34 satellites that were built in our factory in Mayor-Dyland, Florida, which are our new factory. And they're pretty much identical to what we launched last year, but they were built on a full production line that's now running in about 30 plus a month. And we're going to launch 34 of them and they pop off this beautiful dispenser for at a time. Just people sometimes describe it as a corn cob with kernels. It's not a bad analogy, but it's a pretty cool device. It's when you look at the pictures, there's some posted on Twitter, even when I saw it the first time. It seemed almost too perfect to be real. So we're here. We're going to go tonight and we're going to witness. I'm going to witness these satellites being launched into space. And what is, I guess, before we get to some of the logistics of that launch and how many there are going to be and where they're going to live, what is the purpose of launching these satellites? Visit mldo.us for the best free place social casino experience wherever you are. Moto offers a huge selection of biggest-style games and now introducing live Blackjack, Roulette and Casino Holdum. These are so much fun. Moto always has generous jackpots, free spins and exciting promotions. Register today at mldo.us for your free welcome bonus. Moto was a social casino. No purchase necessary void were prohibited. Play responsibly conditions apply. See website pretty chaos. Make that switch. Make that switch. To earn a key. It's into space. The idea here is global internet. Absolutely. So one web is half of our owner with Airbus, but they're also our first customer and we owe them 648 satellites plus the six we launched last year to basically blanket the globe in connectivity. And so they need roughly 600 high 500s of those satellites to provide that. And they'll have some in orbit spares and they're basically going to provide essentially the equivalent of cell towers in space globally. So people anywhere on the globe on the surface of the globe could essentially buy the equivalent of high speed 5G LTE connectivity. So explain to me the difference. You are the CEO of one web satellite. Explain to me the difference between one web, the company and one web satellite. And then also how does Airbus come into this? Perfect. And one web is the company, think of them as a telecom company. Their job is to build a system to provide global connectivity. And so they're going to work with other providers to be basically the provider of that service to people. When they decided that they wanted to do this part of a key part of the whole system is building a lot of satellites and building them at scale. So they actually picked Airbus out of a number of different people that offered to build their satellites. And rather than just give Airbus a contract, they actually formed a joint venture with Airbus. So we are that joint venture where technically Airbus one web satellites, we go by one web satellites. And we have two shareholders, half Airbus, half one web. So I have two bosses. One is an Airbus executive and one is Adrian Steckel, the CEO of one web. And so between Adrian and the Airbus shareholder, that's my board. And I'm the third member of the board and they provide me direction. Adrian also happens to be my first customer. And so where did this all start? This idea of launching satellites into space, creating a constellation that will allow everybody everywhere on the planet to have access to the internet. I mean, this is not an idea that we haven't heard before, but logistically we're starting to see it come into effect. It does seem like one web has beat the big players that we've been following. I think in the US as a US audience, people may be a little bit more familiar with either base OS or with Musk. I'm not sure the... It all seems a bit theoretical, I think, to a lot of people right now, but this is actually happening. I mean, that's why we're here. Yeah, it's actually happening. And I think that's what people really need to take away. This really was the brainchild of Greg Weiler. I think many people know Greg. He's maybe not quite as well known as Elon or Jeff Bezos, but Greg started way back. I mean, he was laying basically infrastructure in Africa and he had this vision, you know, maybe decades ago now about how do we connect the world that's hard to connect and realizing that putting infrastructure in far away places is not inexpensive. Number one, there's all kinds of political and logistical and other issues with doing that. It's a really challenging thing. I think he realized that satellites, given that you can launch them into space, they're kind of hard to mess with. I mean, we hear stories about even in, you know, US cities, people stealing copper pipes from houses. I mean, putting down infrastructure puts it at risk and it takes money. And when you put a satellite in space, it's pretty hard to mess with it. You know, it's there and you can use it and it actually has access to a lot of things. So he actually started a company called O3B, which you may have heard of. It's now owned by SES. That was the other three billion and that was referring to basically the three billion people who had no ability to connect to the internet or connect to the global knowledge of mankind. And so he did that for a while and ultimately, you know, they went one way and they had their own struggles, but ultimately they made it and now they've been sold to SES and they own them. And so, you know, they're on their own path. But Greg really felt like while that was a success ultimately, it still wasn't what he wanted to do. If you ask him, he said he really wanted to go even further. And at that point, they weren't talking about the other three billion. It was more like the other five billion because the planet had grown and he formed one web. And really it was to almost do that next level of how do we provide this kind of connectivity for space. So it started with him and then ultimately formed the company one web and they went out and they put the system concept together. They did the partnership with Airbus to build the satellites. They have all kinds of other partnerships for the ground, for the user terminals and really how they build this whole system out. And I think as you listen to Adrian Stuckel, the CEO of One Web Talk earlier at some of the talks, he was talking about how they're really partnering with all these partners all over the world because it's a huge endeavor. And I think what people don't realize is there's so much that goes into it. And One Web isn't just starting and throwing an idea out there and putting satellites up in the space. I mean, they've been planning this for years. We just on the satellites that have been in development for four years. And that's very quick in our industry. I know it seems like a long time to probably a lot of people, but I mean, I've worked on programs that took 14 years to launch a few satellites from inception. So it's a big deal and they've really put all the pieces together. And here we are today launching a really key piece, which is the first big block of satellites. But they have the ground stations, they have the networks, they have the user terminals, they have the landing rights, they really have it all laid out. So people can count number of satellites in space as the way to say who's in first. But I think when you look holistically at what they've done, One Web is really clearly in the lead. And I think they're going to demonstrate that they'll be able to provide the service to people really in a quality way, beginning kind of late this year in limited service and really in full service next year. So maybe you can help me understand the difference between how, for example, myself living in Los Angeles or how a lot of the people who are here to witness this launch living all over the planet, how we receive internet right now versus how a constellation of satellites would deliver internet. Like how is it that One Web is going to reach people that are not currently reached? That's a really good point. I mean, look, if you look at how people get internet today, I mean DSL and cable modems came in a decade plus ago. And that's basically. Oh, make that switch, make that switch to order Kia. Typically, either using your phone line that comes into your house or using the coaxial cable that comes into your house and you put a modem on there and that modem, basically, it takes the signal in a process that and then you typically have a Wi-Fi hotspot in that modem. So you can basically use your Wi-Fi on all of your devices and hook up to that. And that uses your cable modem line or your telephone line to actually shuttle that data out to what they would call a local point of presence or basically a switch nearby, which is owned by an AT&T or a Verizon or whatever your local telecom company is a spectrum if you have cable. And then that gets routed back to their core network and it gets peered out to the internet and there's these big data centers in most of the US and actually all over the world. There's like a big one in Los Angeles. There's ones in San Francisco. And the data gets trunked down there and routed all over the planet. And it gets routed literally through a series of tubes. We're actually talking about wire that's laid into the ground. I'm talking about wire. Most of it is fiber optic. I mean, people always hear fiber and there is fiber all over the planet. There's fiber that goes under the oceans. And that is still the backbone of the internet. I mean, that's still what carries the vast majority of the traffic around the whole globe, those big fiber backhalls. And then out to people's houses, maybe copper wiring, like on a telephone or maybe a cable modem. You hear people have fiber to their home today, certainly in newer communities. That's kind of a more traditional thing when you're talking about in someone's house. But then of course we live in a cellular world. We live in a wireless world. It's not just that Wi-Fi that goes to your hotspot in your house. That's a cable modem or a DSL modem. But you may be talking over your cell phone. And now as we're going into 5G or LTE today, but ultimately 5G, you're essentially talking to a cell tower. And that cell tower has a high speed connectivity or your cell phone and everyone's familiar with that. You make calls over, you get data, etc. But typically that tower is also connected to the backbone through a fiber. So there's a high bandwidth physical line that goes to that tower. So that's the mode that people communicate today. And I know when people think about it, they go, oh, I said, oh, it's that so wild and it's so crazy. It's really the same thing. And let me give you the analogy that I think helps in a cellular world today. The towers are fixed, right? We move. We drive our cars. We don't typically talk when we're in planes, but some people do. But they try. But I mean, we're moving. We're driving in our cars. We're walking. We're going in the subway. We're doing whatever. And as we move and we move out of one tower, which we go and we connect to the other tower, we don't even notice that. That happens automatically. Your phone knows how to do that. The satellites are sort of the same thing. The difference is that relative to the satellites, we're not moving, but they are. So it's like the users are fixed and the towers are moving. So what happens is you're actually talking to the satellite. When one satellite goes overhead and it starts to go out of range, the antenna that you're talking to will actually go connect to the next satellite. So it's sort of a similar thing as when you hand off on a cell phone network. And with that satellite, does it? It has a series of, we call them Venetian blinds. So they look like almost like window blinds in there. There are these antennas in the front of the satellite. They talk in a KU frequency. That's a technical term, but it's basically a spectrum band. And they talk to a user terminal on the ground. And that user terminal is sort of like the modem in your house. It does have an antenna that talks to the satellite. But locally it probably speaks Wi-Fi. It may speak 3G or 4G or LTE. It would speak a language that your cell phone may understand or your iPad or your Galaxy node or whatever it is. And you're talking to that and then that's talking to the satellite. And you think, okay, well, that's sort of like the cell tower. But then how does that cell tower talk back to the core network? Like, it doesn't have Fiber, it's in space. It also has a big antenna and they're kind of a spot antenna. They talk to one web's ground stations. And they have about 40 to 45 ground stations globally. And so that satellite takes the data, it's getting from the user and it pipes that back to one of those ground stations. And those ground stations are connected to the internet through a big Fiber connection. So it's really, one web has a large terrestrial network, which connects all of their ground stations. Then their ground stations talk to all of their satellites and their satellites talk to all their users. So it's really very similar to when you're talking to your cable modem, your cable modem may be talking to a switch. That switch may be talking to a big hub and that peers you out to the internet. It's a very similar analogy. So it's said a lot of it's over a wireless connectivity instead of over a piece of Fiber or a copper or whatever. And so I mean, we think about the fact that in most kind of developed nations, we already have a lot of these connection points. Like we're already covered with LTE, like you said, coming up on 5G. And so the idea is if we're going to be talking about global connectivity, internet going to places where internet hasn't been able to go because of difficulty with infrastructure, whether there's geopolitical conflict on the ground or there are economic reasons that it can't go there. Where are these hubs as these ground stations and how are they going to deliver that kind of connectivity in places that have historically been very hard to reach? Yeah. So I mean, if you look at it, one of the things, one web's orbits are a little higher than some of the other constellations of much larger numbers of satellites. They're F-1200 kilometers. They have a pretty good ability to see a large footprint on the ground. So with 600-ish of them, you can cover the whole globe. You can kind of envision, I think, there are 1100 kilometers, 1000-plus kilometers, kind of footprints wide. And so as long as that station is anywhere within that footprint, they can talk to a user anywhere in that footprint in the ground station, the ground station could be on the very edge of that. So they could be covering, you know, you could be talking to a user on one end of that. And the ground station that you're talking to could be a thousand miles away. So think about that. That's a third of the way across the country. So you could be theoretically talking to a user in Florida and your ground station may be somewhere over in Louisiana. And that's just literally the geometry of what they can see. So that's how they do that. What's cool about that is that actually allows them to cover the oceans. And they can really cover pretty much the full planet because if they pick key areas for ground stations, they have some clearly in areas like Spalbar, which is very far north and the North Atlantic. I don't know if people are watched the Golden Compass, but you know that that's setting where it was in that far northern place. That was Spalbar. It's a sled dog. It's a sled dog. Yeah, very cold, very icy place, but actually a lot of connectivity up there, very high latitude. So they have one station up there. They're looking at other stations down in the Italian region and the Mediterranean on one of the islands there. They have sites all over the world and they space them out. So essentially they know that any satellite anywhere in the globe always can see at least one ground station. And ultimately before it loses connectivity with that ground station, because it's moving in the ground stations fix, it has to be able to see another. So there's good amount of logistics to make sure that these stations are laid out all over the globe. Obviously they have to be on a landmass. It's kind of important. They don't do floating ground stations yet. And it has to have connectivity. So they've really thought hard. And again, there's a lot of work that's gone into this about surveying all the possible areas for those, picking these sites and then now putting in place the actual builds out of all those ground stations. So very carefully thought through, but really allows you to put satellites in this mesh all over the globe and allow them to always have visibility to one of these high speed ground stations. So you covered a lot kind of in that, in that answer about the logistics, sort of the geometry of the physics of how this works. One of the questions that I asked in the press briefing this morning that I think would be interesting to reiterate here is, you know, we hear a lot about Starlink recently and about the plans of Starlink and about the kind of the worry that a lot of people have about so many satellites going up into space. We're talking like orders, at least one order of magnitude more than the number that you're talking about. How is it or why is it that one web will be able to cover the globe with so many fewer satellites than the plan for Starlink? Well, I think a couple things and I'm certainly not an expert at Starlink, but I'll talk about one web which I'm pretty expert at. I think they're higher. So Starlink roughly a lot of the constellations Starlink in particular is, I think, believe it, 550 kilometers. So it's pretty significantly lower. We're at 1200 kilometers. So over twice the distance. When you look at the geometry on the globe, that gives you much bigger footprint so that each satellite itself can see a lot more. We also have an antenna. The way our antenna structured it gives you a very good coverage of the visible. I mean, there's kind of the visible area you can see and then there's the area where you can your antenna can see. It's kind of like if you hold a camera. I mean, when you look out, you can see this whole field, but when you look through your camera lens, your lens has a limited amount of a field. It doesn't necessarily have everything you can see. Our antenna is pretty wide though. It can actually see most of the whole field of view on the earth. So in doing that, I think mostly it's geometry, but again, it's really looking at what's the minimum number of satellites you need to as as Adrian highlighted this morning in the press brief, get full coverage. Their goal isn't to make each satellite super, super, super high performing because right now they're just trying to provide the basic, which is full coverage. And then they're already looking and we're looking with them to figure out how to they want to add additional capacity. And I want to touch on a question you asked earlier. People think of this as a third world problem. I mean, I always tell the fun story of, you know, I grew up in Chicago. My family was in Minnesota. My mom's family was there. They were farmers. So we were always driving up to Minnesota to go see them. And as I got older, you know, we had a job and you know, I was out of school and I've been there when I have both my work cell phone and my personal cell phone. And I remember us driving through Wisconsin and Wisconsin is a pretty big state. I mean, it's about 20 plus million people if I'm not mistaken. And we're driving to Chicago and Minnesota and there's about an hour and a half. We're literally, none of us could get cell phone coverage. And I had two carriers myself. I think between the three or four of us, there were like three plus carriers. No one could get coverage. And here we are in the middle of the United States in a very populated state. And fundamentally, we couldn't get access to data. So if I was living in a farm in this area and it was a pretty rural area of Wisconsin, but I would have no connectivity. So maybe I was getting very low speed, you know, kind of DSL speeds, but nothing high speed. And so this isn't really just a third world problem. It exists here today. And we all know it all comes down to dollars and cents. If they can't justify that there are enough people in that area to lay very expensive fiber and go through that big outlay of capital, then it just doesn't happen. Think about a low populated state like Montana, a very northern state like Alaska, the whole swath of northern Canada, again, all in first world countries. But that's those people are going to benefit from that. Even in cities, I live in, I've lived in Los Angeles for, you know, almost 30 years. And there are areas of Los Angeles where there is so much contention for cell signal that you can't get a signal. I mean, you are constantly dropping calls. And people say, well, why don't they just put in more cell towers? It's difficult to lay fiber infrastructure in a highly densely populated city like Los Angeles. It's very expensive to put down. And we all hear the horror stories of how much money is being spent to put in one more mile of Metro or whatever it is. And so even there, you could use this as an augmentation, a telco could buy additional capacity from one web saying, look, I just have a really dense section of a major world city and I need more capacity and I can't get it. And so those are first world examples, but then when you certainly get to an Africa or you know, far fun area of Asia or an area like Northern Canada or Mongolia or where you just, you don't have enough people, there's no way that they're ever going to get it laid down without something like this. And so you put it in space and you give them access to it and basically you need power. And you don't even need hard line power. You could have a, a small array of solar panels to power that. You could be completely quote off the grid and yet fully on the grid. It's, it's pretty cool. Yeah, you know, it reminds me of this kind of mentality of sort of skipping in some ways and some areas that the, the, the, the, Mo, go, go, visit modo.us for the best free place social casino experience wherever you are. Moto offers a huge selection of Vegas style games and now introducing live blackjack, roulette and casino hold them. These are so much fun. Moto always has generous jackpots free spins and exciting promotions. Register today at modo.us for your free welcome bonus. Moto was a social casino no purchase necessary void where prohibitive play responsibly conditions apply. See website pretty.us. The best way to buy a car is the Werner way. You'll find more value every day at Werner Hyundai. That's more style, more comfort and more warranty. Test drive the 2025 Hyundai Santa Fe with an all new epic style and comfort. Every Hyundai comes with owner assurance and America's best warranty, a 10 year 100,000 mile power train limited warranty. That protects you not just locally, but nationwide. Enjoy five years of complimentary maintenance. Three from the factory plus two more from Werner. Werner Hyundai dot com. The kind of dirtiness of the industrial revolution. Like we now understand the outcome of dirty energy versus clean energy. And we now know that we can in some places skip all the difficult infrastructure and start with solar or start with wind or whatever. So it's, it's an interesting idea to like skip all the ground lines altogether in places that never had them. Yep. But it makes me wonder because of course like you said, it all comes down to economics. So is the idea here that the countries that are willing to invest are going to be then subsidizing the places where there simply isn't the capital to be able to pull for this? I mean, how is it that global coverage as a goal is, I mean, this is not a new goal. How is it going to be manifest with this model when up until, you know, it's 2020? There's still regions of the world where financially just hasn't been feasible. Look, no one has, I'll speak just about what we're doing. No one has built satellites at the scale we have in an industrial model like we've done. We are doing what Henry Ford did to the Model T. We are making satellites commoditized. And I don't mean that in a dirty word. I don't take commodity as a dirty word. We're trying to bring high quality space rated hardware at a very aggressive price and schedule. And I think we're proving we can do that every week as we deliver this first batch and the next batch and the next batch. So I don't think you could have done this 20 years ago. And there were companies that tried. I mean, there was a company called Telidesc, right? I mean, there was an endeavor back in the 90s that they were trying to cover the globe in much less capable connectivity than we're going to do with one web. But the idea was to put again, hundreds of satellites throughout the globe. And they were going to be, you know, I think less than 100 megabits each or 50 megabits. I mean, they were much less capable. At the time, it just proved way too expensive for the satellites. We're going to be 10 plus million dollars each. This is in 1990, something dollars. And you can just multiply that out. One web told numbers. I won't quote them, but they're an order of magnitude smaller than that for the satellites. I think we're at a point where the technology is finally caught up to the idea. And today we can actually industrialize the satellites, bring this technology to bear, and bring really good connectivity globally at a price point that you go, I can close that deal. And yes, one web wants to make money, they're a business. But when Greg Wiler started way back when, I mean, he was trying to connect rural Africa. And it wasn't primarily a money-making deal. It was really trying to bring something that people who were underserved. And so I think if you look at their overall goals, it's not just the money-making venture of selling connectivity, but they want to connect every school on the planet. They want to be good stewards in space. These concepts have been built into one web from the beginning. And I know people get skeptical, but there is some altruism to what they're doing. It isn't just we're going to dominate everyone and take over the world. That's not the goal. That's not the kind of company they are. They really want to connect every school on the planet. And think about what a game-changer that is. And at the same time, if they can then offer a service, partner with countries who may want to subsidize it, partner with telecommunication companies who may feel like they want to expand their footprint and serve their users better, most of which have regulations from their country to provide minimal levels of service, just like they do in the US. I mean, great. I think that's the business model. It's a collaborative business model. It's much like I think what we're trying to do in one web satellites. We're not trying to take over the aerospace industry and force everyone out and assimilate them, if you will, to use a Star Trek analogy. We're not the board. We want to bring people over to our way of thinking. We want like-minded companies to join us. I happen to believe that, yes, we may be working with a lot of people to what I call revolutionize the space industry, bring them to a new way of cost and price and schedule aggressiveness and yet maintain quality. Because if we can do that, we can make space accessible to everyone. And solutions like one web can become a reality. And I think it's a more inclusive vision. And I think that's also a difference. And I think one web has that same sort of inclusive vision in the way they want to build out their service. Yeah, so in your view, this really is kind of the beginning of something that I guess has to be collaborative if it's going to work, right? Because when you're talking about global coverage. Complex. Right? Really. I mean, think about all the countries. You get into, I mean, you heard some things this morning. And even eye gloss over, you hear regulatory and landing rights and all these terms. But I mean, just negotiating the right to be able to do business there to broadcast in the right frequencies, to be able to offer service to people. I mean, and think about even just the cultural differences. I mean, imagine, you know, in the US, we have an expectation, maybe not always met, but about service that we get from our internet provider or our grocery store or whatever it is. And that's not necessarily the same expectation as someone would have in France or in Mongolia or in China or Russia. It's different, right? I mean, there are cultural norms that are different. And the way you interact with people is even different. So, I mean, just thinking that a one size fits all or my way or the highway, it's naive. And we live in a global society. And I think we have to understand that there is complexity. And to do that, yeah, partnering is inherently sometimes more complex. But ultimately, when you get at the work, it's powerful. And you multiply yourself by the number of participants. And their collective experience. And it's like, how do you do that? How do you build that from scratch? It would be hard to just do it all yourself. And so, you have to get out there. And you have to really make it a collaborative thing. But I mean, you hit on one thing that really speaks to me, which is you almost can, like, re-baseline the whole thing. I want to go out and I want to live in the middle of rural wherever that has no connectivity. With one web, I can put solar panels on my roof. I can be self-sustaining. I can grow my own food, live a simple lifestyle, in a beautiful mountain somewhere. And yet, I can still relate and connect to the whole world. And I mean, I joined the company because people said, why would you leave an aerospace job that you are in for, only 25 plus years? And you had it made, you had a good job, and I had a good career. And I said, I got an opportunity to revolutionize the industry I've been in for almost 30 years. And truly revolutionize that. And I said the chance that I would get that in the remainder of my career is about zero. And I get to help connect the whole planet, which I don't, I'm not naive. I don't think connecting everyone solves the world's problems. But it's a barrier that's broken down. It's an enabler. And if I can help connect the whole planet, and what that will do for people who have no connectivity, all those schools and all those people, and what the possibility is, I said, you do those two things and someone tells you you get to do these. Maybe is the last big thing in your career go, how do you say no to that? Yeah. I mean, it really does at its core speak to a fundamental social justice issue. I mean, I, I probably 20, 30 years ago, people would never think this way. But now the idea that internet is a fundamental human right, at least the right to information, the right to connect is a fundamental human right, is I think developing mentality that you see worldwide. We're also living in a place where people may not have clean water, but they have a cell phone in their hands. Yes. I mean, I remember doing coverage for Nat Geo and spending time in rural Morocco, like in the Borderlands of Algeria, in some of the poorest places I've ever seen. And every meteorite trader that I, that I was working with, every like safari nomad who was out on the dunes, had a cell phone in their pocket. Yeah. But the fact of the matter is, they're not very often being connected. Right. And that's the real issue. Yes, absolutely. And I think, you know, we talk about the, what about us, we talk about the monetary divide, if you will a lot, the 99% the 1%, but I think the same thing exists for connectivity. And I, and I, it's an interesting positive that you say, you know, it's a, is it a, is a human right? I think it is along the lines of, certainly we would want, you know, it's a tool. It can be used for great good. It can be used for great bad. But I think giving people that access and being able to reach people, we really, I mean, I was reading a book recently, Sapiens, I'll give it a call out. Yeah. And really interesting. And I thought the way he posited that we really live in a, in a single society today. And you think about it and you think, well, no, that's not true. And we're all these separate countries and whatever. But he says, look, I mean, we live in a world today where everyone knows everyone else exists. And when you go back hundreds or thousands of years, that's not true. They didn't even know that the other people existed. We live in a society where we all know the other one exists. We, okay, we have different countries and different languages and whatever. But, but I think the ability to connect is really what has helped advance the human race. And I think really making it where it's not the halves and the have-nots with access, I think that really could change it. Now, we have to use the tool for good. And we have to make sure that what comes over those pipes, even if they're virtual pipes, is good things. And that they have access, because it's like having access to a grocery store isn't enough. You have to have access to a grocery store with quality food that's affordable. And so I think there's, what we're doing is we're helping put in the grocery store for data. Now I think others in this community, because again, one company, one group can't change the world by themselves. It's very difficult. But I think there's got to be this responsibility of saying, okay, now how do we make sure that the quality of what's getting to people is good? And if you will, nutritious for the mind. I mean, it is interesting how technology and innovation have iterated what we consider to be a baseline. And, you know, there are, I think a lot of parallels that can be drawn about like tools of oppression, historically like literacy, for example, is a massive barrier. And we know that economically, if people have access and if people are capable of reading and they have access to knowledge, that is a bottleneck that's opened up. And I think that in some ways you can see a parallel between historical oppression of people being able to read. And as we see with some governments now, oppressive practices around the internet, you know, and even in places where maybe there's no force that's preventing people from access other than poverty, other than geopolitical conflict, lifting those, you know, whether they're willful or I guess passive, aggressive forces, can really only be, I think, a tool for good. Absolutely. I mean, look, your example of literacy is great. Literacy we use as a tool to keep people in check for centuries, for millennia probably. If they didn't know how to read, they didn't know how to think for themselves and they did what they were told. Yeah. And I think that's not the case today. And most things, as you said, I don't think it's an oppressive lack of access. There are social places. I mean, you can think of places like North Korea, which limits internet to people. They don't have it. Okay, so they don't want them to have connectivity. But I think there's a lot of places that it's just not feasible. And so if you can, you remove that and it really will, I think, fundamentally change things. And okay, then we see even in our own country, the US today, access to data doesn't mean you're getting good data. I do believe that if we can really, truly have communication, dialogue, learning, that we can bridge even some of these social, political gaps that we have today, I think we see things like, you know, all the stories of Facebook and things that are giving people what they want as opposed to real, nutritious facts and data. Okay, that's a problem. We have to solve on our own society in the United States and other first world countries. But I think we also have to solve it because now as we give more people access, we really want to make sure that that access is good access and it helps them. It's the first step. It's necessary, but not sufficient. Well, and it almost seems like there's an intrinsic need for diplomacy when you're talking about a system and infrastructure that is web-like and that is far reaching. It's one thing if, uh, mo-do. Dot US. Visit modo.us for the best, free place social casino experience wherever you are. Modo offers a huge selection of biggest style games with free spins, exciting promotions and always generous jackpots. You can waste your time with the others or you can win at Modo. Register today at modo.us for your free welcome bonus. Modo is a social casino no purchase necessary void where prohibitively responsibly conditions apply. See website pretty chaos. Modo.us The best way to buy a car is the Werner Way. You'll find more value every day at Werner Hyundai. That's more style, more comfort and more warranty. Test drive the 2025 Hyundai Santa Fe with an all-new epic style and comfort. Every Hyundai comes with owner assurance and America's best warranty, a 10-year 100,000-mile powertrain-limited warranty. That protects you not just locally, but nationwide. Enjoy five years of complimentary maintenance. Three from the factory plus two more from Werner. WernerHunde.com. If a regime has their own infrastructure and they do with it what they want and they make decisions about access as they can. But when it's a shared system, it almost seems like it would be more difficult to not have that diplomatic angle to it. Yeah, I think you need that one because you don't want to, I mean, I think you heard one web say, you know, they're not going to go around anything. They're going to work with people to make sure they're doing it legit. I mean, they're not going to try to work around when someone doesn't want to give them access. But the flip side of that is it makes it much harder for people to block it. I mean, think about it is you can go put a solar panel on a roof, put an antenna on the roof in the middle of nowhere whether that that place wants you to have connectivity or not. You could have it. Now, I think you want to go about that the right way. It's not to work around the system. Certainly in areas where you have a country that's willing and able to have that kind of reasonable diplomatic relationship. That said, in other places, you can imagine where they don't have access today. There will be people who find out that it exists and will try to figure it out. Yeah, and that's, I mean, that's the cool thing that I see is that you're right. If it exists, there will be people who can hack it. But also beyond that, I mean, I often kind of go back to this idea of science to diplomacy. Like we're sitting here in Kazakhstan. We're about to go to a Russian lunch. In a Russian lunch. I know. Like former Russian lunch. Yeah, I, I, I was at my dentist's office last week. And I have like a legit old school Russian dentist. And he was like, what, you know, I have a, I have a temp crown. So you're leaving the country to careful. And I told him I'm going to bikerner and he, or no, I said I'm going to Kazakhstan. He said, oh, bikerner. You know, when I was young, my family, my mother was so scared of me and listing in the army because I was going to be stationed in bikerner. And at that time, it was a black box and no one knew what happened there. And it was a very scary proposition for my mother to send me off there. And I was thinking, gosh, just the difference of a few decades that now, you know, Roscoe Cosm... Like they're launching American. Yes. We're sharing the ISS. Like there are, and you see it with conservation biology. You see it across the board that geopolitical boundaries are often crossed when there are scientific problems to be solved. And I think you see the same thing with this kind of technological innovation, which is, I mean, it makes me very excited. It's not, it's a problem that I think is hard to get mired down in the minutia of all the reasons countries don't collaborate. It's something that people go, oh, access to space. I mean, Russia's offered that. They're flying us to our own space station, as you said. You know, some of the first launches into space came from here. I mean, you're looking at here and where I normally live as kind of the two big space ports that launch most of what's ever been launched. Yeah, which were mortal enemies for ages. And now we're like, yeah, we'll work together. This is more important than all of that. Yes. And actually, I think that's exactly it. I think there's at some level, people realize, this is more important. It's that old analogy. We're more alike than we are different. And I think this is one of those things, access to space, connectivity, bringing people together. It's one of those people go, oh, we're really more like than we are different. Yeah. People can kind of see that. Boy, if we could find a few more of those just in life writ large, think of how much better a place to plan. Oh my gosh, absolutely. So I don't want to keep you much longer, but I have a couple more questions that I want to ask. I'm just checking my watch because I know we have a press briefing. Oh, now. So let me keep this really brief. Number one, why is today important and what happened at the last launch that brought us to today? Today is important because really, this is the first big launch of 34 satellites. We're launching them in the orbit. We're showing that we can not only do this once. We're going to do it again in a month, then a month after that and a month after that. So it's the beginning of the run to really build out the constellation. So I think it's the real big we're here. We're moving. We're going full speed ahead. So last launch was like proof of concept? Six. Yeah. And we called them pilots. And ultimately, as I said, they were fully functional satellites. There's the LEPDAR. They will provide service. But that was to just show they work. Because honestly, even before we launch those, people said they'll never be able to do it. We proved that we could do it. Now we can prove we can do it at scale. And then we'll show we can maintain a pace. And I think the rest will be history and one will be up and running and providing service globally. So you provided, I think, a really important answer to a question that I asked this morning in the briefing. And I have it, but I'm afraid that the audio quality isn't as good. So I'd love to get the many response about a lot of people listening, think of, oh, God, satellite constellation. There's already so many satellites up there. We're adding more physical infrastructure to space. And it's starting to get crowded. I think historically, as a species, we have a tendency to do cool stuff now and worry about it to fix later. I mean, that's why we have the problem of climate change. That's why we have the problem of plastic pollution. And I think we're starting to get hip to the fact that we don't want to contribute to the problem of space junk and that maybe these mitigation should be built into the plan is from what I've read and from the conversation we had earlier, that's something that one web really took to heart, right? Built in from the beginning. I mean, good stewardship of the planet. Built in, I said this morning, the highest reliability. The highest thing that we can count on is the ability of the satellite to deorbit itself. If you look at traditional geo or meosatellites, those are really out there forever. A geo-synchronous satellite, when people say they deorbit it, they actually push it out. There's a graveyard of satellites sitting out there higher than geo. And if they hit each other, they just become... They do, but they're far enough out. And they're in an orbit where they're not going to decay. And so it's just a belt of junk that's out there at the equator, 35,000 kilometers altitude away. And so it's a long way away. But these are leo satellites. And we built them to deorbit. That's the low earth orbit. Yeah, so geo-geosynchronous satellite, they rotate at the rate of the earth. So they're fixed relative to the earth. Meosatellites, medium earth orbit, they typically have like a 12 hour orbit, think like a GPS. Mm-hmm. And then leo satellites, which are lower, so they can't see as much. You need more of them. But we actually trily deorbit these satellites. And so we built in a couple things right from the beginning, really because at one web's insistence, one was the thing we can rely on the most is the ability to get them out of orbit. So that's even more reliable than the mission itself, which is the communication aspect. So they said, look, we want that to be the highest reliability. Then in the extreme case where the satellite can't do that, which would be very unlikely, because we've designed it to be very reliable to do that, we've actually put in a grappling fixture. There's a physical one that looks like a knob today. They were going to more of an electro-mechanical one, kind of like a magnetic kind of grappling fixture, where you could actually, in the future, when a tugboat service exists for space, someone could go up and grab one of our satellites and bring them down. And then third of all, I mean, one of the things we're trying to do is the quality and the repeatability of the quality of our satellites is very important. We have so far all six satellites that we launched last year work perfectly. The goal is that all 34 of these, and every 34 after work perfectly, we don't want to launch junk into space. We're not going to test it. We're not going to experiment with that. We want our satellites to be able to get up there and serve their mission. And if they can't, we want them out. And they're built to burn up completely in the atmosphere and leave no pollution. So that is not something that happened by accident. It's not something we stumbled upon. It was planned. And I think that's a thing that you're going to see, and Adrian used the word this morning when he was talking. There is a certain amount of regulation that is needed. We're going to have to work air traffic control for all these satellites. Yes, we're going to have a lot of stuff up there. So we have to make sure that they get up there. They work. And if they don't work, we get them out of orbit. And that people are responsible. And that there's someone managing that. So there's some negotiation that's going to have to go on between some countries. But I think fundamentally people have to plan and they have to be responsible. I mean, it has to be the new normal. It has to be the new normal. And unfortunately, look, the regulations have not yet caught up with the reality of where they are. I think you're seeing them start to evolve. But I think all the countries are saying, UK has put some rules in place. Other countries have about, you know, how long things can stay up there and you have to have the ability to do orbit. And stuff, they are starting to catch up. But it has to be the new normal. Or we're just going to litter something else. But I can tell you one thing. One website lights in. One web won't be the ones littering. OK, I have one last question because my listeners will kill me if I forget it. They always get mad when I do. I close the podcast by asking every guest the same two questions. And they're kind of like a big picture questions. You were going to very big picture fields. I don't think these will be difficult for you. To start, when you think about the future, I want to know number one, what is the thing that actually keeps you up at night? The thing that you're concerned about, maybe pessimistic, borderline cynical about the thing, you're truly deeply worried about existentially. And on the flip side of that, I want to know, what are you actually genuinely optimistic about, not lip service, but like authentically looking forward to? I think the thing that keeps me up at night is really, it's a lot of these issues we talked about today, the inability of us, societally, in the US, in the globe, to have cordial, intelligent, thoughtful conversation collaboration and find the areas where we're more alike than we are different. I think some days it feels like we're losing that. We need that. As a species, that's what's moved us forward. And I think we have to be able to continue to do that. Each country needs it, the US needs it, but I think the globe needs it. And I think that worries me because I think there's some trends that feel like those norms of diplomacy are breaking down a little within our own country in between countries. But what actually makes me optimistic when I kind of put those doubts aside is that there's a lot of people out there really trying to change the world for the better. And look, I'd like anyone else. You can harsh on the millennials or the young generation. But when I look at them, they're really, they are collaborative. They are willing to talk about difficult problems to reach across the aisle, so to speak, to come to agreements, to see a bright future. And I think we really have to get that group of people energized. As we get older, I think we naturally get more cynical. And we get more set in our ways. And I think we need that younger generation to really help us see the possibility of what we're doing and break down some of these negative trends, and really turn them in a positive direction. Because I do think as a species, I think, we really have the ability to do such great things when we put our mind to it. But the only way we do that really is when we come together. Yeah. And it's kind of two sides of the same coin, really. I love it. Well, Tony, thank you so much for joining me. You're welcome. Thank you. It was a pleasure. Absolutely. It was a pleasure. Everybody listening. Thank you for coming back week after week. I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk nerdy. How about we go see this rocket launch? Let's do it. So we will go now here. Right? My Dad? Oh, welcome back. Comrad, yay, audio. What about your Highness? What about you? If you have no power blind on your luggage are you going to hit me? Visit M O D O dot US for the best free place social casino experience wherever you are Modo offers a huge selection of biggest style games with free spins exciting promotions and always generous jackpots You can waste your time with the others or you can win at Modo register today at M O D O dot US for your free welcome bonus Modo was a social casino no purchase necessary void with prohibitive play responsibly conditions apply see website for details M O D O dot US The best way to buy a car is the Werner way you'll find more value every day at Werner Hyundai That's more style more comfort and more warranty test drive the 2025 Hyundai Santa Fe with an all-new epic style and comfort Every Hyundai comes with owner assurance and America's best warranty a 10 year 100,000 mile powertrain limited warranty That protects you not just locally, but nationwide enjoy five years of complimentary maintenance three from the factory plus two more from Werner Werner Hyundai dot com
