 If you're looking for a new spacious SUV, stop. Please don't pay more for less. Buy from Warnakia and save thousands. Interest rates as low as 0%. Or no payments for six months. Upside down on your tray, get up to 4,000 over KBB from Warnakia. Test drive the Kia's Sarentha with rugged good looks, advanced technology and luxury. If you haven't already made the switch to Warnakia, now's the best time. Get all the details at Warnakia.com. Oh, make that switch. Make that switch to Warnakia. Press play on Encore, Isalia and binge watch gorgeous blooms all season long. Encore, Isalia's Rebloom in spring, summer and fall. So you don't have to wait all year for the next big show. More compact, more sun tolerant, and more cold hearty. With vibrant bloom colors and sizes to fit your landscape, Encore, Isalia's are a must watch. Ready to add the number one best-selling Reblooming Isalia to your watch list. Order direct to your door at oncoreazalia.com. Hello, everyone, and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, October 25th, 2021, and I'm the host of the show, Cara Santa Maria. And this week we have an exciting chat for you today as we do every week. Come on, I am not to disappoint. But before we dive in, I do want to thank those of you who make Talk Nerdy possible. As you've heard me say before, now about 380 times, Talk Nerdy isn't will always be 100% free to download. And that is because I rely on the support of listeners just like you. If you would like to pledge your support, all you've got to do is visit patreon.com slash Talk Nerdy to learn more. You can also check out the Talk Nerdy page at Cara Santa Maria.com slash podcast or even easier Talk Nerdy.com. This week's top supporters include Rob Schreck, Daniel Lang, Mary Neva, Christopher Johnson, Gabrielle Felipe, Adam Yogan-Zalas, Brian Holden, Christopher Pitts, David J. Eastmith, June Separa, Ulrika Hagman, and Robert Christ. Thank you all so, so very much from the bottom of my heart. All right, let's talk about this week's show. So I had the opportunity to sit down with the author of The Glitter in the Green in search of hummingbirds. His name is John Dunn, and he's a natural history writer, photographer, and wildlife tour leader. He's written, you know, across a bunch of outlets like BBC Wildlife. He's also written three previous books, one called Orchid Summer. And he currently lives on a craft, which if you don't know about crafters, they're so cool. I would definitely recommend looking it up in the remote Shetland Islands, and we'll talk about that on the show. So without any further ado, here he is, the author of The Glitter in the Green in search of hummingbirds, John Dunn. Well, John, thank you so much for joining me today. Oh, thanks for inviting me, Kar. So of course, it is a morning for me here in Los Angeles. It is, as you mentioned, when we first connected Happy Hour in all the way out in Shetland. We've been talking about Scotland and talking about Shetland off air before we start the recording, but you are very far away from, not just me, but from your own mainland. Yeah, I'm some removed from civilization. Shetland's closer to the Arctic Circle and it is to London. And my nearest train station is Bergen in Norway. So yeah, I'm in Britain, but kind of only just. Right. And so how long have you been living in Shetland? Because I do not detect a Scottish accent. No, I'm a Cornishman originally. I moved to Shetland about 20 years ago. And I've been here, based here ever since, and using it as a base to explore the world and show people really cool wildlife. That's what I love doing. Right. So in your, I guess we could say your career, you are a naturalist, you are a wildlife writer and explorer. But of course, your career is not separate from your personal life. It's not separate from your fundamental interest. So really, is that why you chose to live in Shetland? This is exactly it. A little potted history. I, from a very young age, and you I wanted nothing more than to be in nature learning about the natural world. My mum and dad had other plans. They thought I should be a lawyer. And so I am a thwarted scientist. I'm not a scientist. I'm a layman. I'm a totally self-taught. Having said that, I wanted to live in the wildest place I could in Britain. And so when I graduated from university, I just wasted very little time in moving up here. It's an incredible place to see bird migration, to close to the continental shelf edge. So you see lots of exciting cetaceans here. I see humpback whales from the kitchen window. It's an absolute marvelous place. You see all sorts of incredible vagrant birds from Siberia, every autumn, but also from North America, from your neck or the woods. So it's a really exciting place to live. And people from all over the world come here to see the bird migration. And I live in the heart of it. And that's really exciting. And of course, I can't help but imagine being so close to the Arctic Circle, being so far north, that the light show must be just stunning. Yeah, it is. The Aurora Borealis, being that close to the Arctic Circle, we get a lot of Aurora activity above us. We don't always get to see it, because we have a hypersionic climate. We are so out there in the Atlantic. And it was around the cusp of the Atlantic Ocean, the North Sea, and a little touch of Arctic Ocean coming down from the North. So there is a lot of weather here. And that means a lot of wind. You might hear a little wind noise in the background, because it's blowing a hoolly outside the window at the moment. But a lot of rain as well, a lot of cloud covers. So frustratingly, sometimes you look at the Aurora predictions and you know there's a complete pirate technique light show going on overhead. And you can't see a thing. But sometimes it is off the scale, brilliant. You know, you pull open the curtains in the evening and you look out and there are these huge curtains and blossoms of light happening in the sky. And you can see them with the naked eye. I mean, a lot of the photos, of course you see taken with cameras with slightly longer exposure. But to be able to actually see stuff happening with the naked eye is pretty special. And you feel that touch by the universe when that happens. Absolutely. It's something I've yet to see in all of my travels. And although I've been to Scotland several times, I've not gone to Scandinavia. I've not gone any farther north. I've been up in, you know, I have been up in Russia. I've been up in Kazakhstan. But I've never been quite in the regions, or Iceland or any of these areas where I know the Aurora are so stunning. I have to get there. I just, I have to. You do. And as much as I would love you to come and visit in Scotland, there are more reliable places to see the Aurora than India. So get yourself to Iceland or Spalbad. And you'll see some magnificent stuff. It really is very special. And it's something I highly recommend everyone to use once in their life. Absolutely. I'll come say hi along a little while. Yeah, come drop in. So come at happy hour. Exactly. Right now. So you mentioned, you know, when you were describing sort of your upbringing and, you know, the pressures from your parents and, you know, the twists and turns in your education, that you really sort of followed the path of sort of the tradition of the historical naturalist. Like many, you know, even Charles Darwin was not a, quote, trained scientist. He was a naturalist in the true sense. He was like, I don't know what I'm doing. I want to get on a boat. And then I'm like, you're in, I would just like, yeah. And also, that was his career. But at the beginning, he wasn't trained for that. No, well, this is it. I was born, I think, 200 years out of time. I should have been born in sort of the late 1700s or early 1800s, because, yeah, you mentioned Darwin. And there was the great English naturalist Gilbert White who wrote the natural history of cell born. And these were guys who had inquisitive questing minds and didn't have any knowledge of what they were seeing necessarily. They just had a little acquired knowledge up to the point they were starting. And for me, starting out in the 1970s and 1980s, as Betray's my age, as a young boy, I kind of was starting in the same place, because there was no internet, of course. And my mum and dad had a couple of really basic natural history books in the house. And we are talking seriously basic stuff. And so I was going out and I was seeing everything from scratch, a new, and having to work it out for myself. That stands you, I think, in really good stead, as a naturalist, as a broad spectrum naturalist in later life, because you sort of get the tool set to look at things without any sort of prejudice or prior expectation. Of course, you know, and I did something which I guess as a writer stood me in good stead. My mum was ever so good. She would take me to the library and I'd go to the school library as well, and you know, research stuff, which sounds really old school without using Google, I'd be sat there looking through books, and actually, you know, because of the credit catalog. Yeah, totally. And cross-referencing, because you'd look at one book which was written in the in the sort of like the 1950s, and then you'd look at something from the 1850s. And you'd realize there were discrepancies, and actually some of these old books had insight and wisdom, which had been lost by the oversimplification of the later books. And so even now as a natural history writer, I now I have a renders library of thousands of books here in the house. I'm like a magpie, because this stuff there isn't on the internet and isn't in later books. And it's absolutely bang on in terms of accuracy. And it's lovely to have that resource. And so I guess here you're right. I am a traditional old school naturalist. And I love having that, having that questing mind. I mean, lockdown, the whole COVID awful, last 18 months, two years. And I feel awkward saying this, but it was kind of a blessing in a way, because you're forced to look really locally at what surround you, you couldn't travel, you couldn't travel even more than a couple of miles from home. And it forced me to, in the times when the breeding birds weren't back here in Shetland, and the weather was ghastly, I thought, well, yeah, I need to look at the stuff. I'm bored. I finished writing this book. And so I started looking at Leicon. And suddenly I realized that for the past 18, 19 years, I've been here in Shetland wasting my time. I hadn't realized there was this whole incredible world of stuff right under my nose. And I love this because there are every sort of different branch of the natural history tree. There is stuff to see if you just open your eyes. And since the start of this year, since January 1st, I've added 13 new species of Leicon to the known Leicon list of the island I live on. And there's one or two kind of interesting ones in the context of the whole of Shetland. But a lot of them are just things which nobody's noticed, they're very common. But no one's been here looking. And this is the case all around the world. Wherever you are, you're listeners in the US and everywhere else with Leicon at least. You can go out there and if you've got a camera, a digital camera, a phone, better yet, a hand lens to look closely at this stuff, you will find new things which haven't been recorded in your neighborhood, your state. It's just unbelievable. Sorry, I'm no, we're here to talk about something completely different. I love it though. I mean, I love this stuff. Yeah, it speaks to this kind of, not just the enthusiasm, but the, I don't know, it's funny because it's something that I feel it's obviously not been lost. It's something that you're still actively experiencing and enjoying. But for many of us who live in cities or for those of us who have very just like fast paced kind of lifestyles, I think this idea and this translates to almost every field I work in mental health. And clearly this translates to psychology, but really to almost every field, this idea of stopping, looking, smelling, tasting, just being and, you know, quote, in nature, whatever that actually means. But just being in the moment, I think, is something that we've kind of forgotten how to do. I think you're absolutely right. I think that that was something which the pandemic, for many people, and I've been talking to a lot of folks to botanists, to birders, to liken people to all sorts in the past 18 months. A lot of people, as I said a moment ago, were forced to slow down and work from home. And their leisure time was spent within walking distance of home for a great many months. And, you know, all of this came at some terrible costs to, you know, some of the really important stuff, which, you know, makes us human, the social interactions that we have face to face. But it also gave people an opportunity to do just what you said of slowing down and disconnecting a bit and getting closer, you know, looking closer to home and being a little more mindful. We were forced to do something which we've kind of forgotten how to do in this wonderful high-tech, interconnected world. And I think that's been a sort of, a bit of a sort of a, the sugar coating on the pandemic pill. It's been a blessing, a hidden blessing. And it's something I certainly intend to take away from it now that the world is, you know, touch wood, hopefully becoming a little more open and we're starting to perhaps see a little light at the end of the tunnel. I want to hang on to that sort of joy that I've rediscovered in the local and the mindfulness of just being, and as you say, in nature, whatever that means, that doesn't necessarily mean traveling to Shetland or to Ecuador or wherever. It can actually just be walking out into your street and looking at what's growing in the cracks in the pavement because that's special too. And this was the other really interesting thing. The like and as a photographer, of course, it's a macro photography thing, you know, you're looking at the very, very small and trying to take a decent picture of that. And that's, I think, important. There's a world in microcosm in your own backyard or, as I say, in the cracks in the pavement, some of my happiest, botanizing memories come from being in the States and walking around Central Park and finding broad-leafed telebrins, which it makes it so an awful thing. You guys call it weed-telebrine for good reasons because it's a really ghastly invasive. But it's, you know, it's really interesting to find those things growing in an urban context and to understand the sort of story of how they came to be there and actually they're impact on your native orchid species. All of this stuff is really interesting and every organism, whether it's a lycan or, I mean, lycan, amazing, but whether it's lycan or beetles or birds or plants, they all have a story attached. And this comes back to that sort of researching thing. I love the fact that it would go beyond just the name of something. When some of those will see with the hummingbird, some of the names have just crazy, they're fantastic. But go beyond the name and dig down a little deeper. Who found that thing, who identified that thing in the first place? What was their story? What does that organism have as a life cycle, a lifestyle? There's so much, so much cool stuff. How is it adapting to our anthropomorphically changing world? I just, people sort of say to me about, you know, I must have been hard in the lockdown, you know, your income gets constrained as naturalists. Actually, income isn't the important thing here. What I feel short of is time. I don't have enough time to see and to learn and to explore as much as I want to. And, you know, I've been doing this since I was a little boy and one lifetime's not long enough. So yeah, I'm digressing massively. Oh, yeah, I mean, and it sounds like that sort of passion, that hunger really not just doesn't know no bounds, but it doesn't discriminate because like you said, we've been talking about likened, you historically, you've written several books, one of which was about orchids as you referenced. And of course, your new book is called The Glitter and the Green in search of hummingbirds, which you gave a nod to. And sort of speaking back to what you were saying about, even if you live in a very industrial area, a very urban area, looking at, you know, what is growing through the cracks in the sidewalk. I can attest to the fact I live in Los Angeles on the east side of Los Angeles in a neighborhood called Eagle Rock. I live in a small lot home, meaning that it's like a three story house that's quite small, like the amount of land I own is less than the square footage of my house because it's built very close to several other houses and they're built, built tall instead of wide, you know, as a way to kind of, I guess, be very efficient in our usage. And but I spend quite a bit of time on my roof. I have a deck, my roof is converted into a deck. And I have hummingbirds that visit me regularly. That's so wonderful. And, you know, some species, as you know, we may come to discuss our incredibly sensitive and vulnerable, but some are astonishingly adaptable and I mean, all hummingbirds are tough, but almost by definition from their sort of biology they have to be. And I love the fact that, you know, you get hummingbirds on, you know, upon the deck three stories up. And four actually, yeah, it's the fourth floor. I know it's amazing. I have massive... I have massive... I have massive jealousy. Yeah, I put out a hummingbird feeder when I first moved into this house and I thought, who knows, we'll see. And within days, they were going to visit into drink. And once you've started as a pushing sugar water, that's it. You have to keep feeding that habit. Otherwise, you'll be some really pissed off hummingbirds. It's true. It's true. And so let's talk hummingbirds now. I mean, clearly you are an individual who has dedicated your life to stopping, to looking, to experiencing. And so there's something about different species, different ecological, as I say, coming from the south of the US, niches. Yeah. Injit niches. Yeah, you're having the icing ditch and I say niche. It's potato potato. Yeah, that's exactly. But clearly there are different things that appeal to you based on your own life experience, based on your own exposure. What is it about hummingbirds that captured you so that you decided to dedicate an entire book to it? I am, as a naturalist and as a nature writer, I am a bit like a bower bird. I am really attracted to color and form, especially color. And so we spoke at a moment ago and you mentioned, I'd written a book all about orchids. There's tons of brilliant wildflowers that grow native in Britain and Europe. But the orchids are just especially remarkable in terms of color and form. There's this rainbow of colors and some incredible, especially in Europe, some incredible species that mimic insects to get insects to try and pseudo-copulate and mate with the flower and hence to pollinate them. So there's some fantastic stuff. And I found that really compelling. And the same sort of principle applies to hummingbirds. I mean, birds on birds, wonderful. They're fantastic. We've got living dinosaurs in our midst and they see in color. I mean, I love mammals, but a lot of mammals are seeing in shades of gray. Birds full of technical, gloriously so. And the plumages are reflecting that, of course, because they're seeing a colorful world. But why hummingbirds out of all birds? Well, there's a nature writer who described hummingbirds to me, a guy called Tim D. And he described them as birds 2.0. And I love that because they are kind of birds but more. You know, they're birds but upgraded. And so any sort of bird, which has wings that beat, you know, 1,000 beats per minute, sorry, a heart that beats 1,000 beats per minute and wings which are beating 50 times per second. So that's just some colossal statistics. Most, I mean, I love this stuff. I'm such a nerd. Most, I mean that as in a good way. Oh, yeah. It's the same. That is not a good word. Now, with the other word. That is not a pejorative word. Not at all. I wouldn't have names. Podcasts for it. Exactly. This is a batch of honor completely. Most birds, pectoral muscles, they're breast muscles, the ones which do the flap, if you will. Take up about 15% of their body weight. Hummingbirds, it's twice that's a third. They're just superlative pinnacles of evolution. But to take it back to, you know, how did I get hooked on them? We have to go back to my poor mum, the one who wasn't particularly encouraging about my natural history interests. But I'm being unkind to my poor mum because actually she knew that I didn't want to be a lawyer. And every now and again, there would be a little nod to what was really firing me up. And one day she took me to London. And we lived in the West Country of England down in the Southwest. So a very rural environment. And she took me up to London. I think it might be the first time I'd been to the capital. And I mean, God, anyone who's been to London, there are those touristy things you have to do. And it's no different if you're living here in the UK, if you've never been before, and you're a little kid, especially, it's expected you would want to go and see the changing of the guard. You want to have a ride in a black cab. You want to go on a double decker bus. So all of this sort of, you know, stuff, I couldn't care less. I was, I just, I had this kind of de-kenzy and view of London that it was just this sort of ghastly terrifying frightening place. And I just wanted to be out in the open air. However, my mum was a canny woman. She knew a thing or two about the psychology of her son. And so she saved a visit to the Natural History Museum in London till the end of this sort of mid afternoon. And that way she got complete the compliance from the reluctant child of her son. Yes. So my, oh yeah. And so we went into the Natural History Museum and it was... And what a museum it is. I love that place. It's so inspiring. This was back in the day when the, as you walked into the entrance, it wasn't hope, the blue whale skeleton, which was hung above you, suspended above you in the hall. This was when it was the de-plodocus, which, you know, it was just epic, you know, it was unbelievably exciting to walk into that place. It still is, but, yeah. I'm a generation which, which just, you know, we grew up loving dying. And all that stuff. So, yeah. It was so cool. But once you got beyond that hallway, and I guess it's not fashionable these days in a cases of taxidermy and, you know, displays of beautifully pinned butterflies and so on. But you've got to understand this was the early 1980s and I was seeing stuff which I just could not believe existed. And we didn't have as well the sort of the amazing natural history documentaries which we take for granted these days on the television and the internet. You know, that stuff was really few and far between. It was a really big deal to have an atombra, you know, come on on a Sunday night. You know, that was like a highlight for me of the year. And so, we're walking through the corridors. And I was just like a kid in the candy store, you know, everything was wonderful and amazing. And it was late afternoon and the sun was shining into it. This really long corridor. And it was very vividly. It was a seminal moment. It was a damacine moment. There was a glass cabinet and inside it were a couple of hundred stuffed taxidermy hummingbirds. And, you know, I've been back to see them since. They're in a different location in the museum these days where the sun doesn't hit them. But back then, I... Is this a huge cabinet that's full of like a tree? It's almost like a branch tree and there's... Yes! Yeah, I know this, Kat. I have a picture of this in my phone. You go, said, why? And I have to say, I've shown people this when I've been doing talks about hummingbirds in the last six months. And it just looks crap. It looks absolutely awful. But how close? It's amazing. Yeah, it is. I mean, yes, it was seated now. Yeah, well, this is the thing. Because back then, in that corridor, the sun came in. And those hummingbirds had obviously decades of being hit by the suns. They were a bit faded. I mean, some of them are probably almost 200 years old, some of the old disbursements. They're a bit dusty, they're a bit flea bit, and you know, they're not looking their best. But I hadn't seen a real hummingbird at this point. And so what I was seeing were birds which were shaped like no other bird I had seen in the garden at home. You know, they were just these really amazing long, sickle-shaped wings, tails with, you know, huge long... Tails longer than the body of the bird itself. And with these sort of amazing spatules, these great bigs, the discs of feather on the end, bills which, again, you know, like the sort of billed hummingbird were longer than the body of the bird. Just a really curved hooked-bills, amazing things. All of that, the forms were incredible. But what actually was really exciting was when the sun hit these birds, they blazed with colour. And these were not colours like, you know, I always say, you know, you have to understand why hummingbirds. Yet if any of your listeners are familiar with old-world, pallyarctic warblers, well, all I'm saying is they are not like the warblers you guys have in the spring in the US. Our warblers are kind of brown. Maybe green, but we're not talking like a bright zesty lime green, we're mainly talking a sort of dull olive. So our warblers are just really understated. Your warblers are really kind of like surging bright colours. So put that context there for me to see birds which were that bright and colourful and iridescent and every colour of the rainbow there and then in that moment, yeah, I didn't know birds like that existed. And this takes us back to this sort of, you know, well, how do you find more about these things? You find out stuff back in the pre-internet days. I went to the library and there were one or two pictures, but that doesn't really prepare you for what hummingbirds do. There's a defining thing about the whole humming flight, you know, the hovering, the flying backwards. And then when you sort of delve a bit deeper and you learn about the amazing adaptations, the physiological stuff, and you learn the evolutionary path they've taken to get to that point. Well, of course, all of this stuff came later. And so the seed was planted, but it took a while to sort of germinate. I knew I wanted to learn more and I had to have a gradual accretion of knowledge through the sort of 1980s. And then of course, you know, weight university, the 1990s, the internet comes along, there's better natural history programs. Yeah, I know what hummingbirds are now and I just had this burning desire to see hummingbirds. I really want to see these things. You know, I've read so much about them. I've seen them on the TV. I've heard David Attenborough speaking in such breathless, excited tones about them. Yeah, I want to see them for myself. And you hadn't seen them in the flesh. No, no, not until, oh my goodness, where are we? Not until about ten years ago. What, what, wait, are there no hummingbirds in the UK? I'm very confused right now. Okay, so as a little boy, you never saw, they're just so common here. Yes, you are so spoiled. And this is a really cool thing and I'm going to shout, I'm going to build you guys in the Americas up and I'm going to just knock you right down here. So, hummingbirds are found in the Americas only and nowhere else in the world. Wait, they found from Alaska in the far north and this is really cool. They found at 60 degrees north, which is really far north and that's the same latitude as Shetland. So, yeah, we are a long way north in June, in mid summer. We, just like Alaska, we get 21 hours of daylight and conversely in the winter, yeah, 21 hours of darkness. It's pretty grim. And yet in summer, there are hummingbirds at that latitude in Alaska. They're a rufus and very probably Anna's hummingbirds now breeding up there. And at the other end of the scale, right down on the shores of the Beagle channel in Argentina, in Tierra del Fuego, there are hummingbirds there as well. So, the Americas, every single possible habitat that you can find between those two points, has got hummingbirds at one point or another in the year, if not all year round. Deserts right up to just below the snowline in the Andes, rainforests, of course, cloud forests. You name it, hummingbirds, mangrove swamps, they have, there'll be at least one species which has found in niche. And as you rightly say, four stories up in eastern Los Angeles, there are hummingbirds there too, but not here. What's the change though that they've decided? I mean, decided. How strange that we often think of these kind of ecological bands as existing at certain latitudes or as existing at certain elevations, but how strange that there's a longitudinal band of this bird that they, they don't want to, like, because the habitat is so similar as you follow a latitude. Absolutely. And there are hummingbirds in the Andes which actually make a migration, but it's an altitude and all migration up and down hill, depending on the season, which I think is wonderful. And then, of course, in the US, going back to the Alaskan ones, the Rufus hummingbirds, which are breeding up there in the summer, those hummingbirds are making a proper latitudinal migration of some 3,000, 3,500 miles from Alaska to winter down in Mexico or Florida these days as well. So, I mean, it pound for pound and Rufus hummingbird is a tiny little thing. There are other bird species, Arctic turns, for example, which breed in the Arctic and winter in the Antarctic, which make a longer migration, but they're big birds. Rufus hummingbird is a tiny little thing powered on sugar, basically. And they're making the most epic migration. So, I've built you up here, and now it's time to just knock you guys down, because you've got them everywhere, they're brilliant. Yeah, they originally came from Europe. Well, no, well, wait, wait, why aren't they there anymore? Yeah, we had ice ages, it was a crap time. No good, so it wasn't because of us. No, oh God, no, no, we have plenty of sins where hummingbirds in the rest of the natural world are concerned, but this is not one of them. The fact we haven't got any birds still in Europe, but I love this. This is so cool. There are hummingbird fossils which have been found in the Americas. They're about one or two million years old, and that's plenty old. However, there was a German paleontologist, a guy called Gerald Mayer, who in 2004, he was looking at some early bird fossils which have been pulled out of a German clay pit. He looked at them and he had that sort of eurica moment when he looked at the wing bones of these fossils and he thought, well, hang on, that's a hummingbird, and I know, and this is just as big as belief. He named those first hummingbirds. What was it? Euro-trocculus in expectartus. My liney and binomial Latin or Greek isn't brilliant, but even I can translate that one. It's unexpected European hummingbird. I mean, unexpected, I think, is a massive understatement. I think he must have picked himself up off the floor. How old were these fossils? This is the killer. They were 30 million years old. We know that hummingbirds originally evolved in Europe when Europe was a much hotter, lusher, more temperate place than it is now. There's other birds as well. You've got what are they called? Hewatsins in South America. These wonderful primitive birds, which again, there's a fossil record which shows that they came from Europe as well. So at some point in the very, very distant past, they made it across to the Americas and then basically got isolated there when Europe turned real cold and unpleasant. They were left in the Americas and they were very happy there. So you've still got them now. One thing for them. Oh, sorry, sorry, it's interjecting. The hummingbird is to Europe as the camel is to North America. It's like Italy. Yes. When people find out, like, camel's originated here, although we don't have camel anymore. So we just so identify them with like North Africa in the middle of the UK. Tonex little yank of camels as being American. No, that's your example. You gave the little camels. We gave you hummingbirds. No, no. So yeah, to see hummingbirds, I had to come to America. That was no hardship. I have to say that was why I first visited America was really to see hummingbirds and it went from there. And what a thing to come here to see because they're so common. And of course, there are so many different species. So in your, I don't want to say hunt in your trek to find some quite rare and unique species. Obviously, there were twists and turns along the way, but you can just take a walk in most areas of the US. I mean, I don't know. I assume growing up in Texas, they were quite common living here in LA. They're quite common. I think most parts of at least the continental US. Yeah, you see them everywhere. Yeah, you do. And there are more species in the south and the western states. The eastern states are a little impoverished because it's cooler there. And there aren't as there isn't as much diversity, but also the closer you get to the equator. So you know, the southern states you you just have more diversity of species and you you you get some of the species which are found in Central America are pushing their ranges, you know, sort of their north. And some of them will turn up as occasional vagrants into into the very southern states. One of one of the first hummingbirds I saw in fact was in Arizona. There's this gorgeous thing called violet capped hummingbird. And there by the standards of some of the birds you see in South America, they're pretty subdued. There's sort of this gorgeous sort of mink brown and white hummingbird, which looks as I say quite quite subtle. Until you see on the males this this sort of the eponymous violet cap, which looks like a shard of amethyst. They're just fabulous looking things. And you know, they're not breeding species in in the US, but they turn up as vagrants pretty reliably in certain places in in Arizona. And so yes, one of the first hummingbirds I saw was one of these slightly unusual ones. And let's let's be honest, I love seeing all of the kind of the regular stuff which it occurs in its natural habitats. But as a birder, yeah, there's a little bit of a sort of spark which is lit when you see something a little bit rare and how to context. And so it takes a few boxes for me. It was pretty. It was, you know, it was somewhere where it shouldn't necessarily of naturally be found. And yeah, I it was a hummingbird and that was enough of that stage. I love it. I love it. You know, it's funny. I was just looking as we were talking. There are no hummingbirds in Hawaii, which I would almost think is such a hummingbird would be such a hummingbird haven, but no, they don't they don't naturally exist there. No, and I find it's really interesting because Hawaii, of course, is, you know, is is an isolated marine location. And you could think to yourself, okay, well, that would explain why there are no hummingbirds there. But one of the hummingbirds I saw in South America, something called the Juan Fernandez Firecrown, is found on the, well, only on one island these days. It was formerly on two of the islands in the Juan Fernandez archipelago. And that's about 500 miles off the coast of Chile. So it's right out there in the Pacific. And I mean, you know, that's that's not a huge distance, but it's pretty big. And they've been isolated there for such a long time. The, I mean, all, most hummingbirds are sexually dimorphic. The males and the females look different one another. But the Juan Fernandez Firecrown takes that to sort of an extreme on parallel in the hummingbird family. And for many years until comparatively recently, I believe in the, in the 1980s, even people still thought there were two different species of endemic coming, but on, on, on, on, on the Elavro, and some cruiser, the main in the inhabited island there. Because the male and the female look so different. The male is this, I appreciate this is the, we don't have, you know, visuals here on a podcast. So I'm going to have to describe it in the, in the medium of words, the male looks like a glowing hot cold. He's this wonderful deep rich, cinnamony color with, and it's all over it's an all over body color, but his forehead is this beautiful fiery iridescence of yellows and scarlets, which depending on the, the angle, which the light catches his forehead, it blazes. So I mean, yeah, male hummingbirds like, they've all species that complete show off. So that's, you know, what they do. But the female for my money is, is more attractive than the male in the Juan Fernandez. Really? Because usually they're just kind of beige. Yeah, a beige or just kind of a really practical dull green on top white underneath, which when you think about sitting in a nest, or, you know, living in, in a, in a raising chicks, or young in a, in a, a sort of bushy environment, that makes total sense because a predator is less likely to see you looking up against the sky if you're white underneath and equally looking down is less like to see you if you've got a dull green upper part. But the, the, the, the Juan Fernandez firecrowned female dispenses with that. I mean, she, the basic sort of theory is the same. She's kind of, you know, greeny on top and white underneath, but now she, she has these amazing spangles of ultra marine and blue and, and green all over her belly, the Snow White belly. This sort of blazing blue, so Caribbean blue forehead. She's just this gorgeous confection of bright color. And that was because, of course, they, they, they found themselves happily isolated on an island where there were really no predators to speak off. And so it's time, you know, female Juan Fernandez firecrowns could dispense with the need to be really subtle and could sort of let, let rip with the whole evolutionary thing. Yeah, bright colors will have some of those. And that was wonderful until mankind turned up and that all went a bit wrong then because we, we bought all of our usual problems. We bought rats and mice and cats and dogs and goats and sheep and horses and cows. So all the native vegetation was getting hammered. There were things eating young hummingbirds and catching them. And then for good measure, someone decided to introduce coattim Mundi, these ghastly omnivorous mammals from the South American mainland. They're there and now. And just to sort of really sort of put the final nail in the Juan Fernandez firecrowns coffin, someone introduced brambles. You know, this is the thorny shrub which you get delicious blackberries from. Someone introduced those as a stock proof fence and of course they've spread all across the island and they smother and out, compete the native vegetation. So it's it's by any standards, it's almost like a perfect storm and that is a hummingbird which is in genuine, the real trouble now. 400 individuals left on one island in the world. That's it. That's horrifying. It is. And that was this was a really sobering moment for me. Yeah, I mean, it's obviously the hummingbird I think is a sort of representation of clearly a larger issue. It's it really I think shows from a from a conservation perspective, a concept that is very hard for a lot of people to grasp. I know that from the time that I've spent in Africa and I'm by no means an expert on on you know southern African fauna, but one of the things that I I recognize when I speak to locals in southern Africa about the complex interplay of hunting and raising money for anti poaching patrols and the devastating impacts of poaching. And the the work that so many brilliant people are doing to to conserve these kind of native species is that we often think of a an organism as a single entity like elephants are threatened elephants are not doing well. Yes, that's true. And yes, they are endangered, but there are populations over here that are where their numbers are too high and their populations over there where the numbers are devastating low devastatingly low and it's not. It's not as easy as I think we often want to think it is when we look at something as it as an entire category. Absolutely and this is something where the natural world is nuanced it's it's it's easy to to pick out particularly with the hummingbirds which often have very geographically specific ranges. I mean, you know elephants have Africa elephants to take your example have a broad range across a lot of Africa. There are some hummingbirds which are found in one river valley in Peru, for example, or as we were just talking about one tiny island out there in the Pacific and nowhere else. And we barely understand some of these species habitat requirements let alone, you know, what we have done perhaps at a more existential level with global heating, which might be for the really high altitude species. It might be simply removing the habitat they have and making it smaller and smaller and smaller the area of habitat left available to them. Or it might be the sort of the the more insidious stuff which is is very much a localized impact. And there's a good example of this there was a researcher in I think British Columbia who was looking at the traces or looking for traces of neo-Nicotinoid pesticides in the feces and urine of hummingbirds and also in bumblebees in in in in and these were animals which were feeding around blueberry fields commercial blueberry crops which were being sprayed in these pesticides. And we're pretty aware of the outcome on bees but I think we haven't you know it's not common to have a conversation about the outcome on birds. And this has much the same reaction it it basically these neo-Nicotinoids affect the the the the cerebral activity of the birds in particular their memory. And that my for for a migratory species that's a that's a real problem because you know in in theory that could affect their ability to migrate safely from where they breed to where they winter and vice versa but also of course you have to remember that hummingbirds follow feeding patterns they they you know they work a territory. And so if your ability to to navigate back to sources of nectar is impaired at a local level that to have an effect and I mean the statistics are actually ghastly but the to take go back to roof of something birds which you know one of the species in question which are found in the northern latitudes their population. Simply between 1966 and 2014 has dropped by 62% so almost two thirds of roof of something birds are gone and to go back to where we started very early on when we're talking about sort of historical records in books and stuff which isn't necessarily out there. There were early European naturalists who came to America and were walking around and one of them recorded roof as hummingbirds and I always thought this must be an exaggeration but I'm wondering these days in in sort of native wildfire meadows and he he reckons they were there at a population density of a thousand birds per acre. And you think that's just not credible but maybe it was and you know we've like we've lost that much just since the late 1960s which is practically when I was born in I was born in the early 70s if we've lost that many in that time you know what have we lost in the last 150 years or 200 years it's really ghastly and that is a nature right I obviously I want to infuse people and get people interested and care. I was wondering about these things but at the same time when I was writing the book I was I was learning lots of stories like this and and and also we know we're talking about conservation efforts which are directed at one particular species you know and and and you sort of think when you hear that you know for example the marvelous spatula tail in Peru you know real efforts being made to conserve its habitat and and return some of the former coffee plantations to to native planting and so sounds great. But I think to myself in the bigger picture are we just papering over the cracks here with these things and maybe making ourselves feel a little bit better about the bigger picture which we know is just going to hell in a handcart. And I came away you know absolutely from this whole sort of immersion this deep dive into the hummingbirds world which was brilliant on so many levels and please don't think I'm. At all ungrateful for the wonderful things i've seen but it's in my came away really sort of knocked for six I was I was it was a chasing experience to be really bought home to me the bigger issues which are a play here either at a sort of a macro or micro level it was it was it was it was pretty pretty sobering really. Well this really comes down to I think a fundamental obviously a fundamental existential issue that we're all dealing with that is larger than us dealing with it and and kind of in a more applied sense you know over the many years that I've worked in science communication I've of course collected along the way many many friends who work in conservation ecology who are naturalist themselves who are science writers about the natural world. And one of the biggest things that we sort of discuss offline is this struggle with how do I write about this topic and find the strike the right balance between being hopeful between being. Excited between capturing somebody's imagination and and being sobering and we saw this recently with. David abdneros newest piece where he said I can't do it anymore without without talking about the detriment I can't I can't just celebrate without showing the other side and. And it listeners might remember and I've referenced this before that I had a woman on the show named Joe rucksian who is a producer. On blue planet and she spent so many years working on blue planet showing this very. Inspiring yet as she described it quite sanitized view of the ocean she's like it wasn't like that when you're down there filming you you it in all these minutes or hours of footage you're finding the pristine seconds to air because. Oh now that scene has a plastic bag floating through it or a fishing net or and so you know that that inspired her to then make a film a documentary called a plastic ocean which. Which showed the dark side of this you know beautiful series that she was on blue planet this this really was my experience as well because the the orchid book I wrote was perhaps quite an old fashioned piece of nature writing because it was. Very celebrational it you know it was just a joy I set out to see all of the the orchids which. I'm a car naturally in Britain and Ireland in the course of one summer so there was a sort of you know a framework to hang basically a wonderful celebration of of the plans the places that found people involved past and present with the plants and places it was just joyous and. I love doing it but there was a linkering the we touched on a couple of sort of you know aspects where you know there were plants under threat and. I did have some lingering feeling afterwards that you know that's not telling you the completely the entire story here. And as I say the more I saw with the hummingbirds yeah I just felt that I had to tell it as I saw it and perhaps to the detriment of some reviewers because. There you know if you're if you're explaining the context of why some of these birds are in trouble you have to touch on politics and man's activity and economic development and just what you know cost that comes out and this was the this endless fiction that the government. Pedal that we can have constant economic growth well we can't it's a finite place. The this planet with finite resources and a growing population something has to give and so I you know I I I dive and touched into some of that stuff in in the glitter in the green and it was really interesting. I mean any writer will will know what I'm saying here you look at reviews through some three fingers and and and perhaps don't look at some at all because they're just so ghastly and some of some of the some of the things that people had to say well well you know how. Day you mentioned politics and how day you criticize decisions made by various political parties or leaders or you know that's that's not your place as a as a as a naturalist and a writer I thought I was getting a celebration about hummingbirds well. I yeah I hope this celebration is still there but at the same time I couldn't not tell it as I saw it because you've got to how could you how could you explain some of the issues without explaining you know the causes. If you're looking for a new spacious SUV stop please don't pay more for less buy from one a key and save thousands interest rates as low as 0% or no payments for six months upside down or your trade get up to 4,000 over KBB from one of the key test drive the key of some right though with rugged good looks advanced technology and luxury if you haven't already made the switch to one of the key of now's the best time get all the details at one to key of calm make that switch make that switch to one of the key of press play on encore isalia and binge watch gorgeous blooms all season long on core isalia's rebloom and spring summer and fall ready to add the number one best selling reblooming isalia to your watch list order direct to your door at on core isalia dot com if you're looking for a new spacious SUV stop please don't pay more for less buy from one a key and save thousands interest rates as low as 0% or no payments for six months upside down or your trade get up to 4,000 over KBB from one of the key test drive the key of some right though with rugged good looks advanced technology and luxury if you haven't already made the switch to one of the key of now's the best time get all the details at one to key of calm make that switch make that switch to one of the key of yeah yeah and I think that we obviously we're tapping into something here that you know I close my show every weekend and we're getting there but not not quite yet with the same two questions which are these big picture questions about where we find hope and where we find and where we struggle and you know we we you and I will discuss your answers to those two questions but I can imagine that we're dipping our toe a bit in this idea of the sort of the ambivalence the juxtaposition the the diametric yet existing at the same time concept of hope and of beauty and of just awe that that the natural world gives us and the absolute bittersweet sadness that comes from knowing that we ourselves are changing it at a pace that we cannot get a runaway pace a pace that we cannot we cannot undo the damage we can try to mitigate it but it requires an active will that you clearly we have not shown were capable of of exercising and you know as you're out and about and you're traveling and you're seeing all of this beauty I can imagine that every time you know you're moved to tears by by an image in the flesh that there's almost an arresting moment that says like what are we doing yeah this was this was it the whole thing became quite inflected with with that poignancy um and and it it it was it was a narrative arc really from the initial God my first hummingbird isn't it wonderful and then there's the scene lots of different the hummingbirds and really remarkable ones and and that that sort of upward trajectory and and then as I work my way down through through the Americas and you started to sort of to to and also researching dive a little deeper yeah um it it did become a very bittersweet experience and to return to the the Juan Fernandez firecrown that was kind of the penultimate species eyes saw and there was a sort of a real moment there you know this was one of the ways it was a really romantic coming bird to see that out there on Ela Robinson Crusoe you know the the island which um defoe got his inspiration for the eponymous novel um roms and crusoe from the shipwrecked Scottish sailor Alexander Selka call that stuff really appeal to me it's a wonderful story and I went there and I I knew the hummingbirds were in some trouble I'd looked at the the bird life statistics and they said there's you know a thousand birds left and I found myself and you know late one evening sat at a bar chatting to the the guys who were on the island they work for an absolutely brilliant um um NGO called oikonos who I if anyone has got a couple spare dollars or pounds and would like to donate to them I partly recommend you do because they do brilliant stuff all through the Americas but I was chatting to these guys and I I saw you know like a like a good writer I said so you know how you know you obviously doing all this this work here to try and um grow native species which are in demic to the island to to to eradicate the brambles to plant these species to you know try and educate the the the the island is about the need to control cat numbers and and so on and so on this is all brilliant stuff how are the hummingbirds doing how is that population of a thousand hummingbirds doing um and the the the the the sort of main guy he he looks need just laughed and he said John you know you've been reading the bird life statistics it's not a thousand thousand one for numbers far clients here there's four hundred and we know that because we go out we find every single nest every year and in the context of what I was seeing on the island and I sort of realized that this you know the conservation work they were doing they couldn't possibly without an enormous application of of capital investment they couldn't eradicate the rodents on the island um you know the and he he just shook shook his shook his head and he said you know 20 30 years it'll probably be extinct and that was that moment where I thought you know I've been seeing I've been hearing sort of quite read all stories of sort of redemption and hope with with other hummingbirds and I suppose I allowed myself to dare to hope and to think you know actually maybe we are stepping back from the brink and you know we can save these very niche species but then I sort of thought to myself well actually maybe maybe we we can't actually with all of them um and looking a bird in the eye you know and knowing that it was probably going to be extinct within my lifetime that was awful you know nobody knew that the dojo was going to be extinct but then suddenly it was but you know maybe maybe oh it's just that it's just the worst thing actually it was awful and that and you talked about tears you know I I genuinely felt at the time and now I still feel myself choking a little because it's just awful it's just awful and you're right there's there's almost something even more dark and more kind of disgusting about the fact that we know we're doing it and yet we can't help ourselves as opposed to sort of the historical naturalist who were you know go they would go out to a um uh a place that they had never been before they would I mean there was that colonial view which was like I am white and I own the world and I will go to a place where they're indigenous people and I will look at them as though they are savages and I will just basically steal a bunch of flora and fauna and wipe out whatever's there for my collection and but and it was absolutely disgusting but I guess the one kind of thing about it that I don't know 10% although it doesn't really is that they were sort of like so fucking privileged that they had no idea how disgusting they were but maybe we're no different now though collectively I mean the which we you and I you and I you know of us are aware but many people aren't exactly and you know I include amongst those people in a really close friends who are intelligent educated people but you know they they don't habitually watch natural history documentaries for example or read nature writing or science writing um how are they to know the stuff which which which you know haunts us um and and when I was telling them about some of the some of the stuff you know they would you you know saying oh what have you seen you know what for you what you know what tell tell us about your adventures when I was telling them some of this dark stuff you know you can see the shock and they were like well that's not what I expected you to tell me about and and so I you know I don't you know there's no there's no blame to be attributed to to the individual here I think at all and and then we've been all of us bought up in a society which has venerated economic development and growth and which has to fuel that been all about freeing up disposable income for us to buy stuff and you know the the the consumption of stuff whether it's a new phone or a new tv or you know any disposable item which we can now afford to buy in a way that our parents or our grandparents couldn't afford to do um you know the the the the the purchase of that thing is the sort of the the the grease that oils the wheels of this this fictional endless cycle of economic growth and it's really difficult when you've been bought up to to expect to have things to to suddenly think to yourself well actually I ought to be making a choice that I shouldn't have that thing because it comes at a direct cost somewhere else in the world you know a a a a hundred removes from me and I mean to return actually to the historical thing as well I mean we we just to give a little bit of historical context it we've been doing this with hummingbirds for hundreds of years and the the 1800s it was all about high fashion hummingbirds were consumed by us in their millions to decorate hats and uh there there's there's this was something which shocked me when I I was looking at the sales uh records of auctions um in London but also in Paris in New York these were these wall centers of this trade and tens of thousands of hummingbirds would be sold in one lot alone um to be turned into ornaments on hats for high fashion and this is not that different than the ivory trade it's not exactly so easy for us to look at the ivory trade and go oh how dare they because it's so removed from us but it's not any and no no it's really no different um and actually are are sort of about the nature of our our our footprint on the environment has it's not gone away we've stopped killing hummingbirds for hats but you know we we consume in different ways when uh or we we you know we we impact on them in different ways when we I don't know eat a chocolate bar that's got palm oil in it um you know it's hard to think that that has had an impact on wildlife but it has because the palm oil plantations which have been planted to grow that's filthy stuff you know that that's come at the cost of natural habitat somewhere um well and basically all the food we eat you know most all the food we eat comes from some combination of like large-scale agriculture or um factory farming you know I mean very few people in this world have the luxury of eating locally grown you know small farm uh pro do like most people are eating from clear cut forest they're eating from places where massive amounts of habitat were lost to agribusiness and and actually this comes back to something as we we spoke about a a a while back when we you were saying about the conservation picture being more faceted and complex than we necessarily know and the same goes with the food we eat it is a more nuanced picture um and there's an example which I give which may not have resonance for guys in the US but but in the UK it's a really sort of sobering case study we we have a lot of upland um hill farming in in parts of Wales and Scotland and northern England and the the main thing which is reared there is lamb and you know it seems quite sort of intuitive that buying local lamb must be better than buying lamb which has been imported from the other side of the world the other big lamb producer is New Zealand you know that's that stuff come halfway around the world it must have a big carbon footprint right and there was a a a proper peer reviewed study um done in looking into this by it was it was it was commissioned by a local um a government funded um and economic development agency in Scotland and they had it peer reviewed and they compared the carbon footprint the whole life cycle carbon footprint of lamb reared in Scotland in Wales and New Zealand and they were very much expecting this to sort of you know be a uh a good marketing tool the outcome of this to sort of say you know Scotland you should buy local you should buy Scottish lamb it's you know it's the green choice to make and they actually discovered that that um New Zealand lamb had a carbon footprint approximately um a third that of of Scottish lamb even though it was shipped off we ran the world and so you know we we're conditioned to think that buying local is the right thing to do uh and often it will be but not always and this is is is is the thing really because as consumers we you know a lot of us want to make the right choice we want to do the better thing but actually it's really hard as consumers to know what the better thing is to do without digging really deep into every single thing we buy and when you know some of these foods are processed foods how do you even begin to understand the impact of of of of what that that burger is when you look at it as a whole thing and sometimes we don't have a a quote better choice the system is built so that we have to engage in the system and the system itself it you know and I think that's been one of we talk about this sometimes on on the other show I work on the skeptics guide to the universe that one of the biggest kind of um uh uh foists you know the biggest sort of fleeces that have been pulled over us by corporate I say corporate America but really by uh by multinational corporations is to put the onus back on the consumer for things like recycling for things like making better you know consumer decisions like the reason we buy plastic is because we don't have another option yeah but actually I mean this is something which a realization which has really come to me in the last few years it's it's not just corporate you know America or Britain or you know the the the it's not the corporate world which is is doing this it is also governments and that's and and this is the sort of is my conclusion about all of this if there is meaningful change to be affected and this is so relevant on the eve of COP26 of course um if it's meaningful change to be affected it can't come from the individual you know we can care individually and that's important we should but it needs to be instituted upon us at a state level it needs to be government switch say right you know this is a big existential problem and we all are going to have to to you know square up to it and we are all going to have to across the board make compromises um and we we need it kind of forced upon us and that's a that's miserable for all of us but the alternative is is is something in the long term for our children for us indeed in our lifetimes but for our children our grandchildren it's something far more profound and we we we need to address this stuff now we won't do it individually some of us will because we have the luxury of privilege and and circumstance and you know we can make those those decisions to buy organic buy local you know pay more to do that but for some people that's that's just simply not an option a realistic option and so they're even the whole organic thing sometimes it's not even yeah don't even get do any things like that's about the the derogations which allow something to be described as organic when it's still got copper sulfate dressings and they're just exactly yeah I'm over here like yay biotech yay let's all this you know and so so I think that you know I really what this ultimately brings us to I do think John are these final two questions I close I close every episode by asking my guests the same two questions the first one is the sort of rough one and that is when you think about the future in whatever context is relevant to you you know it could be personal it could be global it could be cosmic um what is the thing that does keep you up the most at night the thing that you're most concerned about maybe even pessimistic or cynical about and then on the flip side of that yeah we do end on a more positive note I I always ask about where you find hope and where you find your optimism and I'm just wondering you know when we because a lot of times you know all here people say climate change and I'll hear people say pollution and I'll hear people say these other these answers to the question and when I I think about it I often I come down to like a place of kind of tribalism a place of power structure and dynamics and more psychological frame work around the decision making that we have and how that ultimately downstream affects all of things it sounds to me like your sort of um I don't want to say reductionistic but your your way that you've been trying to get to the pure essence of this problem rest on economic systems like it comes down to this sort of laissez-faire capitalism of uncontrolled growth can't happen in a closed system it is a zero-some game well um the full disclosure here um I didn't become a lawyer like my mom and dad wanted me to um nor did I become the proper formally trained um scientist that I wanted to become a middle ground was reached where I I failed my exams um oh god I think I'll admit this now publicly I failed my exams at school deliberately so I wouldn't become a lawyer oh self sabotage I did yeah I did I know um but by the same token I I had to do something and I ended up in one last nod of obedience to my parents to get a proper job in inverted commas I trained as an economist and so I have an economic development background um professionally until the last few years that's what I did and so I I just guess I'm kind of poached it turned gamekeeper or vice versa here because you know I have seen the system from within um I have worked my my my background actually was agricultural economics um but I ended up yeah I mean but how better to understand the motivations and the the structure within than to be there I mean obviously this wasn't your Aaron Brockovich moment you weren't I guess that's not even the best reference but you weren't going into exposed but oh god you've learned things that are probably very remote from most of our understandings yeah I guess I I suppose really I mean it comes down to you know how do I how do I see a glimmer of not hope that's the wrong word but how do I see a solution is far too too big a word too but how do I see some sort of of way to at least minimize perhaps mitigate perhaps address this sort of vast super tanker of problems and maybe start to turn its course very slowly around um I have to say I see it in in economics and politics and I I I have a great deal of of contempt for politics as a whole because demonstrably it hasn't delivered um necessarily public goods it's delivered economic um benefits um and it only takes the pandemic to see the sort of the cronism which has taken place where contracts have been awarded to to companies which are sort of you know hand in hand with with politicians to deliver um vaccines or testing regimes and so on and it's sort of beg as belief in a time when you know the the world has been reeling from something as profound as a global pandemic that's that shit still goes on but it does oh yeah I mean the outcomes of the pandemic are that most people got poorer and the rich got richer like this is objective data we saw the happening yeah and so you know we we are a leopard which doesn't necessarily change its spots having said that I do think that even you know even now even the sort of the the the super rich and privileged people who are part of those corporations are perhaps beginning to wake up to the fact that you can be as rich as you like or as powerful as you like as a corporation but if if the the world is burning or is flooding that money is worth you know it's it's worth fuck all it's a it's a it's it is not going to to to to to to see your you know it's not going to see you right and I do think that I do think that as well you know that we spoke about sort of you know a lot of people not being aware of perhaps you know biodiversity loss and perhaps the same goes for for the sort of the the the greater woes of the world but people are waking up to it people are becoming aware of this stuff and pressure is starting to mount on governments to to deliver an alternative future a future which you know isn't predicated on on on endless economic growth and actually is is is perhaps all about naked self-interest of you know can you please stop the world heating up and sea level rise happening and these terrible wildfires and these awful floods you know perhaps you know you do something about it government because you're the one who looks after us right and I think I my glimmer of hope my candle of hope in in in the darkness is that perhaps for the wrong reasons but the right outcome will come where governments will affect the big changes upon us which which individually some of us will make the some of us won't for for very real and and tangible and understandable human reasons but you know that the changes will will be will be will be instituted that will start to to to turn the ship and change its course you know I I come back to the sort of my my my my inate cynicism about human nature we look at what we just spoke about the you know that what's happened during the pandemic and we've still you know seen some some terrible acts of of cronyism and corruption and and and and just self-interest and greed but surely to God there's going to come a point when hopefully not too late we will change yeah yeah here's hoping well everyone the book is the glitter in the green in search of hummingbirds by john done john thank you so much for joining me for teaching us all about how cool hummingbirds are all about their their plight and and a little bit more about natural history and kind of the state of of the global on the way oh thank you Cara I feel I've not spoken enough about hummingbirds I've just had that's what the book is about people yeah yeah yeah I read the book guys please do for them no and it's and honestly I have to say the book it's not as miserable as I maybe sounds this evening here in shetland just like oh everything's going to hell in a hand go so windy outside god damn it's so it's so it's dark and it's raining like can't see the aurora borealis there are really lovely human stories in the book there's wonderful natural history stories and you know there is there is hope and there's redemption and there's some really cool stuff happening out there and at the end of the day the birds are so wonderful and so yeah it's it it is a nice book please go and go and pick up a copy and read it absolutely thank you once again so much for sharing with us I had an absolute blast oh me too thank you it's been a joy and everyone listening thank you for coming back a week after week I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk to you press play on encore isalia and binge watch gorgeous blooms all season long encore isalia's rebuuum in spring summer and fall so you don't have to wait all year for the next big show more compact more sun tolerant and more cold hearty with vibrant bloom colors and sizes to fit your landscape encore isalia's are a must watch ready to add the number one best selling rebuuuming isalia to your watch list order direct to your door at oncoreazalia.com