 Ugh, Mom, my car won't start again. Oh really? Almost like ignoring that weird clunking sound for a month wasn't a good idea? I thought it fixed itself when the check engine light finally went off. Julian, you know that's not how it works. It gets worse along when you put it off, not better. I think it's time you got it into the shop. You're right, but where do I keep it? You already know where. Bass auto repair. 850-765-4595 If you're looking for a new spacious SUV, stop. Please don't pay more for less. Buy from Warnakia and save thousands. Interest rates as low as 0% or no payments for six months. Upside down on your tray, get up to 4,000 over KBB from Warnakia. Test drive the Kia's Serentha with rugged good looks, advanced technology and luxury. If you haven't already made the switch to Warnakia, now's the best time. Get all the details at Warnakia.com. Make that switch, make that switch to Warnakia. Hello, everyone, and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, November 8th, 2021. And I'm the host of the show, Cara Santa Maria. We have a great guest for you today. We're going to be talking about podcasting and science and kind of getting into some fun debates. But before we dive in, I want to tell you that change is a foot. So I, at the sort of urging, gentle and kind urging of my incredible community of podcast patrons on Patreon, I've been thinking quite a lot about how to shake things up and how to make sure that everybody who pledges their support of the show and who promotes the show and sponsors the show individually, financially, is really getting their money's worth. And one of the ways to do that is to shake up my cheers on Patreon. So those of you who aren't patrons yet, I hope that in hearing what I'm about to say, you might consider joining this really vibrant community. Those of you who already are patrons, don't worry, you're not going to lose anything, you're only going to gain things. So let's talk about this. If you go to patreon.com slash talk nerdy, you will learn all about it. But as of today, we are pushing live an entirely new Patreon system. If you pledge $1 per episode as before, you will be a friend of talk nerdy. And of course, a virtual hug will be sent your way. You have to imagine it a little bit. That's kind of how virtual hugs work. But I do thank you from the bottom of my heart. But if you up just to $2 per episode, that's where things start to get interesting. As one of the coolest people on the planet, you will now get an ad-free version of the show. No more host red ads, no more dynamic ads, which are endlessly important to help me get paid, to help me pay the team of people who worked tirelessly with me, including my assistant Noelle, and the editors that work on my show. So ads are still going to exist for the bulk of people who listen to the show, but you will have your own feed that you can download and listen to an ad-free version of the show, but you'll only be able to access it on Patreon if you are a $2 per episode or above member. Climbing the ranks from coolest person on the planet to coolest person in the solar system. At the $10 level, you'll get access to the Discord server to my own talk nerdy channel, where you can of course, commune with like-minded people. If you're already on Patreon, you know how fun Discord can be. You can set up channels. You can chat with one another, all pop in periodically, so we'll know well. We can answer your questions, get your insights, and your recommendations. It's gonna be a blast. Then at $25 being, you know, the coolest person in now the galaxy, you will continue to get the same perks which include a shout out at the very top of the show. Don't worry, I haven't forgotten about you. I will be giving your shout out in a second. And then finally, at the highest tier $50 or more per episode, and I have a few of you, and oh my goodness, are you amazing? We're gonna change things up and offer an opportunity for face-to-face live chats. So obviously because of COVID, this is gonna be done online, but we'll either within this very small group of people have periodic chats together where we can talk things out. I can again get recommendations. We can kind of just shoot the shit. Or maybe if the schedules are too conflicting, you know, because we're all over the globe, we can do some one-on-ones. We're gonna figure that out as we go, and I'm gonna get your input on that. But these are the new tiers. These are the new amazing perks, and I really hope that you'll consider pledging your support. Again, if you're interested, just go to patreon.com slash talk nerdy. So let's give a shout out to my coolest people in the galaxy. They include, oh, Frederick Fast Markison. And if I'm pronouncing that wrong, you'll have an opportunity to tell me soon. Rob Shrek, Daniel Lang, Mary Neva, Christa Johnson, Gabrielle Felipe Haramio Gonzalez, Brian Holden, Christopher Pitts, David J. Eastmith, June Separa, and Ulrika Hagman. Thank you all from the bottom of my heart. All right, it's a little more business at the top than usual, but it's important and exciting. I hope you're just excited as I am. So now, let's dive into this week's episode. I have the opportunity to sit down remotely, of course, with Wendy Zuckerman, the host of science versus, you know science versus, you already listened to the show. If you don't, science versus takes on fads, trends, and the opinionated mob to find out what's fact, what's not, and what's somewhere in between. They have an amazing team of reporters and producers, but the host and executive producer of science versus is Wendy Zuckerman. Previously, she worked for the Australian broadcasting corporation, that ABC, where she originally created a science versus. She studied law and biomedical science in school. She's written for a ton of outlets, like New Scientist Cosmos Magazine, the Australian and Saturday paper. She's won a ton of journalism awards for her amazing work on the podcast. And, you know, the episodes really range in content. We talk about a few of them on the show, but they really range in most recent episodes about chronic pain, episodes about burnout, about therapy, about, you know, just like, what is the science behind these important, important topics? Wendy is just an absolute joy to chat with and just to reinforce, because it's important for me to tell you, I think in 2015, science versus moved over to gimlet media, and it is now a Spotify original. So if you don't already listen to science versus on Spotify, subscribe today without any further ado. Here she is, Wendy Zuckerberg. So, I think it's a great question. I think it's a great question. I think it's a great question. I think it's a great question. I think it's a great question. I think it's a great question. I think it's a great question. I think it's a great question. I think it's a great question. I think it's a great question. I think it's a great question. I think it's a great question. I think it's a great question. I think it's a great question. Some people on the internet say, or, or is that a lie? And then we also look at things that might seem really scary. And ask, are they, are they really that scary? And the show has been running for about six years. We're now 11th season now and we're part of gimlet media. And so you started off, so you worked for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. And that's where you first developed, because science versus is really your brainchild, isn't it? Yeah, yeah. And I came up with it at the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. I have to be very careful because ABC has changed. Oh, right. And he was. Yeah, so at the time, so this was 2015 back in the dark ages. And Australia, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation was looking into doing podcasts. They made radio for a long time and kind of chopped it up and put it online, and they didn't make dedicated podcasts, which does feel like the dark ages of podcasts. That back then, only six years ago, the ABC was like, oh, should we experiment with this thing called a podcast? And now it's, you're so such a part of the media, of science journalism as well. And they knew at the ABC that science radio generally did very well. And so I was approached to come up with an idea for a science show. And it just so happened that that week or something, Gwen of Paltrow had suggested that women steam clean their vaginas. Do you remember? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. This was, yes. It's only maybe by the Jade eggs. Right. We didn't think she could go anywhere. But then the boy, the gift that keeps on giving Gwen of Paltrow. And so at the time, I thought, oh, it would not be fun to do a show called Science vs. Gwen of Paltrow where we take these ideas that seem completely bonkers. Or obviously not bonkers to that many people, because some people were like, should I be staying playing my vagina? And we look at the science behind it. And so that's, that's what I wanted to do. And I wanted to tell science stories with humor and make it fun and not make it feel like homework. And then that, that's, I don't know, the history. One of that phrase and the guys' history. Right. That's right. And that's what she wrote. I love that. You know, and it's, it's funny because one thing that you mentioned when you were, when you were telling me that sort of was like, oh, okay, like a little triggering for me as a science journalist. Well, it's funny. I call myself that. I don't even think I'm, I'm that anymore. But as a fellow podcaster, I also started my podcast in 2015 here in the States. And when you were like, you know, an in Australia, science radio did very well. And I was like, mmm, that is not the case here. And so like, I feel like my, my starts were very different because I'm constantly feel like we're swimming upstream here and trying to justify. And of course, now you are part of the American media landscape as well. Working with gimblett media. But like, do you not feel the same pressure and the same stress of like constantly trying to swim upstream and convince people why it matters that we do what we do? I know. I definitely, I definitely feel that. And the only time that I haven't felt that is at the beginning of the pandemic. That was really one of the moments where people were so appreciative of science. And I know the anti-science movement gets a lot of time and space in the media. But the truth is that there were a lot of people who just wanted to know what does science know about this virus? How can I keep myself safe? How can I keep my family safe? And when we were sort of running down the facts on what little do we know about this virus? You know, so many people were emailing us and saying, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you. Because there's so much gaff online, I just want to know the facts. And we really didn't have to spend much time telling people, you know, you should love science. Because it's amazing. And it helps us understand the world and helps us understand yourself. And you don't need to make up lies. You know, there's so much work as you said that goes into explaining to people why science is important. But during the pandemic, particularly at the beginning, I felt like people really understood that and wanted to know what was going on. And I was also obviously people who were just, I mean, I don't even know what to make of those who kind of went on their own tangents and preferred to listen to the strong men online. I presume it is because it is much more comforting to have someone say, here's what is the truth rather than to have some science journalists go, the truth is, we're still working it out. And we don't really know, but here's what we think. Right. And there's a little bit of a gray area over here and it is this, but it's also that. Exactly. Exactly. Yeah. Exactly. And the world is more complicated, but I see why you would get comfort from this idea that, you know, whatever hydrochloroquine is the big deal. So yes. But I know, but I shouldn't pretend that it is Australia to go back to your question that in Australia, we were not always fighting to prove that science is cool. I think the real, when I said science of radio does well in Australia, it's probably referring to kind of the fun part of science, like the quirky, you know, if I piss on the lemon tree, is it good for the lemon tree? Yes. That, that goes very well. I mean, I enjoy that too, but it's sort of the Australian audience. And so tell me about the shift over, I don't even know if it would, if shift over is a good way to put it, but when you first sort of joined gimli media, when you, you know, you're able to develop a big team, like I can imagine that, you know, I started in 2015 also, it's still like just me. But I also, I have an assistant that I work with and then I hire an editing team that, you know, is a professional podcast editing team that doesn't just work with me. They work with a lot of different podcasts, but I hire them to help me just because, you know, it's a lot of work and I'm doing other things. You have an entire, like a decent team that you work with, you've got, you know, an audio engineer and a composer, you've got two audio engineers and composers, you've got editors, producers. So tell me about that kind of the development of being able to really take science versus and make it into something that's a polish sort of machine. It's been a big, a big learning curve on some, like very sort of personal levels going from it just basically being me and then I had an editor for a couple of hours a week back in Australia to then this huge team that you mentioned, like a machine. I'd never been a boss before. I'd never been, you know, it's sort of funny because I had this, I don't want to sound like a wanker, but I had this like vision for what I wanted science versus to be and then part of being a, the leader of a team. So you're trying to get everyone on board with that vision and I hadn't really thought about the kind of emotional toll of that because we were hiring, you know, sometimes journalists, sometimes science journalists. Now we just have basically dedicated science journalists, but people want to tell stories in all kinds of different ways. I want to tell it with a lot of humor and I don't want to take myself too seriously, take the science very seriously, not myself. At the beginning we had people on the team that wanted to be super earnest about the science. They wanted to tackle, you know, capital I important things and I'd be like, that's important, but do I really want to spend the three months of my life digging down the science of, you know, whatever it was. And you know, maybe show me, shouldn't just tackle magic mushrooms, you know, I wanted to, you know, and so that was a big effort to sort of get a team that was behind the vision and then able to execute it. That was really hard. And then, but it's also been really wonderful because now, like the facts of the show where we're so tight about making sure that everything we talk about, we are, we're telling the truth. I mean, back when it was just me, the show was shorter and I would like desperately read as much science as I could, but I needed to pump out the show once a week while we were in season, which is a lot of a lot of science. But that's why I made the episodes short of it now because we have this big team, we have dedicated fact checker, we can go longer, we can tackle bigger issues. And that's been super, super fun. I sleep so much easier now that I have this amazing team of like fact checkers and science journalists behind me. So I'm like, yes, okay, we hit published on something and I feel really confident in the science that we've just given our audience. Yeah, and so how, how are, what's your range of sort of time on your episodes? How long do you try to net them out at? So for big complicated ones, I mean, it really depends. So for example, this chronic pain episode that's coming out this week. This has been produced by Nick Delrose and Rose Rimmler, so she's going to be hosting it. And they started this three, four months ago, just starting to kind of dip their toes in the science as a personal story. Nick has been suffering from chronic pain for a really long time. So he'd been kind of looking into the research before them. But in terms of really sort of nutting out what our episode was going to be, yeah, that was probably three months. Then on the other side, during the coronavirus, when we were doing missions like during Westell in it during while we were doing the season, our coronavirus season, just at the beginning of the pandemic, then we were pumping out episodes within sort of 48 hours basically because at the beginning, it's kind of hard to think back, but it was so, the misinformation was so thick and fast. It was really every day I'd go online and there was something else that people were saying. At one point, I don't know, I think we all thought we were asymptomatic carriers. Yeah, we are. We're all just spreading it all around. Exactly. I mean, I can't count the amount of antibody tests. I got it. I'm sure I'm sure I'm sure it's me, you know, when we didn't know, and then there was hydrochloroquine and then there was this. Maybe if I just shine a light inside my body. Oh, yeah. Oh, my God, drinking bleach and, you know, and then there was the pandemic YouTube video and everything. I have a plan. Oh, my God. I know. And it just went on and so to get that, we just felt this huge sense of responsibility to try to get the facts out as quickly as possible. So then we were producing episodes within, yeah, like I said, 48 hours. Right. And even though that's so much, I can imagine that's so much brutal work at the same time. Some of the conspiracy theories around the pandemic were so ludicrous that it actually didn't take much to debunk them. Like I can imagine that some things require a lot of really deep intensive research to try and describe it or debunk it depending on, you know, what your stance is with that topic. And other things are a little bit easier to be like, well, but no, it's a pretty quick thing. Yes. Yes. Which is extra frustrating. Yeah, we didn't do the drinking bleach because it would have been a very short episode. Right. It tackled very well elsewhere online. But even here, topics that like the idea that this escape from a lab, I mean, that was a classic one that still people today are like, but what about the origins of the virus? And that episode in some ways, we could have quickly debunked it. But what was, what was more interesting to me was looking at why scientists were sure that this virus wasn't cooked up in a lab that they could analyze the genetic sequence of the virus. And they could see, you know, this just doesn't make any sense. I can't see a human fingerprint in this genetic code. Like that was super interesting to die into those details rather than just being like, ah, this is, you know, you know, silly. This is a silly video. So that was a real fun one. Despite originally the whole thing being like, do we really need to jump into this? Yeah. Yeah. No, I love that. And so, you know, it's interesting. Partially, I'm asking you a lot of these questions from a very sort of, I don't know, selfish, personal perspective. I often back back in the days when I first started my podcast, I remember I'd get really positive feedback and everybody's really warm and lovely. And then every so often you get a bad review. And the bad reviews usually go something like this. Cara asks a lot of questions and talks about herself on her show. And then I'm like, well, yeah, because it's my f-ing show. So deal with it. And so one of the things that I, I noticed about the way that I podcast is that I talk about things that are interesting to me. And I just, you know, if people come along for the ride and they also find them interesting, cool. But otherwise it really is sort of a weird flex for me that I'm like, okay, this is fascinating. I want to learn more about it. And so partially I'm asking you some of these questions because I'm sort of comparing and contrasting in my mind and trying to learn more. I'm always just fascinated by other people's processes. And one of the things that I do with my show is I try to keep the workload as low as possible. Because I'm doing so many other things. I'm working on my PhD. I'm doing television work. I have other jobs. And so I do pure interview shows. You know, I have somebody on like you are right now. I talked to you for the hour. If the editor needs to do a little bit of cleanup, great. I actually try to keep that down to a minimum because I don't want to overproduce my episodes so that they no longer sound like the way people talk. Whereas you take a very different tack now because you have an entire team. And your episodes are based around a question or based around a concept or an idea or a topic minor based around a person and their work or a book that they wrote or something that they produced for the world. And so the topics are guided in a different way. Your sounds like so much more work. Yes. I mean, we don't need to compare the hard work that we're both doing. But it is a lot of work to produce an episode. Yes, we're often interviewing for academics, you know, editing their just picking out of favorite moments in the interviews and then putting a whole bunch of research around it. We release our transcript, which has all of our citations and it often goes over 100 is a script easily over 100 in many cases because we really try to make sure every sentence is perfectly fact checked. So yes, it is a different way of making a show. And in the way that you bring yourself into each episode, it's kind of interesting. I have not done that traditionally on the show. So I've really tried to keep my personal experience out of it. And I think it's just different ways of making the show. I think part of it is that I don't like to give too much of myself just generally. I guess I'm old school like that in terms of my privacy. So I've always had this sort of question around how much do I want to give away. And I think because I'm so nervous about a lot of media being about the host rather than about something a little bigger. So it's just different ways of kind of communicating science because I do see the value in a personality that the audience loves and is like, oh, well, you know, I love Cara and I love her personal journey. And plus I'm going to get a little bit of extra science. Great. Like I'm hooked. So that's kind of one way that's how you're doing it. And I see the complete value. But for me and the work that I wanted to do, I just wanted to make it a little more about the science. And then the way that I'm kind of used in the show is to just kind of bring little humor to make sure that we're explaining the science in a fun as fun away as possible. Right. So right there, you've got to leg up because you're funny. So that's helpful. But I have, I have, what's the, I wondered what is the best way to do it because, you know, when we think of the worst, worst examples of people who's, you know, the personality cults around say Joe Rogan, you know, he's exactly. He has huge influence. And he has, you know, in more recent times, use that for bad. This is Lisa Brady owner of LASIS Payne Body Shop. If you're in an accident, don't be afraid to ask questions about what's being repaired or replaced. And what kind of parts are going to be put on your car truck? Lisa's paid in Body Shop at 2820 May, Android. And V46050. For bad. And it's funny because I think that that, like a full disclosure, when I first started my podcast and other people might know this, I'll keep it really brief, but this story. I was working in television and I was working more in the capacity that you described, like doing kind of more clean science journalism. And I mean, I'm still working in TV, but I was doing a regular daily show. And, you know, it wasn't about me nor should it have been. I was presenting the news and presenting this different topics. And, but I was also working for an executive producer who was like horrifically sexist, who was like gaslighting. There was a lot of really difficult problems on set with a lot of the women who worked on the show. And it was a really not healthy environment for me or for many of my female colleagues. And at the time, randomly, I went on Joe Rogan's podcast. And again, this was in 2015. Yeah. And he was like, wow, he brought a woman on the show. I know, right? Like very different back then. I had actually been on his show twice. And he was like, Harry, you should start a podcast. Like this is a place where you can be your own producer, where you can make sure that the topics that you're going to be. Topics that you want to dive into, the areas where you want to focus. Like you're not beholden to the network. You're not beholden to the advertisers. You're not beholden to any of these things. And at the time, it really resonated with me. And I started a podcast. So it's so funny that the same person who saw this, I think, very important thing for sort of making space for different voices has gone to a very dark place. And you're right. It's been within the past, I'd say, three, four years, just probably in the Trump era, Trump era and pandemic era is where I've seen a big shift into this very sort of intellectual dark web space that's been quite dangerous. Yeah. Yeah. And I think it just does speak to the power of using personality to bring people along to ideas, whether they, they good or bad. And I think a lack of a scientific compass as well, you know, a lack of respect for the scientific process and a true understanding of what science can be and also the limits of science. I think is, you know, when, when your guiding force is something that makes you feel good or it's something that reinforces your previously held beliefs or it's something instead of a more scientific hypothesis testing sort of. M.O. I think you can get into a lot of trouble and that's what we see politically around the world. Exactly. Exactly. I think it's some, I mean, just to broaden it out away from from Joe Rogan, but it is, I think it does go back to the comfort that a strong voice, and I don't mean that like a male voice, although it's a charismatic leader, that kind of thing. It's charismatic leader that's just giving comfort and saying things, just saying things as if they are known is so much more comfortable. And so saying CBD is proven to do all these things and if you have these problems, then you should try this. That's obviously incredibly comfortable if you have those problems and you're going to give it a go. And I think that's why we see so much of this and it is a lack of understanding of, I don't know, it is really sad and it's been interesting to watch what's happening in Brazil because we're so long the strong leader was going, but going great guns for him. And now it's all come crashing down in a sort of interesting way that I wonder if that's going to be a model for what happens elsewhere where we see the dangers of not trusting science. I mean, in some ways I thought the pandemic was going to do that because it's literally you and your family, your particularly if you've got grandparents, you know, it's their life on the line. So how could you not trust science? But I don't know whether we have seen the turning point on that yet. So maybe this story is just in the middle. No, you're right. You know, I recently had a gosh, what was her name? She was on quite recently on my show. I did a full hour with there she is. Natalia Pastor, who has been a really outspoken advocate for science and for evidence based policy in Brazil. So we did a whole, you know, episode about Brazilian pseudoscience and good God is it scary and you're right. Like it does seem like there's been some table turning she testified before the Senate in that very famed hearing that now is having these outcomes that we've, we were talking about. But it's interesting to see that in a place where a person where Bolsonaro could have such a stranglehold on policy, there's still an undercurrent of basic, I don't know trusted. I don't know trust in scientific authority. And so like you push me on the pale and something breaks, whereas I'm not sure I'm seeing that here in the States. I know. I know. It was me as the pale not broken yet. I know. Right. Like was the coronavirus not deadly enough to make just that. So just that Trump was so good at developing a new normal at doing this very or well in thing where each new terrible thing was so normalized that eventually we came to expect it. And that there was such a concerted effort to dismantle trust in things like the media, the scientific scientific authority, even, you know, sometimes political authority that ultimately. He laid the groundwork first. He didn't just come out guns blazing going coronavirus. It's fake. It's a hoax. He really set up a structure that would then reinforce that kind of rhetoric. And I don't know if Bolsonaro did that. I don't know. I don't know. But it's scary. It's really scary. It is. It is. And I, I'm thinking about it with in the context of climate change as well, because what I think actually. I'm terrible at predicting the future just to put these in context when we got to get Rose Everleth on the show. She's good at predicting the future. Exactly. Like as a prime example of how bad I am at predicting the future when when the coronavirus was just just starting to we were just hearing about it in the US. Yes, my boss, Alex Blueberg said, you know, do you think we should stop having the shared candy? You know, like we had M&M's in a giant bowl. And I was like, nah, this will be fine. So with that huge caveat, my prediction about what is going to happen with climate change where we've obviously seen huge amount of denial for a very long time. But now as we're seeing more and more fires, more and more flooding, you know, it's getting more and more drought. It's getting harder and harder to deny. And I think what I think we, and we are seeing the tables turning in terms of action from governments. Obviously, very frustrating how slow it's come, but we are seeing it in Australia, for example, where we have a conservative leader who has done diddly squat for climate. Even as the nation was on fire, is now starting to make a plan for climate change. And what we're going to see, I think, is we're never going to get an apology. Sorry, we knew this decades ago, we saw this coming, should have acted faster. Instead, what I think the conservatives are going to start saying is, well, the science is in now, isn't it? Yes, that we know now, you know, they weren't sure before, but now, now that the science is solid, it's time to act on it. And it's that sort of weird, sort of mental gymnastics that I think happens because all sides want facts, like the word science is somewhat politicized. But everyone is trying to say, I have the evidence behind me for what I'm saying. To go back to Joe Rogan, he does have scientists on his show that are sometimes slightly renegade or a little bit, you know, a little bit too excited about the research where it doesn't work. Sometimes legitimate, and that's where it's extra confusing to people. Exactly. Yes, yes. But even those characters are saying, no, I've got the evidence. Everyone wants the evidence. Everyone understands that that's important for the story and important for their own justification of whatever they believe in. And so I think that's how it's going to turn. And I don't know, it's just incredibly frustrating because obviously when I need an apology, I just need action. Hey, it's, you know, I was, we were kind of discussing this. I work on another podcast, the skeptics guy to the universe. And one of the things we were just talking about, we were recording yesterday, we record on Wednesdays and today it's a Thursday that we're talking. One of the things that we're just talking about was this sort of weeks, you know, one of the co-hosts was like, I expected herd immunity by now. And God, this is really because we just can't, you know, get our, get our shit together and blah, blah, blah. And you know, who's saying the anti-vaxxers are dragging their heels or people just haven't come around and sort of the pushback was, well, no, we actually have seen that as the pandemic has become more salient to individuals in this country. As more and more people have gotten sick and died from the pandemic, more and more people have, of course, woken up to the severity of this problem. And vaccine campaigns are working. They're just, you know, working slower than we would like here in this country, of course. And so you see the media sort of representations of individuals in the hospital going, guys, I was wrong. I shouldn't have put out that TikTok video. This is real. This is dangerous. And I'm about to be put on event and I could die, go get Vaxed. But then you also see that very small percentage of the entrenched people who are like dying in the hospital and still saying, well, I still wouldn't get it the vaccine. And those are the people who a confused the hell out of me, but b, I think we do a bad job in this country of highlighting them and giving them more space than they actually represent within the milieu. Oh, yeah, I thought you wanted to give them more space. No, no, I think that the problem is that those people get so much air time that we think they're representative of way, a way bigger portion of the population than they are. No, it's true. Because, you know, vaccination rates, for example, in New York, they're doing, we're doing quite well here. I guess that's kind of an obvious one. And same in LA. Yeah, we're doing quite well, but, you know, not in all parts of the country. You and I represent the extreme side. I do think you're right. I think that people, I mean, they, what's been interesting to see with the vaccination story is I was really frustrated with a lot of the reporting around when the vaccines were first coming online. Where there was all these stories about, you know, people don't want to get a vaccine. There's all this vaccine hesitancy, all this anti-vax blah, blah, blah. And I was like, no, this is not the same thing as what's happening with like the measles mumps, rubella vaccine. This is literally a vaccine that has just come online. I totally get why people have questions about it. Sometimes that reporting was happening before we even had vaccines. We did a survey of a thousand Americans and they're not sure if they'll get the vaccine. I was like, yeah, because we don't have one yet. We don't have any data on it. This is like, this is like, I was just going to be a medical poll. Exactly. With a hypothetical virus like a vaccine. I was like, what? Like me? Who loves, loves, loves science, loves vaccines. Like would not take a hypothetical vaccine. I read the articles. We reported on them about, you know, the safety profile was great when we eventually got the results. And then exactly, this is one where I did predict, predict the future. As soon as we started getting data showing how effective they were, how safe they were. And then more and more, more and more people got vaccinated. Vaccine hesitancy dropped and dropped and dropped. And yes, we've still got that hardcore group that, as you mentioned, you know, we're not at 100%. But, but I do think there was this reporting about vaccine hesitancy. Vaccine hesitancy. I'm like, oh, come on. Like, how can you expect people to say they're going to take a vaccine that doesn't even exist yet? Yeah. Yeah. It's true. You know, and I think that, yeah, yeah, it's, and again, and then the virus annoying, this really gets me caught. The, the, the, the, the, when nothing was in, then they did it again with the kids. Because then again, when we didn't have any data about whether this was safe for kids, then again, parents won't give their kids the vaccines. Oh, vaccine hesitancy for the kids. But again, we don't have any data. Why would you like? And then we got the data and then people started vaccinating their kids. It's true. It's true. And I think it's, I mean, what do we do about this sort of, God, it's such a big, big question. But as, as an individual who works in science media, who's watching, you know, amazing science communication on the one hand and a bismill science communication on the other hand, you know, I can only imagine, well, I can't, I don't have to only imagine I feel the frustration day to day. But the question is, you know, what do we do about that in as media entities? Like, how do we change the way that we talk about these stories, the way that we talk about these massive public health issues, so that a, we are inducing, or we are promoting positive public health, but at the same time, we are doing it in an empathic, kind of humanistic way, because I think sometimes that gets lost in the equation. Yeah, I mean, I really wish when it came to a lot of the bad pandemic reporting, even sometimes science journalists that I usually respect, we're still doom and glooming. That was, that was where I really see where we can do improvements. There was a lot of like worst case scenario reporting, which I think the vaccine hesitancy fits into. But even more extreme examples like, you know, saying before we knew, at the very beginning, particularly, you saw examples of that, but I think it's a thread that has gone throughout the pandemic. When we didn't know, for example, let's say, like the death rate for, you know, and people were saying these like very high numbers, or we didn't know how contagious it was, and people were saying incredibly, you know, they're like, well, I guess if it has the contagiousness of measles, and it has the deadliness of Ebola, then all of a sudden we all be dead. And it was like, and early on at science versus we were reporting like, okay, there's not a lot we know about this virus, but what's the chance that this is literally the worst example of every other disease we've ever known about all combined into into a coronavirus. The experts were like, yeah, that seems unlikely, you know, and so I think we just kept it. Like when you don't know something as a science journalist, don't assume the worst, and particularly not in the middle of a pandemic when people are already scared. You don't need to scare, like, scare people into action when they're already in lockdown. You got that. That's though what the motivation is that they literally think I've got to show people how bad it could be so that they go out and they do all these things that they're not doing. Another example was like the, with the, the phone lights, you know, the concern at the beginning of the pandemic, we didn't know whether we needed to bleach our groceries. And there was this viral video of someone being like, this is how you shop in a pandemic, you know, when you put your gloves on and you put you all this, you know, your PPE that even our like doctors and nurses don't have access to and you go to the shops. And you know, at the time we didn't know, but we could still use our understanding of viruses more generally to make a more rational approach to what we needed to be doing. And yeah, you know, we were, we were washing our stuff. But again, it was this assumption that this was going to be the worst. This virus was going to be able to stick to surfaces and never leave. You know, and it was like, okay, okay, let's just take a step. What else do we know about coronavirus? What do we know about other respiratory viruses? Like, let's be smart here. And just so many headlines predicting the worst. You know, and I, so I think that is something I would next pandemic when you and I are made Lord of Science Journalism. That's something that's trying to fix. It's such a hard thing culturally to overcome too, because we really live in an era. And when I say an era, it's been most of my, I mean, I just turned 38 last week. And so I thank you. I was born in, you know, kind of in the post Reagan era was my youth. And, you know, this is sort of the, the era of massive policy change with regard to how we present news in this country, because we used to have legislation that required that the news did not make money. And so, the local news, right, like when we looked at the classic kind of news hour on television on the main television stations, it was not tied to advertising. Basically, the, the game shows and the, you know, scripted series, they made the money that then offset the news. And there was all of these laws about like how much children's program needed to be educational, almost like this fair broadcasting thing. And that all changed with Reagan. And now, you know, there's no standard. I mean, there's a, there's a journalistic standard that's kind of self imposed. But other than that, if it bleeds at leads, right, and we know this, we've seen Facebook's algorithms, we look at the way that almost every large organization has to monetize their content. Like if you get clicks, then you're going to be able to fund your, your news network, whether it's on the web, whether it's on television, whatever. And ultimately, what do people click on? Do me a gloom. What is, what's interesting about actually without show with science versus we find, and I know that is, you know, what you say, I would totally believe that within some media forms, but probably I don't know. I don't know the data. So I shouldn't talk nonsense. But just curiously without show, we find that the most popular stories actually are the happy ones. I love that. That makes me very happy. That makes me feel full from humanity. Yes, I like every time we do, because you know, I mentioned at the beginning of the show that sometimes I don't like doing like capital I important topics. But we do do them because they are important. And now they show it on first, just for like, you know, 11 seasons. So, you know, we cover everything. And in the topics where it's like a hard listen about, you know, whether it's, it's climate change or, you know, something that we haven't done wildfires yet. But one will well, you know, obviously it's very close to my heart being from Australia. Those kinds of like episodes don't do as well as say, you know, blue balls, the G spot, magic mushrooms, dieting, you know, people like love, you know, these stories are lighter, that it kind of little bit smaller, that you can have a giggle orgasms is one of our most popular episode. Not a, not a bleigick of like hopefully no one's bleeding at the time. You know, you could just have a laugh and learn about, you know, you're clitoris. So that has been kind of nice because it's also when you're producing these episodes, it's much fun to be making an episode where everyone's having a giggle, including the scientists. No, no for sure. That speaks to me, you know, I, because I have a subscription to the New York Times. And to the economist and it's funny because the New York Times it's so, it's so tevy down out your eyes. So yeah, my morning briefing, sometimes I just blow right through them like I can't I don't have the bandwidth for this to take. Exactly. With the economists every now they'll have these like little, little funny things that always find myself just going to them these little tidbits about a place in the world that I didn't know anything about and it's just delightful. You know, there may be maybe we've had so much leads, it bleeds that we don't want it to bleed anymore. Maybe we just want, you know, some discover about some like beautiful discovery about it like marsupial in Australia. Right. Right. You're so right. It's such a human thing. Like if I were to look at my Instagram like gosh, I shouldn't be admitting this out loud. Like I follow this pathologist named Mrs. and Jimmy who it's basically just like dead body pictures. It's really like morbid and weird, but it's like you learn a lot about like weird pathology. And so it's a lot of like gross body stuff and then like puppies. Like it's like the extreme ends of the spectrum. Look at that cute puppy. Gross look at that boil. What are they going to do with it? It's like what is that about human nature that we go to these like very extreme places? It's true. But even even that pathology one, it doesn't sound like it's being like this is a bad. You know, it's helpful like I said isn't the human body amazing. Yes, very educational, but it's also kind of like I think she just gets that like look at this gross thing is a good on trade to look at it for some people. And yes, it's very true that people like me are like who fascinated. I'm wondering, you know, and I know that this is sort of a left turn, but maybe not. But you know, you're in New York now. Obviously you're still very closely tied to Australia. I don't know if you live there part time or how often you go home. And I know the pandemic has made things quite strange. But have you noticed any big cultural. I mean, I've long felt like there Australia is a very kindred country. I've traveled there probably every few years for work. And there are portions of Australia that are just like, you know, I very much see like the Cindies and the Melbourne's like the New York's and the LAs. But then I also see like the Perths and the other parts that like remind me of growing up in Texas. And it feels very parallel with the US in obvious ways. But I can imagine as somebody who's really been like lived in both places that you also see the big, big cultural differences. Is there anything that really struck you when you came to the US that you like are still having a hard time getting used to or that is, you know, pretty jarring to you, especially in the context of bringing a show from an Australian sort of context and audience into a US context and audience. Yeah, it's a really good question because. I think about it a lot in the context of the stories we tell ourselves about where we're from. So there is this story that I could tell you about how Americans are quite individualistic and Australians you care more about their society. That is the story that, for example, I read in a recent editorial about Australia because Australia seems to have found its odd place in the conspiracy theory on the right about how terrible it is to live in Australia. And then part of this editorial was like, no, but we care about each other. And I guess I never put Australia in the big bucket of collectivist countries. I put them more on the individual inside of the sector. We definitely have a better safety net that you have in. True. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I wouldn't say it's completely off the wall. And the, you know, there was Australia's had a lot of lockdowns because the goal while they never set it explicitly, the government never set it explicitly. Basically, they were trying to get down to COVID-zero. Delta, that's been made incredibly difficult. But it did mean that in Australia, Sydney and Melbourne had been in lockdowns for extended periods of time. You know, friends really, you know, not leaving their house to do anything other than what was its sport shopping. It was more, it was way more extreme than the lockdowns that we had in New York at the beginning of the pandemic at its sort of scariest. Yeah. So, and there was a little bit of pushback to that, but given how strong the lockdowns were, the pushback wasn't that much. I would have to say most people understood that as a community, we all need to get together and stay inside so that we don't have to deal with this virus. Right. And I can imagine the framing was different. It was more like, I need to be careful because this threatens my livelihood as opposed to, you don't have the right to tell me I have to wear a mask if I'm carrying an infectious disease. Yes, yes. A lot of, you know, do this for your team. Be a good mate. Be a good mate. Yeah, that argument doesn't always work here, does it? No, no. And I think, so in some ways that story of collectivism, you know, when I sweden, and probably Sweden is no Sweden as well. But on the other hand, I think you're right, there are a lot of similarities. And I think Australia is definitely moving in the direction of individualism as well. Do you think that's because of US influence? Like, and when I say US influence, I mean global US influence. Yeah, I, I, look, I mean, I'm just talking out of my ass here. I don't have any data, but I don't know if there is data on something. Right. Yeah, I don't know if you actually can measure something like that. So given we're in austereitory here, I would say that for a long time, at least, you know, America has been the, what are the leader of the free world, so they say. And, but it has been a model country for what you can do. And I think in that way, it has sort of had this cultural influence. And I do think there is something to it. And it's, it is really sad because, as you know, we have a lot of data about what some of the things that America does, they doesn't work, you know, healthcare is a prime example. We have so much data around that. And yet we still see in Australia and other countries, they're moving towards a more, a model of healthcare that is less preventative, that's less, you know, let's start from the big investments in the early days. Let's pay for like, going to see your GP. You know, so it is really sad to see it because we could learn from America. We could learn from the mistakes of America made. For like the inverse, like the negative consequences that instead, what is that? Like why is it that we go, well, that doesn't work? Let's try it here. Is it just because we're allowed to? Is it that America gives us a, a possible, they're kind of doing it over there. And they're getting away with it. Yeah, we could be like, for whatever reason, we're really good at marketing. Like, we're really good at selling a toxic product. Like, like, like, like we saw during the, the housing crash of what was that 2007, 2008, like we're really good at packaging something up and making it look like something that we should be investing in when it's actually garbage. I think that's what that is. You know, candy corn. Yes. Yes. America. Our healthcare is like candy corn. So what was that scary for you when you picked up and you moved here? Were you like, oh, shit, I hope I don't get sick. Wait, so I moved before the pandemic. Oh, no, I just mean leaving an Australian system, which was a little bit more, as you mentioned, egalitarian definitely had more of a safety net. I mean, I know for my friends who live in the UK that even when they come to visit, they pay for this like exorbitant travel insurance because they're so scared of getting sick in the US. Yes. No, it's, it's, it's very funny. You mentioned I haven't thought about it for a little while, but when I first moved, I definitely had a lot of comfort in the fact that if I did get really sick and my insurance didn't cover it, because at the time, you know, I always had insurance with my work. I was lucky like that. But I had no idea if it was good insurance ended up being good insurance, but I didn't know about any of that. And I always had comfort in knowing, well, I would just get the fuck out of here and go back to Australia. Like, I'll never have to pay a bill and a huge exorbitant bill, because I'll just leave and never come back and never pay that bill. And it's such an, it's such an awful position to be in for someone who doesn't have that escape route. Like, it's an awful situation that a country has gotten to where people are coming and going like, well, if I get in trouble, I'll just go home. No, but I get it. Like, in my version of that is I grew up in Texas, and I'm applying to internships for my PhD right now in psychology. And I'm looking at these different sites. I'm a cancer, I'm a psychoancologist. I work in a cancer ward. And I, you know, I love doing cancer psychology and end of life work. And the only internship available that's APA accredited in my exact field is at MD Anderson in Texas. And I'm like, I can't go there. I can't go there because I don't have reproductive rights in Texas anymore. And I know it sounds crazy. And I know that there's some crazy. It's like, there's a lot. It's not a good chance that within that year, I'm going to need to use services, but it's not worth it to me. No, and it's the stress of living in that. Even if you never needed those services, it's the stress of that year being like, if I do, what will I do? Yeah, and I feel so heavy-hearted for all of my family and for, you know, I grew up there. I spent the first 25 years of my life there. My family still lives there, and it's just heartbreaking to me that this is the state of things. And so I can imagine that being here, you have something similar. Like, well, at least I could go home, but you're right. Some people don't have that privilege to be able to go home. And it's, yeah, it's, I don't know, it's, it feels... And for some people, this is a better, this is a better opportunity because they live in places where, you know, well, that's not even true, where other things are worse. Maybe, you know, geopolitical conflict is worse, but the strange thing is even in countries that are developing countries that are dealing with horrific geopolitical conflict. Often they have better healthcare. They, but if, you know, if you don't have a good insurance system, yeah. Some, I know, and I was going to say it feels like an intractable problem. And I'm like, no, it's not an intractable problem. Many countries around the world have gone to spout a solution. Pretty much all of the, yeah, it's like they're, we're in the, like tiny, tiny minority here that we don't have any sort of public health service or public education funding or, you know, child care funding or like all of these basic, what are often viewed in many countries as basic human rights? We don't fund here. But hey, Biden's looking to pass this new social package. I'd be very, I mean, I haven't done the deep dive into what it really entails and whether what it's likelihood of passing is, but I'm excited to see that at least we're trying, at least talk. Yeah, there's talk about it. We're trying because it's been a long time. Pretty much my entire life in this country has been work to try and undo a lot of Reagan era dismantling of these kinds of social systems. And it's, I don't know, it's, it's, it's sad to think that, I don't know, I don't know how we even got off on this. But we just did an episode with Joyce Lynn Elders, who was the, the surgeon general during the Bill Clinton era. Well, for a couple years. Oh, she was the masturbation lady. Yes. And she is. Yes. Yes. Yes. You will still love her. She, she's amazing. She was for those who don't remember. She was fired unceremoniously for an offhanded comment around masturbation and then Bill Clinton fired her. Right. This is supposed to be a pretty progressive president who did this. You are. It's supposed to be. That's a big, big memory. I don't know. It's, and, uh, and what was amazing interviewing her and also listening back to the speeches that she gave in the early 90s, um, literally those speeches could have been said today. It was she was talking about how important preventative health care is, about how we know how much cheaper it is to treat people before they get seriously ill, whereas the whole American health care system, she called it, it was her words, she was like, we don't have a health care system, we have a sick care system. Oh, sure. I'm pretty sick. And, and everything, you know, she was saying this decades ago and I literally was like, wow, you could take this whole speech and present it today and it would still be used to people's ears because we still haven't solved these problems. Um, and that, I hear you. It's very, it's very depressing, particularly when there are so many other solutions out there. And it's, it's just been politicized in this really gross way. Strike Gold this March with the luck of the drive event at Werner Hyundai. Hyundai offers more style, comfort, safety and tech and you're in luck because this event offers even more savings. Test drive the 2025 Hyundai Palisade, a perfect fit for any family with its seven available trim levels and three rows full of comfort and convenience. New Hyundai's come with owner assurance with America's best warranty, a 10 year 100,000 mile powertrain limited warranty. Nationwide, feeling lucky, visit WernerHunday.com. I'm interested in your take on that then. Um, this, you know, you mentioned this word politicized and I think that it's such an important topic from a, like going back to this very scientific perspective, right? Like, um, the work that you do as a science podcaster, as a science communicator, as a science journalist. Um, okay. So I work on two podcasts and I've also done a ton of science media over the years and on my show, it's very me, me, me, like this, these are my views and I'm not going to be afraid to say them, right? And so I get ultra political and then I'm a co-host of a show called the Skeptic's Guide to the Universe and the editorial policy on that show is that it's a bipartisan show. We have listeners from every, you know, uh, end of the spectrum and that we don't get overtly political. But my take and the frustration where I find myself, uh, kind of sometimes screaming is that I truly believe in my heart of hearts that science is political. I don't think you can separate the two. Well, I'm interested in your take on that. Yeah, I, um, I see what you're saying and I agree with it in spirit, but I do not think that science is political. Okay. Tell me what come politicized. Okay. This would be my splitting of hairs with you. This is my, I was once going to be a lawyer and I studied law so I can say. I love it. Okay. Give me the, give me the legal brief. I mean, I could just think it was like, you know, like you said in my brain, just kidding right now. But I do feel like it is actually important, the distinction. Um, so I think, you know, science is, as, you know, all the listeners of your show know and you know, you know, it's this process of discovery of learning things about the world. You're painted enough times. We think we've pretty much got an answer to something. Um, and, and that, that answer may end up being something that the left doesn't like or the right doesn't like. Let's use an example like, so let's say preventative health care for example. So we, we know we have, you know, lots of data, um, showing how important it is to catch things early say diabetes before it hits the, the, the really rough end of the scale. How much, how much cheaper it is, how much easier it is to take care of people, um, earlier on. Now that is, that is not a political statement. Say we have evidence of that. Um, now what is political though is this idea is, is socialized medicine, this idea of, you know, that what has become politicized is this idea that you're, oh, if you take care of a lot of people, if you increase taxes and then you use that money to help everyone. You know, these are ideas that have become politicized. And so I think, you know, once you start taking a scientific finding and putting it on the political spectrum, that doesn't mean that science is political. It means it's been politicized. Right. So your view is that they're sort of, uh, and I don't want to, I don't want to caricature it, but that there's like a, I don't want to use the word pure. But I think you know what I mean. No, no, no, it's fundamental kind of scientific question that's asked that is, I guess my view is that it doesn't, it's not even asked in a few words. I don't even ask in a vacuum. The people who are asking these questions and doing this research also are people with agendas and with views about the world. Yes, I, I, I, I think I guess my, my purest when I put my purest hat on the right of science, then because I think when you start getting into questions around like, yes, obviously scientists are human beings who are biased, um, and can ask, you know, questions in particular ways and can do kind of what I would call dodgy science. I, that's not, that's not true science to me. Um, that's, that's kind of like a messed up version of it. But when it's, when it's working right, so let's say let's use the example of climate change again, you know, like we have all this evidence, obviously the climate change is real. That for some reason, which, you know, we know the reasons how money and power has now become a statement of the left that climate change is real and we need to have action on it. But there's nothing inherently left about that idea, you know, a, another example that I think is, is interesting in the context of America and Australia is, you know, a lot of ideas around. Being a, a Republican or being on the right in America, don't translate in Australia gun control would be an obvious one. So there's no real reason you could, you could make one, but why. You know, really like loving guns and wanting freedom around guns is a right and issue on the right, you know, you could say actually if you're a true conservative and you're risk a verse, then maybe you don't want guns around. Now in Australia, you couldn't map gun control on a left or right scale. So that's what I mean by like, and you know, and if you want to then put the science question on it, we have data around how dangerous having too many guns around is. So you do in Australia here, we have like very limited data because we were allowed to study. Right, right, but I guess we as a global community. So I, that's kind of what I mean by like science isn't political, but it gets mapped that way. And then it's interesting. Yeah. So I do feel like it's important to separate it. And you're right that I don't, I'm not so naive that I, that I think science is always exercised in a pure fashion. And, you know, we, we talk about that on the show as well, but I do think that is important. Yeah, I guess I guess where my sort of like respectful pushback and disagreement comes into a place of sort of like, I think that that's the aspiration. But it's not necessarily the reality. And my example that I would bring up like kind of as you bring up climate change with, and I think is a beautiful. Like if we were doing debate club and I was assigned to that team, I think climate change would also be my beautiful example of sort of a, an agnostic, a politically agnostic view that then becomes really politicized. But I think when we look at the history of let's say, um, uh, race, race science or intelligence test day or any like we can then very cleverly. Evolutionary psychology. Equal coin on quite or even eminuous, genetic like if you really think I remember I brought this up recently on an episode that there's a stunning picture. I saw a professor give a talk once and I was feel so guilty because I don't remember who it was and I can't find the photo. But he, the opening photo that he used was a snapshot in a periodical section of a library like remember libraries. Remember university library where you would have the bound archive books of different periodicals of the journal of this, the journal that and they're bound by year. And it showed the exact date when the annals of eugenics switched over to the annals of human genetics. Right. And it was a really like chilling photo that this is the same journal, but it had a different name because it was a different time. And the, and the, the motivation for doing very similar science was just well accepted, it was well accepted back then within the scientific community that white men were superior. And that black people, especially women had inferior traits that this was literally talked about as if it was a known thing. And I think that's where my view that like the politicization of like it's almost inextricably linked and you're right there's an aspiration for doing pure science, but I think that in practice, it's never pure. Never, never, not even when you're studying sort of physics. And you know, we've got, we've got a coming out of this cool noise that monkeys may. And you know, there's one scientist out there who's like, no, this has to do it. No, no, it's true. I mean, that's the thing. I just think the vacuum mentality. And I think that this has come as I've moved out of neuroscience and into clinical psychology more and more that I've grown to have a greater appreciation for the fact that it is always messier than I wanted it to be. And back when I was doing pure science evangelism and really talking about science as this sort of unblemished and very, not as so, not as so, but very kind of clean process that I was forgetting about the social justice component. And I do, I do think though that even you're, yeah, I do agree with you about about this as a, as something to consider, but I do think that in the, at the same time in the, in the public's mind about the really controversial scientific issues of our time in terms of, and you're putting that in quotes, right? Like controversial, like things that are not controversial within the science. Exactly. Exactly. Like when I think about, you know, gun control, climate change, health care. Those things, while you, you, you are right, we always have to be aware of these, these potential for bias in science and it's a horrible history in some respects. I think that in that sense, those areas aren't as politicized as sometimes people make out. I think you're right. You're right. This, I think that, that's a very important point that you're making that the, just like we were talking about before, where sometimes the media likes to focus on things that aren't really representative of reality because they, they're more flashy, they're more, you know, putting that spin on the headline is something that is a common practice within the media. I think that there are things in science that are not controversial yet to keep the story going. They're, they're sold to us wrapped up in this, in this controversial window dressing. So who wins into bait club? We, we go split pizza and, and that sounds good. We just, we just, we go celebrate with some, with some, I don't know, we've food on the mind. I've been restricting my calories recently. So I'm like, hmm, not much Sunday. We've not much Sunday. That sounds good. Yeah. Well, gosh, I can't, like, there's so much more that I would love to be able to talk to you about. I don't want to keep you any longer because I know that you have such a busy schedule. Wendy, I've had so much fun debating with you, but also, no, no, just learning about your process with science versus about some of the really cool episodes. Everybody, please go check it out. I'm just looking at your most recent episodes. I know that you mentioned the one that's coming up next, but that recently you, you have the episode about the legendary condom queen, which I love. I'm noticing that there was an episode recently about therapy, which, okay, that's like I'm going to go listen to that right now. About weight loss, about childbirth, about the secret world of plants, about monogamy. These are all such fast, oh, and blue balls, of course, which you also mentioned. All such fascinating. And hey, I think important. Sometimes the capital, I'm maybe a lowercase, but whatever, it's all important. That's right. I mean, we really, we really came to a fun conclusion. Yes. Good, good. So thank you so much for being here with us for sharing your enthusiasm and your excitement and your point of view. Before we go, I always ask my, my guess, the same final two questions. And I would be remiss if I didn't ask you, but before we dive into that very, very tiny short last segment, I'm wondering if there's anything we didn't get to talk about. If there's anything that you want to kind of plug or, or mention for the audience. No, I guess just go listen to science verses and do it on Spotify. Science versus on Spotify, important point. All right. So, so Wendy, at the very end of the show, I always ask all of my guests the same two questions. There's sort of big picture questions, but you are an expert in grappling with big picture questions. So I know these will be. Questions on a match for you. So, so I would like we would like to know number one, when you think about the future in whatever context feels relevant to you. So it could be really big picture stuff. Like we could be like cosmic big picture stuff or global stuff or local stuff or even just very personal stuff. The first thing we want to know is what is the thing that's keeping you up the most at night, the thing that you're most concerned about worried, maybe even a bit pessimistic, maybe borderline cynical about. But then on the flip side of that, because we'd like to end on a more kind of positive enough lifting note, where are you finding your optimism these days? What are you genuinely and kind of authentically optimistic about? I think that we are in the horrible acne, acne-pocked teenage years of the internet and that it is not going to get worse from here. So there's a lot of kind of tour. There is some studies on how the social media is separating us and bubbles and everything's terrible and you go online and conspiracy theories are hoi and there's nothing we can do about it and blah, blah, blah. But I think that will eventually calm down and when we think about how young the internet really is, how young social media is, it is in just its awkward teenage years. And I think we're kind of going to grow out of it. We're going to hit the 30s, you know, the 30s of how we interact with the internet and what we do with it. And it's going to be just a little more chill. Yeah. Yeah, 30s have been good to me so far. So yeah, the 30s of the internet, I think, I am looking forward to that. You're right. I like it. Great. I like it. I get it. You said you're not that good at predicting the future. That's fair. Yeah. And of course, caveat to that. So forget everything I just said. Well, Wendy, thank you so much. Everybody, the show is science versus they take on FADs, trends and the opinionated mob to find out what's FACTS, what's not and what's somewhere in between by Gimlett Media. It is a Spotify original. And if you don't already subscribed, do it right now. Wendy, thank you so much for being here. Thanks so much for having me. And everybody listening, thank you for coming back week after week. I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk to the media.