Hello everyone and welcome to talk nerdy today is Monday March 5th and I'm your host Cara Santa Maria Guys, I want to thank a new sponsor for today's episode and that is waterline This is a really important podcast that will teach you all about You know everything you needed to know about water from the economic the political the social the technological even the environmental aspects of water all around the globe now I recently listened to the episode called water and peace all about hydro politics and I don't know I really learned a lot just about the history of geopolitical conflict with water but also from modern experts who you know shared their insights So guys search for the waterline podcast on iTunes or in your Android podcast app Give it a listen and let me know what you think you know Talk nerdy is and will always be a hundred percent free to download and that is because of the support from our advertisers but Also because of the support from listeners like yourself I know I say it every week and hopefully you don't fast forward through it But this week I do want to thank my top supporters on the show and they include Phil T. Bear David J. E. Smith Pedro Em Rosario Barbosa Jeffrey Perez Charles Payett Jonathan Wright Christian Jeffrey the honorable husband J. F. Gabrielle Felipe Hata Mjolgensaal is Brian Holden and of course Jeffrey Suol now if you want to hear your name called at the top of the show or maybe you don't and you just want to support the best way to do it Honestly is just to go to hatredrion.com that's P. A. T. R. E. O. N. dot com slash talk nerdy That's where you can pledge your support on an episodic basis Okay guys, I want to dive right in without any further ado like I say every week and this week's guest is a great one I've been on his podcast before now he is on mine He's a stand-up comedian super funny super insightful very smart and his weekly show is called The space cave. I love it. I don't know It's if he would call it a science show. I would call it a science show But it's definitely a show about curiosity about inquisitiveness and really about planet earth So here we go guys. It's David Huntsberger Well, David. Thank you so much for joining me. Thank you right before we started you didn't impression of me I did I think that's my generic man impression. Oh, yeah. Hello. I am a man What's up? Very that oh my god Well, what's here? Do you have a generic woman like when you're doing stand-up and you have to do a lady? I used to do like that standard one and that was kind of like the valley girl like where's my latte? Yeah, then that felt like it got overused and I felt we're doing it So I don't know if I have done like on Record any sort of like a female voice in a long time because I think it's so Jarring to people it is that's very Louis C. K. Does that voice a lot? Yeah, like I know the man right I'm a woman. Yeah, I was a little abrasive. I think like The soft subtle kind like this would be it sort of Just sounds like you you just like me, but it's very like Methotic or methodical and like I think what I'm going to say just a softer thing like that would I would I could at least say like That's a woman. It could be a woman. It could be a retic on NPR. Yeah. Yeah, you have a bit of an NPR voice Thank you. You do. Well, I don't know what that means exactly. It means I had to boost your mic a lot. Oh It's just it's comforting. Oh, thank you. Yeah, like there's breaths in your voice Do you know what I mean by that? That was back when I was a singer in school and you would sing jazz if you want to blend with the other people in your in your group You have to put breath in your voice. So so now my voice has breath in it Huh, do you think that's an affect like people choose that as they grow up and become I don't know I I don't know if there's actually a way to know the answer to that question. Yeah, like our our voices kind of what percentage are they a product of Influence of decision because like for example, I don't have an accent from Texas Virtually at all. There's a couple little things that people can hear but my family talks like this They're fully southern sign-owned in their Texans and people are like why do you have an accent? I never have Never like it wasn't even a conscientious decision If it was if it was I don't remember making it. I was a kid interesting. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, oh I was just having this conversation with Crystal Crystal Dolor she's been on the show before Very good friend BFF I might say we were talking about the state year from and how it is pronounced by the people that live in it Yeah, so we say it somewhere to attitude but everyone else says it with like the awe sound Yes, and so I was saying I think I say Nevada now that I live in California because people here Also say Nevada probably because they're next door. Yeah Oregon Colorado There those are a few people say Oregon and Colorado. Yeah, Colorado Shabrock. Yeah, cuz when I grew up in Texas. It was Nevada. Yeah, yeah, that's just Acceptable okay, okay. Good to know all right. So Nevada is the right way good to know all right So so David what do you have to know you you are doing the comedy thing? Not as much I really yeah, I did the fringe festival in Scotland in August and Took something out of me. I don't know It's like it's it's weird when you live in a like just the planet in general every everyone's sharing their opinion you see it kind of ostensibly knowing it's there like well There's a lot of people that have a view on this or when you're in any field Entertainment of any kind like I guess when you go audition and you see 30 people that look just like you This is I am not too special But to go do comedy and see like 3,000 people all trying to like come see my show and they're just begging in the streets come see my show It's free. It's free like turning the can't give it away. Yeah, and I there was something about that it was like It made me feel really weird like I don't feel like I have that much to say anymore I don't I don't think anyone's views are worth anything these days I've been having this kind of existential Crisis myself a bit like there are days when I start to do the podcast and I'm like Nobody cares like I don't care. Why do they care nobody cares like it's not special You know and when I'm pitching shows for TV and stuff and it's like you gotta sell yourself and I'm like no Man we have had very similar experiences In fact like my manager was recently like yeah, the overwhelming note is like you don't have like a big energy Yeah, that's that's been me my whole life I don't know why you'd take me to these meetings if you knew that was gonna keep being a problem I'm like you we didn't team you up with someone with a little more pizzad like I was just today like looking through Television stations as we all do and realizing there's only like three of them that I like yeah But then like why don't I like the other one? So I started really examining what's on there and when they talk about Just the dumbing down or how idiotic all the stuff it when you start really examining the titles You're like, oh of course where as dumb as we are and there's so much nonsense like this person has a huge personality They're not saying much, but look how excited they are I just hate it I actually did a talk in In Australia and New Zealand late last year about American television in the age of Trump I think I was like in the age of Trump because that made it catchy and people wanted to see it but really it was like since I've been alive In the problem, but it's getting worse, right? And so I cited a few different things like shark week like some of the issues with like the Megalodon documentary or like the mermaid Do you remember how there's like a mermaid documentary on discovery and it was like mermaid so real and the people were like Yeah, there's totally mermaids in the ocean and I was like that's not good and It's sad to me like I'm working on a pitch for this is so not something you should say publicly on a podcast But I work a lot with national geographic and I love working with national geographic because in many ways I feel like they're kind of the last bastion Yeah, and I'm working on a pitch and I'm talking to my friends about it and some people who have more expertise in that area And they're like okay, but like sell this aspect of the dichotomy between the personalities and you've got it and I'm like I think I'm gonna pitch this as the anti everything else that's on TV I think there's some value in that like I really someone asked me the other day like something that I was on a podcast They're like what's overrated what's underrated and the underrated thing I said was the show called the tech tourists on Netflix It's a BBC show with McKinsey crook who is a garrif on the original office And it's just this really slow-paced show that is I love it I think it's really funny and like the characters get a chance to Exist and I have like have a you know clap every two seconds and I couldn't really explain what it was But it was just that like it so it's a comedy, but it's slower. I think it's it's more of just like it's just a story But I find a lot of parts of it really funny like there's one way that they wanted to form this like go to an open My can play music these two main guys Mm-hmm you started working on stuff and then they realized pretty quickly that one of the dudes couldn't play unless he was sitting cross-legged on a pillow So then like when they go to the contest they like setting up on this table and they do it so subtly We're like that's such a silly bizarre thing I just loved the way it was shot and the way it was done like very understated a Few years ago. I was like there's so much violence and speed and I love ice-peak chases in action movies But I was just like what doesn't have that and you go out to like old Winnie the Pooh It's the greatest it's the many adventures of Winnie the Pooh is like Everything I want the world to be it's so perfect Is that on Netflix? Yeah, can we just like down? Yeah, and it'll treat you just right like you'll find me yourself being like oh, yeah The world used to be kind of like this you could read a book and you could just kind of sit outside and not worry that you like Had to go somewhere do something or be striving or achieving or you could just kind of like oh this is very pleasant I dig that have you ever seen Actually hilariously a friend of mine who is a Showrunner like he is the main producer who will like make a TV show Yeah, mostly in the reality genre, but like smarter reality like he did queer eye the first one way back in the day He was up to executive produce this show called too cute Okay, have you ever seen this show called too cute involved kittens and things of this nature? It does Yeah, they've seen a little bit of too He turned it down because he thought it would be embarrassing to be on his resume and I was like Your full-time job could have been hanging out all day with puppies and kittens. Yeah, and like I Beans watched that show for weeks. It was literally just puppies and kittens Crawling around on the ground and it was my happy place You need that I feel like that's what everyone's like feeds or whatever compile of these days Oh, you're right. I want to stay up to speed that sucks that sucks. Oh, yeah, this is terrible. Oh, that's adorable Just moving on like it's very It's never been more critical I think nowadays like those little spikes those little things that are still good Yeah, my Instagram is definitely my friends Dead bodies I weirdly follow a lot of pathologists don't judge me and puppies lots of puffy. It's dead bodies and puppies Yeah, I've I try to not follow my friends because so many of them are comedians and I just hate it I think maybe you need some new friends. I think I well, I like to separate them I like to have them in different places But there's such like a weird societal demand of like what fold you? Why don't you follow me? I hate that because you post pictures of everything you see There's no value to that to me and it fills my thing up. I hate it. I follow photography I like I have some friends who are really incredible photographers I have a lot of like science journalist friends So I cool parts of the world Yeah, I don't usually see which is nice My Instagram is totally boring. It's just my dog That's like all I know how to post I We just got a new dog and I like hesitate to post stuff because I we're all share it like I like the Instagram is that it's this Vicarious way to just dip into your pocket and see how the people are living life what they're creating what they're seeing But then I also think like do you have to share so much of yourself? Yeah, I know that and well And why is it that that you know that top nine thing like people do this at the end of the year where there's like an Oh, and then it'll pull from your Instagram the top nine posts that had the highest engagement and I don't know if it's the same for guys But for girls when I look it's all selfies So it's this weird thing where you think it's like a narcissism where it's like People are just posting selfies all the time But then that's what the people who are following them actually want to see yeah, I don't like it Now I think like we've gotten to a point where like if you're an anthropologist or sociologist or you just in any way studying like the pathology or the behaviors You can't stay on top of it. It's happening too quickly like what does that say about us? What does that mean? It is pretty funny I'm actually back in school now and I'm working on a clinical psych PhD and like when you there will have articles that are assigned or will be researching a certain topic And you'll be digging through the literature and of course there's a delay in publication usually by like up to a year And so you're digging through the literature and it's like on the internet You know this is like this new thing Because we all live in order on their tumblr This paper on my space is garbage fucking my side. It does still exist. Oh, yeah It's a pretty good place to source music It was a while ago. Yeah, I checked it like a year ago and you Jev use Groove shark Yeah, Groove shark was illegal. I was kind of like an absolute listen like whole albums and theoretically They were paying artists and it turned out like they were not but their code is evidently really good I think my space trying to kind of borrow that where now you can go type in like any song or artist And I think what it does is just parses the internet and finds the youtube video for it I was gonna say Kate you just do that on youtube. Yeah, but you can like build a better playlist I suppose I probably probably yeah, but you need no You don't need a membership from my space now. I don't have a Spotify membership because I'm cheap Because I have a I have Pandora and I don't want to pay for both I have Pandora and I just also I know that I get paid nothing from Spotify as an artist and so I don't want to support doing that to other artists You know like yeah listen your whole album on Spotify. I bet I made three cents. Oh, yeah, you have albums Yeah, I have several I feel like in in some other parallel dimension like that would have been sort of my life's work And then now that we live in the age of constant creation Yeah, it's adorable. He made three hours worth of stuff So are your albums all pulled from live Stand-up sets. Yeah, okay, and are they local or is it like when you're in a place that's really special You decide that would be a good play. How do you do that? The first one was well, I've technically done three and then kind of like an EP. That's not the greatest I also like something about it because it was like I was I was a young comedian I wasn't that prepared. I was just like I wanted to capture that But that one was just like I showed up in the venue was like we record stuff here if you want to do it Let's do it And so that and then that was a place like in San Diego where I had kind of started a bit And then okay the next one was in Minneapolis at a club and that was sort of the same thing I ran into like the the label guy and he was like hey man I'm ready. I'm around this week. I was like I have material. I'm ready to record So we did that that worked out pretty well And we did like several shows and kind of used one as the main skeleton and edited into it Which felt a like weirdly duplicitous But it's probably what people do all the 99% yeah, I mean you have to like But it's like that joke hit better when I was in Texas like the crowd laughed more and this is better energy here Absolutely, and it's a weird thing because It almost like never should be recorded stand up really is an immediate thing the energy in the rooms different And when you're trying to replicate that You some comedies be like well, I'll just go for on a play and in whatever works best in that room But other times you're like I've wrote these words in a way I want them to go out into this sort of archive exactly in this order Yeah, so people get their own heads and stumble over the words as if they were hurting like you know doing a script or something But some comics do that like I used to data comic and it was like Like he would record a special and then that meant that that material was done And then this show would build and build and build weekend after weekend after weekend until about like a Year later and then by then it's all new material So it's time to record a new special and then like move on yeah, but it was super like like I didn't go to you know Like we were traveled together. Are you gonna come to the show? I'm like no, I just saw it yesterday Yeah, why would I watch the same show? But it's like if you're doing it if you're and it's not like building a model or something It's something that's the system of channels and locks that are always just slightly changing And then once you like the tumblers all click into place It's like the thing can shoot out of it or whatever. It's that so like each show like oh, I got a little closer on this piece I got a little closer on this one. I changed this word So yeah, I mean I remember the Simpsons long ago making a joke of like oh you'll be a comedian after travel town to town telling the same jokes every night I was like that sounds so sad But isn't that that's what musical artists do too like yeah, especially the ones Who have been around for like Decades but people just want to keep hearing that same song from the seven years Yeah, and they're like oh man. It's a really fun play that song every night But if you're getting to see the world and do that I always ask people to go to those shows like what did they do? And I go play three songs then they played the big hit yeah, and then they played like eight more songs played the big hit again Like an encore and I think you know what they closed with yeah, and that I think it's hilarious like yeah We have this one thing we made three minutes of content that's taken us around the planet Incredible. Yeah, give them what they want. Yeah, and then I get to go to like Prague for free That is I mean, it's not a bad life. No, that traveling for free It's like one of the biggest perks of my job. I don't want to do it nearly as much as um music artists are the musical artists musicians That's a word. I'm very good at words I was picking up on that yeah Yeah, no, but it's also a lonely life. I tried to date a musician once it didn't go very well Yeah, we're still friends, but I couldn't it's like you can't just drop your life for their life But their life act like apples to apples they always make you feel like you're shit just as important as mine And it's like but really yeah like In the grand scheme of things maybe but when it comes to like how many people get to put food on their kids tables tonight Because you're doing your job versus me doing my job Very different. Yeah, I suppose I've I never looked at it that way. That's how I always like it's like I can just can't like if I were like David I really don't want to podcast today like I'm slightly tired I could do that it would be a bitch move, but I could do that Whereas like my ex couldn't be like me. I don't want to do a show tonight because there's literally hundreds If not thousands of people relying on him. Yeah, and then all the thousands of fans too We're gonna be disappointed and the thing the little things you don't think about of like the venue is waiting there Just innocent that venue is supposed to be busy every night and there's crew the whole crew the parking lot People outside it just extends and extends and extends and like and he would travel with an orchestra and then yeah You know all of his like security and all that and you're just like that's a lot A lot of pressure. That's yeah, I suppose that's different than like 90% of dating a musician. I think yeah You might be right. That's a pretty high level. Yeah, you might be right But that is like a thing that I think sometimes we don't think about when we're Lebrides and there you know, I think being in LA you're Exposed to a little more of it than when you were in Nevada when I was in Texas It's a different idea that we have in our minds of what it's like to be Be a celebrity. I have much more Sympathy for people who are like accosted by paparazzi and people who just like can't Fuck and go into Starbucks and get a latte. Yeah, you know what I mean when I used to know I'd be like but they're rich So fuck them, but now it's like I don't know if any amount of money makes it worth having such a shithole life I mean, I think when you offer nothing creatively like say Exactly. Yeah, I was trying to think of a way to say without mentioning that name. That's good. Oh, like it goes out there into the ether and suddenly Boosts up that signal or something. You're right. Yeah, I think those people when they do get a cost it or whatever you like just inconvenience They deserve every bit of it because that's really what they not only did they wanted they I think Wanted to pretend they didn't want it. Oh, I know and they like call ahead Like they have people who call ahead and say like so and so it's gonna be at this coffee shop at this time But then you think about other people whose names I am comfortable mentioning like a Brad Pitt or somebody who's just a really talented actor Who's very low-key very keeps to themselves very quiet Yeah, and the fact that there are people camping outside of their house and they can't pull out of their own driveway Yeah, they can't do normal things like go to the grocery store They have to worry about their kids being photographed But I would say this I mean this is a hindsight things and Brad pits a good example of someone who's done like Unbelievable work with like plan B with rebuilding New Orleans And then bring a lot more diversity to cinema. Yeah, and just by all accounts like really a very productive and worthwhile Aside from some of the stuff with this marriage recently in the children. Yeah, but like doing that I think accounts for something and and you almost look at like the back end of it of like oh This is maybe the more worthwhile. Yeah, I almost trade that for like oh, it's need to be a movie star and be famous And that's what allowed this to happen But I think those careers where people end up being behind the scenes and or like if you're a composer or something where people will flip out They'll pay so much money to come see you But you could walk out after we're on the street and virtually no one would recognize you I've been like I've seen that before it's super weird. I've been out to dinner before with um With like a very famous person who's visually very famous and then a person a director actually who's way more famous like Ten times as rich, you know, just so much more. But nobody knows what it looks like. Yeah That's and then you're like in the proper arts you're like swarming and they're just like do do do Nobody gives a shit. It's like yes. Yeah, that's the way to do it. Isn't that what you want? I think theoretically that's whatever one would say like oh, that's what I want But no, there's the narcissism. There's like an attention-seeking thing and people shit on Banksy, you know Yeah, this this artist can try it whenever like at least he went about it in a way of like even if you hate it That's are supposed to elicit some reaction you're allowed to hate it But at least you don't have to like see this person's face all the time. That's true Yeah, cuz we are that culture this like super indulgent kind of like we want even like the hero It's gotten to the point to where like the the people who are considered like the heroes You root for them to fail in a weird way which is super gross very gross And even if you're not rooting for that when it starts to happen you're never surprised You just kind of like oh yeah, here it comes here comes this when you first started seeing The I'm kind of sick of Jennifer Lawrence you like yep. This is what happens like people just drag it down I've had enough of her. Yeah, that's what we do yeah, and it's so sad because like she's a human being Yeah, like in most people eyes. It's like no, she is a Product for me to consume you know, it's like oh yeah, but that's our culture So what are you going back to say it again for your PhD? What's the clinical psychology? So how would that factor into what we were just talking about like the psychology of these or you're going to be in a clinic doing psychology I have no idea what were we just talking about like the psychology of of wanting the acclaim or you need want to have success in your field But then What does it say about like so any of one of the people we just mentioned? Could you would you be diagnosing there? I don't want to work with people like that But some people do like my personal therapist I think works with some pretty high profile people because he's got some expertise in like work life balance issues And helping people sort of not be workaholics and have families and things like that Also, I think some psychologists are very good at working with narcissists But there's a weird thing there where it's very hard to get narcissists to actually go in for therapy Yeah, it's actually only mandated. Yeah, yeah, they've kind of set in their ways like I'm good Yeah, like I'm awesome. Why would I need it there? I'm a fucking narcissist That's not I want to work with people who are dying so it's like a totally different field Like I actually want to keep the psychology side of my world Very separate from the science and psychom and all of that and the TV stuff I might actually if and when I get licensed and decide to move in that direction I might have to actually stop or minimize the other work. Yeah. How are you gonna be doing? How are you already doing? I don't know dude. I'm so tired So I took a 45 minute nap before I slept Good lord. So do you sleep at night? Yes, some nights most nights. I do sleep I actually had I get visual migraines if you've read a visual migraine I've had very few migraines or you have had some migraines Maybe I've had some unpleasant head that maybe twice in my life though So the co-host of the other podcast I work on the skeptic sky He's a headache neurologist at Yale and he's in a camp of headache neurologists who feel that all headaches are the same And migraine is just a classification that we use for a severe version of regular headaches So I've always secretly harbored that hypothesis. It's good to hear it Yeah, that there's kind of no difference I have never had what I think people describe when they say they have migraines I have a very particular type of quote-unquote migraine where there's no pain involved but I see This weird glittery insane thing called a scatoma that goes across my field of vision. Oh, I've had these little tracer things Similar to that they're like silvery little So are they on both sides are mine's always just on one side. Oh my under kind of like in my peripheral Like are you talking about seeing stars? Yeah, kind of they're like a long time tracer and usually like I shake my head or blink a lot and then they kind of disappear That could be like did you do it a lot of acid back in the day? No, I don't have any of it in my residual spinal cord Because I'm like I've had that but I think that's different This thing last 20 20-minute straight It sucks and I know it doesn't happen often, but when it happens I'm really sleep deprived like it's a big trigger for it and I was at brunch the other day with crystal and it was happening and I had to drive home like I need to go to sleep so the drive of all this I mean is it Yeah, I'm sure this goes deep Yeah, I don't play the part of your Why do people feel every waking moment of free time with stuff? Because not to give away too much of your home life, but it's relatively austere, but it's very calm It is very calm aesthetics is very important to me. It's very hard for me to live amongst clutter You know, so it's all clean and you it is austere, but but that aspect of it is calming to me But it seems like you could like wake up late and throw on some slippers and go over to the window and gaze out over The view Okay, so you have that morning those moments in your life for sure. Oh, okay. I do It's it's funny because even though I blessed my ass and worked my ass off I think it's very similarly to you Em a freelancer and I work from home So unless I'm on set just like unless you're traveling and you're doing stand like There's no time constraints to think they're due dates, but it's all do it on your own You can do the job as like I'm wearing pants right now, but that's only because you're here Like if you were a voice through the computer. I would definitely be a panseller So that's like an ideal way to exist and live is just pansellers for me. Yeah What about you funny? I feel like I have ratty ass old shorts or something like that that I would wear and that's like I'd feel the same that you feel panseless in those like oh god. I hope no one shows up I don't know why like you can be in ratty clothes or I guess as a woman It's maybe different if you open the door of panseless probably like to the postmates guy like thanks for my noodles You know that in England they call pants underwear. Yeah, I don't care for it. I don't care for it either Knickers and pants. Yeah, it's like down to trousers are pants and pants are underwear. Yeah. Yeah. I don't care for it Very confusing. Yeah, that conversation is probably very confusing to the UK listeners. Yeah Apologies guys. Don't get your pants all in a twist Hi So obviously you've been a comic for a long time. Yeah, I don't think so. Okay, comic and comedian are interchangeable I feel like a lot of getting into comedy people talk about these sort of things as if they're gonna solve it It's just a very like well a comedian is this but a comic and there really probably is some delineation Like Conan O'Brien could be considered a comedian. It does comedy But like to hit the road and travel and in like check into shitty hotels and stay in these gross condos and perform and this is our venues where people hate you I think that is less derogatory more like yeah, you're a comic. Okay. Now you've become a comic. Yeah Like you've been in the ship. Yeah, yeah, and you've been in the ship. I've done all that crap Yeah, and it didn't earn many stripes didn't make me feel more accomplished Just give me a more like nihilistic view or if not outright negative view of our culture like This is this is us that show title bothers me so like oh no We're out there in the middle of Kansas in this gross beer bar Saying the most heinous. I don't know. Well, I've good off track. No, it's it's like that. This is us. I mean Today today we're recording this on February 22nd. I have no idea when this is gonna air But we're recording in a February 22nd and today is only How many days would that be six days and host the Florida shooting? Yeah, and I'm at brunch brunch is a common theme in my life I'm at brunch and trump is on TV talking about arming teachers. Yeah, this is us. Yeah, that's us That's a good cat like capsule of and then being a comedian means that Whatever day this is or They're on like especially when you go and you're like and the dynamics have changed a little bit You'd be like three comics, you know the host and they'll be a middle act and typically when you're like working I wrote a lot. I was middling a lot So it's all of it. So you're going up no one knows who you are They you have no bearing on their lives But that's when you're doing the most comedy so you have the most thoughts you're writing the most you're like I feel like the best comedians right now are all middling all over the place all the time They're getting up in front of those people and asserting or positing the notion of hey Maybe like my sister who's a teacher who as a kid could never You know even Whatever that might be like oh when we were cleaning fish you couldn't even hold the fish. Yeah, so gross But now you're gonna put a gun in her hand and have her shoot a child. Yeah, and people go Oh And that's us that people in the crowd. Oh you liberal piece of shit. Give your views yourself I saw my sister to have to murder your stupid child It's awful It's so glad to be away from that and just in this quiet little bubble where I can like podcast and like Gently float my ideas or just conversations and I and not even really opinions anymore just like oh, it's nice to hear someone Speak about things in a way where they're knowledgeable and pleasant and All the things that it's certainly like our digital world does not have it's all just I hate it jump cuts. Yeah, yeah Jump cut don't like it and you're right podcasting is this because I do a lot in TV And so it's the same like you have to just say something really cleanly and really concisely and you'd better have an extreme opinion And yeah, yeah, but I can talk to you for an hour and maybe not even say anything and that's cool There's something in that. I feel like there's something worthwhile and like especially just our ability to see our human eyes Not through a screen, but just has like you get a sense of people's mannerisms and feelings like I'm getting a sense that I could Broach the subject of gun control with you and or or our national parks and Feel like you're not going to suddenly stand up and storm away or write the most heinous thing to me through pixels And not feeling the attachment to it right. Yeah or like much follow behind me in your car and yellow obscenity I mean Have you ever done that before I have the worst rotor and you know it's that separation just like you're talking about like that's The example right pre-internet and now post internet still like I hate people when they can't like I don't care Anything about you are just dead to me if you're a bad draw and I mean I've literally had to be careful about oh, I'm about to be at my meeting. Yeah, what if that person that I just yeah I Oh lovely to see you I felt like they were there's words coming around. I could read them very definitively. Oh No, no, I was even count. Yeah count. Yeah, I'll be being there on time. Exactly. Yes very pleasant I was trying to be pleasant to it. Oh my god, but yeah, it's it's weird how it's a like a fundamental human thing that like the minute There's some sort of emotional separation It's like you're not even human right you're an object. Yeah, I can just say fucking horrible things too I think of traffic is such a weird like it's analogous to so many things in life and yet it's its own separate world like People driving where they almost go up on the curb because they want to turn right You know what I'm trying and they'll get like inches away from the car next to them But they'll slowly just keep going. I just I'm almost past you and their heads are very close to one of them But because the glass is there from the window they're like I'm in a car. It doesn't count Never walk past someone in a grocery store like that. Just like breathing on their neck I'm not touching you. You don't need to look at me. I'm going right past you Like traffic has so many things like that and we just do it. Oh, it's fine. There's windows here And I'm in this little contraption. It's funny because I feel like in New York people in like life are more like drivers Everywhere like you'll be at the like pharmacy and you're waiting and you know you're buying your toothpaste or whatever you're waiting And like the person in front of you go and then you're on your phone somebody's go Steer-chair Literally vocally honk Shit, we're grabbing your cart and moving out of the way. Oh, excuse me. Yeah, it's like this is a and some people love New York for that reason That's real here like I can kind of get that but I wish there was just this in between of like you can be Calm and peaceful to one another and still be in a rage in a right like a lot of times when I'm waving people through traffic What they see is my hand going come on, but outwardly. I'm going you piece of shit. Come on get through there But I still feel like the deed itself is pleasant, but you're taking so long. Oh get through True, it's so true So I was I was asking about you know the the time that you spent on the road and now you're I guess focusing more committing more to podcasting more gentle calm lifestyle But your podcast historically you were on professor blast off. Yeah, you do the space cake Like they have a science theme to them And yeah, because I've only ever guessed it on yours I've never really had the opportunity to ask like where did that come from like what what inspired that what makes you want to keep doing it like Yeah, I Feel like that Pursuit of figuring it out is somewhat attainable. I also kind of like it. There's like that I think it's a fine men quote of like if it's just peeling an onion and there's it's just more layers I just like the pursuit of that. Yeah, and to be in a lab and and examining the stars or whatever you're doing that has tangible results Is not something I'm equipped to do But to talk to those people and get some of their results or get their thoughts on it I feel like that's available And so that's it. I just want to know more stuff not to like be a know it all at dinner parties I just want to feel like there's some rhyme or reason to this that Something's gonna make sense. It's just and not from like a purely there's no god This this is all an accident the big bang et cetera But if that is the starting point it's very bizarre to develop consciousness and be walking around and pretending like You cut in front of me in traffic and we like zero in on those sort of emotions because then you don't have to let your mind wander off And like it's just infinite space outside of this and this if we're such a little blip and so I like to entertain that and let that come in and see if If there's something there that could like become kind of an ethos or maybe even like not a dogma But something you're like I think I know what it is. That's really like healthy And also rare like really yeah, I mean I I do think that there are people I think probably people listening right now. We're like uh-huh They're like like nodding furiously in their cars like I need to meet more people like that like listen to his podcast But there I think that there is a large Minority of people who have this drive and this need to kind of consume Information that helps them answer these sort of existential questions, but I also know there's a famous study It's not even a famous today. There's a study that crystal and I always cite When we're talking about how scary meditation is yeah, and the idea of like just sitting alone with your thoughts It's like really stressful and there's this study where they gave people a survey About how likely they are to harm themselves and of course everybody scored really low on the survey And then they put them in an empty room with nothing in the room except a machine that every time you touch it it shocks you And like on average across the board most people just fucking shock themselves over and over when they sit in the room Really just to feel something yeah Just because being alone with your own thoughts is like really stressful. Hmm for a lot of people I just feel like I was really lucky in Certain sort of childhood things and maybe it's my nature I I mean I grew up around like open space for a certain few years like on a cattle ranch like way out of way And I I don't know if I like the desolation of that and like subject there subconsciously I was a kid I could bear of three when we left or something Then the rest was kind of on the outskirts as well, but you know like neighbors and stuff You know, we'd have horses from time to time and like I would just come home and get off the bus and like Saddle up a horse like 10 to 12 and just ride out into the desert And I really like that. I mean and my parents would be kind of like hey, you know This horse is not cheap like we got it make sure you're riding it So I was like sort of compelled to do it and I also liked it, but I mean I'd be out there in the snow like just a kid by myself out in the You know foothills and stuff and I I liked it I liked hearing like the horse breathe or like you know animals in the distance or you need to hear stuff like cars going by Not too far away and stuff, but then later I worked for this ranch where I would be like way out in the middle of nowhere All by myself and for hours just hours just like listening to hoofs clop against the ground and or hooves and There was something about that. I you just at some point you can't shock yourself You just have to like give into it and I miss that now I don't really have that now and so maybe it's like an attempt to get back to that of like we're so inundated with all these extra things and external sort of um Like stimuli. Yeah, and it's just too much. So I don't I feel like it's such a challenge for us to get back to a place of like Sitting quietly listening to each other without checking our phones or looking over someone's shoulder or if there's a screen on It's just like catnip to us and maybe that's just me personally, but Do you ever go camping? No, I don't like it. I don't know why I was gonna say you need to camp more It's such a great thing for like if you live in LA to get out and camp well I go up in the mountains once you so yeah, I guess I do kind of camp But we have like this old cabin that like my great grandfather built and so I Cool. Yeah, it's I feel really lucky to have that as well. It feels like very Bougie to me and yet if you saw it you'd be like it's like a little rock hut But to me it's just so foreign. It's such a weird thing to have so wait. Why do you hate camping? I feel like because I think that most of the things we do Are us trying to pretend That it that it's this other thing I come on. We'll take the butane torches out and we'll set up We'll like our food up into a tree and save it from the bears and we'll really be feeling something like yeah It's on schedule everything's on schedule and What is the last of you actually did camp like that way like or just anyway in a tent like yeah in a tent It's been a while. That is the sound of a tent That's really good and I went up and over We we camp periodically Mostly for me as an excuse to bring the telescope to a place where you can see shit because we live in LA Yeah, there's so much light pollution So it is sort of all around being able to stargaze late at night, but I don't know I like it because there is no schedule. It's like you cannot sleep in because the sun is way too bright And then you eat food. Yeah, and then the next scheduled thing is eating food. Oh, so you don't so Beyond the telescope is just kind of like let's just stroll around yeah like we'll go to Joshua tree And it's like okay, do you want to take a walk or do you want to try and climb up to the top of that rock? Yeah, let's climb up to the top of that rock And then you're like this feels dangerous. I don't want to do this anymore But yeah, I try not to do anything you do have to plan around meals Because it's like we have to get the fire going before it gets pitch black And then we put on the headlamps and then it's all the bug you have to plan certain yeah things about eating But it's kind of nice at like Making food takes three fucking hours for summer And everybody's involved in it and helping out and I don't know you're right I do need that in my life. It's good and you can get big groups like I like to go with like 20 people And then like I don't know and then you do dumb shit like play charades like things you never do at home because you have the internet. Yeah, you know what I mean So yeah, that's true. I don't know whenever there's something that feels like let's all do this to take our minds off I'm just a poor sport. I think I just get like oh, okay. I can't we just sit there Does everything have to be filled up? I just such a poor sport it but I but all of that sounds Really appealing? Yeah, just sitting around the fire playing with the dog. Yeah Just like sleeping in a tent. I don't know. I like it. Yeah, I do like that. It's good And you feel like when it's hot like it feels hot and you have to do things like put on sunscreen or like take off the layers Because it's hot and then at night it gets very cold and you're like this nature is cold I must protect myself. Yeah, yeah, you can't just like turn on the fucking you know AC or the heat. Yeah Have you ever dropped down a tree? No, that's one of those duh I don't know why it's not referenced more as like you should do it because people go like put it's a tree Like just find one that's on its way out Yeah, but if you can get through it with an axe There's such a weird human feeling to that like that's ties to all this primitiveness and like simplicity of like focusing on the task at hand Yeah, it's a really interesting feeling when it falls over like whoa. I did that. Yeah Fuck now. I have to like cut it up into smaller pieces. I actually I remember referencing a lot of X's in the show Which is actually quite rare for me, but I usually just talk about science and I don't get that personal But I remember an X of mine when his dog would die like while we were dating he'd lost a couple dogs and He would bury it Yeah, like the hills behind his house and it was like brutal Like it would take hours for him to dig this enormous hole sometimes in the rain very dramatic You know like in the rain and he's like crying the whole time And then he puts the dog in the ground and the puts the dirt on and I feel like there's a weird parallel there Because it's just very heavy physical labor and it would always bring him closure is a very kind of personal Do you need do you want me to be no, I need to do this on my own, you know, yeah, yeah, and I don't know why I think that was very healing That's so weird because like I had you know for a huge chunk of my life like from college until I was Just like four years ago. I had a dog that was everywhere with me I took him on the road. I snuck him into hotels. I mean he drove thousands of miles with me all over the country And like when he passed away I remember feeling that thought of like it just seems like it disservice to like pay to then get this earns sent back to me But that's what I ended up doing and partly was because like I don't really have like a set home Neither my parents kind of live where he had spent a lot of time or anything like there was no central place to go and be like All right, I'm taking you to your favorite oak tree Yeah, and you can't like just dig up the sidewalk outside of your apartment What's going on here sir? Oh, I've got a semi dog off right You have a permit. No, so when killer dies, which is never gonna happen by the way. Yeah, see seven Mm-hmm, and also the smaller dog. He's yeah, he's tidy. Yeah, it's to be 48 minimum to the totes Yeah, the expectation I have told people before that I want to make him into a pair of gloves and they think I'm insane Yeah, I thought about that too really the thing that sucks those when they get really old their first starts being way less cool Oh, cuz my dogs first so sought like even at seven everybody comments all the time that he feels like a little puppy Yeah, do you think that a last or is he gonna be like weird? You know these lumps and fat tissue things and like yeah, these gloves don't seem as comfortable now But I love that you did not even blink when I said that no, I thought a rug to begin Because like when he'd lay on the floor and put my feet like on him like this is essentially a living rug It's like people do like a bear and why would it be that different to like ah remember that dog remember 30 years ago They was so cool now. He's still kind of here exactly and like the whole thing about having a pet Especially a dog to fervor cats is the interplay between like you Literally take care of them you feed them you let them go outside when it's time to go outside You you provide for them and then they Serve you you know way like they're like you're my human. What do you need? How can I help you? I'd be happy for you. I'd be sad when you're sad and so I feel like that's what he would want It's to like keep me warm in the winter Do you struggle with that because the societal sort of customs would say you're a psychopath? Yes, because I tell people that and they're like you're psychopath and I'm like I'm not talking about Stuffing him and having him in the corner of the room just looking at me for the rest of my I don't want his face right Taxidermy. I just want his fur to line a pair of gloves. Why is that so weird? I completely agree and I would spend a lot of time thinking about that of like I would have to explain it all the time And then people would be like I bet Dave's got bodies buried somewhere Yes, make that natural job if you can do that if you can separate. Oh my god Like if it seems so much harsher to me to just leave your animal Laying in a like a facility somewhere and like all right You guys take it throw it in and center it or somewhere and send me the remains that somehow more Well, cuz it's like we do that with people Yeah, isn't that like we don't win like grandma's gone. We're like get her out of here like we don't want to be near She's dead. Yeah, yeah She's all dead now. Yeah Get that out of here and it's so weird at like Very few other cultures treat the dead like that. Yeah, it's like this literal taboo this like toxic Horrible thing that we have to like immediately remove from our press like I'm feeling a slight discomfort get it away I know I when people have a memorial like six days after and it was an unexpected death. Yeah I want I think like yeah, do it right away before you fully processing the grief it makes sense But also I'm always blown away that they're like all right. Let's get this out of here Disgusting start planning call them get everyone on the phone show people have funerals within 24 hours. Yeah Like it's crazy how quickly people do like a week is actually like good on you you waited a week Like really evolved of you You know, I mean I've had people tell me that they weren't willing to wait for people to fly Oh, so when so's in another state they can't get a ticket until I guess they're missing grandma's funeral It's like it was four days ago Oh, it's a very very Strange relationship we have with death and I think that our animal sort of embody that but also killers never gonna die Yeah, you definitely I'm not in denial at all, but I also think That acceptance. I mean if we're on this planet and seeing all the cycles and knowing these lifespans and the existential nature of like I spent I think a lot of my last stand-up stuff I haven't released it yet But it's all the stuff I did at the fringe was a lot about like Entering into these physical forms and the deals we're making potentially to do that We're really just my way of accepting what it is that dogs don't get to live as long or that we slaughter every Every bovine all the cattle and then we just we devour them Yeah, but like so that I started thinking of it from the point of like if you did enter into earth Maybe that's part of it to go and like I want to go for X amount of time like you can be a rat I want to go a little longer. How about a monkey? And you start like so like so because like I'm an atheist and I'm like this all bullshit But if it worked and you actually could like choose yeah, like you know like there was like a checklist or like a sign-up sheet Yeah, and then you were like and then maybe you re-up each time and you would choose something different each time Because what what being a human a lot of ways feels like when you meet your soulmate or a close friend or an animal Very close with isn't if there's like this connection from elsewhere as if you were up there with them like we should go to earth at the same time Then you're you and they're a dog You know like well, this is really unfortunate because you're about to bounce up there Biologically ahead of me. Yeah sucks way ahead. Yeah, that's true because that that's why sometimes it's like There are certain pets that I understand like people who have parents Mm-hmm, which I'm like, oh why would I have a I don't want to pet I don't want to turn it but I know Yeah, also people used to keep crows as pets. It's illegal now, but I don't like that and I'm like a conservationist I don't know there's some protection. There's a man that protects people from just met some pros today walking my dog And I feel like we hit it off. Yeah, crows are awesome. They're really smart also if you give them Cheetos They'll come back every time you walk your dog and they'll start bringing you stuff. They will Yeah, I love it. I love crows. They're and they are really long lived. Have you seen the documentary bird brain? No It's phenomenal. Is it on Netflix? I think it's on the PBS app. Oh, okay Well, I am legit and like logged into that already. Oh perfect. Yeah, it's really really good. Oh great. Yeah, I'll definitely check that out All right guys. I want to take a quick break from the show to thank a new sponsor for this week's episode shaker and spoon Shaker and spoon is a monthly cocktail subscription box that delivers the craft cocktail experience Right to your door now I know that you've probably heard me say this on the show that I don't really drink actually. I don't drink at all Which is why maybe you're thinking this is weird Why would you be working with shaker and spoon? Well, just because I don't drink doesn't mean my friends don't And it also doesn't mean that I don't love to throw a great party and let me tell you what I just recently got my own shaker and spoon box and it was so cool I got the one that centers on a bottle of rye the way that it works is each box centers around a different type of liquor So you choose your liquor and then you get all these really amazing mixers and fruits and there's like special recipe cards So that you can make honestly a really unique cocktail So I got the rio my box and it came with like I'm not even kidding like all spice extract orange oil Habanero cocktail spice all these interesting bitters Candied ginger Candied fennel seeds like things I would never think of to make incredible cocktails with and What were some of the cocktails I was able to make an eastern sour a mystic mule and a mmm sugar and spice my favorite and Let me tell you what even though I don't drink liquor all my friends love where I whiskey though I was able to make myself virgin cocktails that tasted way better than anything I could have ever come up with at home So here's how it works you get a monthly box It's got three brand new original recipes that are created by world-class bartenders with enough ingredients to make 12 cocktails for from each recipe and like I said before that syrups It's bitters its mixers its garnishes Everything you could possibly need all you have to do is add one bottle of liquor and voila there you go So guys what are you waiting for I want you to try it out and I want you to tell me what you thought Just go to shaker and spoon.com and use the offer code nerdy for $20 off Once again, that's the offer code nerdy for $20 off at shaker and spoon.com All right guys, let's get back to the show So do you watch a lot of nerdy documentaries? I watch a lot of documentaries. I don't know that all of them are nerdy, but I try to like Be up to speed. I mean, I feel like they're all very valuable to but and maybe they are propaganda I typically tend to like Trust gnome chomp ski and I just think he's a well-educated individual But then I could be someone could go oh you idiot you fell for it. I don't know. I watched 13th. I really like that Yeah, it was good. I feel like yeah, I mean there when things seem to have sort of a tangible factual Thing about I I trust it. I mean, I know someone could say like well you see it if you're this lens I go all right the bird brain is beautiful because you were watching the birds physically do it like I know birds are doing Even if they were coached the fact that a bird could learn to be coach. It's amazing still really cool And it's like we see them do cool shit all the time like if you actually just sit like you can be in a city Yeah, and there's like pigeons everywhere doing weird shit and you just watch them for a while you're like that was fucking awesome It's a really smart bird. Yeah, yeah, you see birds do cool moves. You're like I like sitting and watching a bird that found something in the middle of the road and it knows the middle of the road is dangerous But it'll like hop out there and look around work out as long as it possibly can like ah shit Just sit there and wait for it all right traffic's clearing up water back at waste smarter than a three-year-old yeah, yeah Way smarter and even like our dogs you watch bird brains you like my dog couldn't figure that out There's no way my dog's actually not very bright, but he makes up for it in cuteness. Yeah, which is good Have you seen the documentary any quality for all yeah? Yeah, yeah, okay, so yeah, so I um was shooting in San Francisco a couple weeks ago And it was right during the state of the union whenever that was month ago maybe now and we were driving back from our location The like the DP and me and the producer and we were like we should turn it on and then we were all getting like Angry and like almost cry And you know, he did the thing with the like heroin addicted mom and the savior military guy I heard like adopted and it was terrible and I was like oh and then I got back to my hotel and Robert Reich was sitting in the lobby of my Oh nice and I liked it as little feet touch the floor He was very small and he was like I was like oh my god. You're in the lobby I like a fan girl. They've never done that. I was like you're in the lobby in my hotel and he was like Yeah, hi Bob and I was like I know your Bob and he was like I'm the door man and I was like no you're not No, you're not and I I thanked him for being a voice of reason and I was like I'm sorry I'm just really depressed because we were just listening to the state of the union and blah blah And I think he finally was like she knows who I am and so he'd like put his hand on my shoulder and was like we'll get through this nice It's like it's a rough time, but we'll get through it and then I tweeted yeah, and I tagged him in it And then he fucking liked it and followed me that way Oh, man, I'm so jealous It's like this is the greatest day of my life That's the fame though. We're talking about earlier That's where you want to be where you make a difference to people where they only know you if they have sought out something that has Some value to it. Yeah, because no one else in that hotel right knew the fuck who this guy was just like sitting here on this back Yeah, so we started talking earlier about like you feel like Reddison sometimes to put stuff out in the world Like and I was into this doc I bring this up all the time But I was listening to this interview one time and this girl was like this young singer songwriter And she'd got to start from a bunch of musicians I think she was originally from Tennessee and she'd made her way to like Nashville Then or maybe from New Orleans anyway. I don't remember her whole story They were like is it weird now that you're starting to become someone that people Like look up to yeah, you know, you're a big deal thing They look forward to you putting out new music and she goes we all need those little twinkle twinkles She goes I need him as she said that so genuinely and like so sweet like I need him And like that we definitely do you need your Robert Reich like yes, that guy's a twinkle twinkle to me I absolutely I'm glad he's existing I'm glad he's like fighting the fight He's really fun to follow on Twitter because he's always like here's what's going on Yeah, I love it. It's it's so nessa especially when you're just you start swirling sometimes in these days where like I subscribe to the New York Times what I do I canceled my paper Subscribe because it was just like so much waste yeah, and I was like I can get through three pages In the newspaper every day and then the other like 10 pounds just go directly in the recycle bin So I just do the digital one now and every morning when you're subscribed to the New York Times You get your daily briefing and I scan it, you know And then if there's anything that I'm like I want to read more about that. I'll read it But otherwise it's like okay, this is the news that's like important that just hit the press and it all sucks Yeah, it's also depressing And it's you're right. You're scrolling your Twitter feed or you're doing and to have these people even if they're talking about the same depressing things that are like hopeful and solution oriented And sort of just this voice of like I'm not a drift in a sea of crazy Yeah, there are days where I feel like there is no one sane who's left on this planet absolutely. I mean the the recent thing again like of guns going into teachers hands and classrooms That is the most insane like just the thought that we're entertaining it is too much to take the thought that our own President is suggest it's like and I feel like we shouldn't even have to do this Well, let's just break this down for a second. Yeah, your sister who is a teacher Can't hold a dead fish one of those gentle souls you'll ever meet. Yeah, she's not gonna hold a fucking glock right our teachers are severely underpaid first of all right, they have to buy their own crayons yeah and glue like what now So we're not gonna give them school supplies, but we'll give them all guns which they where do they put them in the desk exactly The kids already steal all their mints and kids. Yeah, are they gonna be wearing holsters? Like the Wild West. Yeah, which worked out really well It's like schools already which when we were kids did not have metal detectors and them but now they all have metal detectors So what is their special teacher line where they put their guns in the bowls and it like those around like the cops at the court house Yeah, crazy and then there is literature on this already There are people who are smart who decided to say what would happen if we armed a bunch of teachers And then they ran simulations Using like nerf guns or like electronic guns in a cafeteria or a Auditorium and then an armed shooter came in and then all the armed teachers fought back the shooter and guess what more people fucking died Every fucking time way more people die of course of course obviously I can't even create another analogy would be as a sign to be like and there I've proved it Oh, there's like some sort of fallacy about that like like when something is so ridiculous that you have to invoke Hitler Like I never heard it and then and you can't tell the difference Like what's farce and what's real like that's the world we live in Abs and what you're saying about like people being fighting the fight but also being knowledgeable because like following a lot of comedians They make sat you know like snappy points and stuff like that. I think that's funny But it's not the same as like well here's legislation that's currently in the works that will that it on you go Okay, good. I don't pay attention to that I don't make sure like my local representative is familiar with that and so maybe there's some value to that Yeah, they're starting to know like I know who district 43's council member is this year You know, I know that are we in the same district? Are you shift? I'm in the 34. Yeah, we're really lucky I know I call every time like I'd like you to fight net new travel like way ahead of you Yeah, it's gonna sad I don't even feel like I have to call the dude like he's like I call with some recommendations I have you thought about oh, yeah, that's a way better It's we're very lucky. Yeah, that way we live in this district. I know yeah, I feel and part of me feels like maybe I should move Right, I know it's like my voice has more weight Yeah, but I did that for years. I lived in Texas and it was like two sides of the same like I was like am I throwing my vote away Living in Texas. I struggled with that when I moved to New York during the Obama The first Obama campaign Because I was like okay if I vote in Texas I can keep my address there and vote there and he won't get elected in Texas or I can vote in New York where he's already gonna get elected Yeah, and it's so hard that you have to be strategic about your vote in this country Yeah, very bizarre and the Jerry mandering and just all those things that like Requiem for the American Dream is a great numchomsky one like really talking about like the string pullers and that top ultra Evil 1% and the methods they've like enact that you see them tangibly like this is what has been done and what is being done And I think those people just kind of crawling out of the shadows now. I'm feeling more comfortable Like oh, we can show our faces the American public is like Inundated with bad TV and fighting amongst each other We can just slide in the back door here and start pulling strings directly And that's how it feels to to be a part of it and go like but but maybe you know history has always had I don't was it Mussolini that they hung upside down the street for a few days? I don't know Someone's doing this a while ago and I was like getting all excited like Oh eventually things right themselves. Well, that's the thing It's so weird when you can literally look somebody in the face and be like What you're saying is legit on the wrong side of history and they're like is cool. I don't care How does Trump not I mean he knows it. He's not a moron I mean, he's a moronic smart guy, you know what I mean like yeah But there are things where like he know he has to know when he's like literally falling asleep at night They're like oh, yeah, I'm gonna go down in history as like one of the bad guy if he but I I he probably wave goodbye to this long ago, but there's still part of me that hopes like he'll go look at you Your civic engagement is it an all-time high you're familiar with all these things you realize how our democracy works And this was difficult for me, but I was playing a character the whole time He would be immortalized in the halls of every improv studio in the world They just like that's next level so people hated him They hated him to a degree. You can't even fathom and even more bizarrely the followers just glomed on and the things They believe were unsettlingly They were so passionate about it. You could not wrap your mind around it like if he said Whatever blank certain followers make yeah, it turns I do hate that I know how to read you're right Oh my god, and it would be like a black mirror episode because all of us would be like What like you would take a long time yeah for us to come a right you know Like when people ask me as an atheist well, what if god just appeared to you one day would be like I mean I would talk to my shrink about it a lot before I decided whether or not this was a real You wouldn't engage God like I just walk it next you like hello if you have two seconds You just go right right there. I just kind of be like I don't know is the sahalus and I can't wrap my head Eventually I would come around because that's what it means to be a good scientist It would be hard at the beginning. Yeah, I wouldn't believe him. Yeah, believe Trump Oh, if he said I was playing the character thing especially if it was like the impeachment things were starting to heat up and all these indictments and the flipping and like Guys, I was kidding. I was kidding. I did all this funny years would be the first tweet though it would be I knew it C timestamp one hour Amazing my god, we've been talking for an hour Dave um, I want to know about your your favorite like guess that you've had on your show I want to know like what are some of the favorite child you don't have to do okay Some of the most fun things you've talked about like yeah because obviously I think tell me if I'm wrong Like I didn't really recognize you when you got to my door because you got like beardy and your hair is long and like I you've kind of like become one with the earth since the last time I saw you and you don't want to go out on the road Is much anymore and you're focusing on like Thinking and feeling sure and things of that nature like I probably characterize that a little too much Is the show like is it it like is that where you're putting all your effort into now? I certainly can't financially, but there's something about that that I think I enjoy I mean I spent a lot of the last couple years like pitching ideas and not really getting anywhere and just being like I don't I don't want to keep feeling that level of like rejection So making something that I really like and get to do is I mean I feel Really lucky to be able to do that and awesome, right? It's fantastic and the people that I've through whether it's like JPL or caltech or you know like like you and crystal I mean getting to chat with people like we were just talking about knowing that like the world is not this Isolating place where you feel Yeah, maybe I'm all alone in this. It's really nice. So yeah, I love that I really want to continue to do that. I mean as far as like a certain guest that pops out I can't really pick one there was so many things like a topic and science that you because Like did you ever study science in school? I studied civil engineering. Okay, okay, so I got like a minor in math So it's really interesting. Yeah, so you've got the math and like probably some more like Newtonian physics kind of a little bit Yeah, yeah, so is that like when people talk about physics? Are you like whoa? That's really because it is called the space cave. Yeah That the aspect of science that you're most drawn to or is it really just broad? So you and I I think first got acquainted through a gentleman who I believe's name is Daniel He never reached out after you were on my show or maybe he did maybe we I tweeted Daniel It's probably like Daniel underscore 33 or he's just an avatar a digital person that I've never met personally But he was like oh, I'd love these two podcasts to sort of intersect. Oh, that's awesome Yeah, yeah, and I think I tweeted at him after we're mentioned it on the show And I think he did like a couple tweets But he wasn't that a few stuff of that He's so funny if he's like yeah, I really have time. Don't want to see me Well, thanks for the intro Yeah But yeah, getting into doing that from that place of just like being interested in it I think especially in them we have beer on mine a lot of times too. Oh, I forgot. Yeah, that's like a thing you do But I don't think so I was like I don't know where that's from either it I think maybe I had a good conversation at like Waiting somewhere whether it was like oh this next train is down here for a while There's a bar next door or it was like at a ski lodge or an airport event Something where you like unexpectedly like all right, man. We'll have a good flight. That was really interesting Yeah, I'm never gonna see that person And it's such a weird and so I if now if that happened I could at least like give them some info and like come chat about it And we'll archive it Because I just like that like these little conversations you have that don't really have an agenda I mean sometimes we'll talk fully about someone's research and what they're studying and background Other times it just gets into more of like what they think life is or what's valuable to them and I just like that I think we with the psychom community, you know, still certain groups all contact and they'll be like We have to clear a lot of things before we can even potentially talk about that and like that's fair But I'd rather it was a little bit more transparent. It's true like definitely I find that when I have NASA people on yeah, yeah, they're more hoops because they just have a rule within their organization That when they talk about anything having to do with the work that they do at NASA they're representing NASA Yeah, so they have to get a lot of and I've interviewed people for TV at JPL before or even at other NASA facilities and there's always PR person sitting right then they're like you can't talk about that. You know we can't can you guys edit it and you're like I know Which I get and I do love to a certain degree that like when you hear of Nobel prize winners or or the The things that we've accomplished like oh, I did all kind of happen in a clandestine way I don't bug us. We're just working on it But I also like to get people fired up to get them more excited like I would imagine all the little kids that saw Falcon heavy go up and see the starman and go whoa Hopefully they got really excited But I also think along the way if they followed Elon Musk on Twitter and followed SpaceX is going on They'd be even more excited. Oh, yeah, so then theoretically when they do this like knowing the steps That's the best part of science is like this is what they want to do this way think the results gonna be and then they're gonna do it So I want that to be a little bit more of them the way it goes, which I think it does but I love that and I love that you have this passion for talking about it with people because I do think that sometimes Even this show Can get I try really hard to I'm I just started five sentences And the thing is that To be understandable and Accessible and all that but at the same time sometimes I get in my own head I know that I was talking to somebody recently I don't know if the episode will have aired already or is going to air But a physicist named Adam Becker who is a new book out and we started talking about philosophical monism and deism Didn't find it just kept talking about it as if everybody listening would know what we're talking about I don't know those yeah, well because fucking people just don't why would they if they've never taken But I literally lose so many god like oh sorry Modism and dualism did I say deism on dualism? Yeah, so whether You believe and most modern philosophers are Monus meaning that mind in the brain are two sides of the same coin But they're historical philosophers and some modern philosophers who still hold that like Mind and spirit and soul is like a separate entity from the brain And that it's yeah, and so that's kind of that the modern neuroscience whatever But didn't define it just kept talking about it at this level where I'm sure people were like fuck you Like I don't even know what you're talking about what sometimes that can be fun to listen and not I mean I get a kick out like sitting next to two people like I don't know most these words But at the same time I do worry that maybe my show is Narrow to some extent like I try to put up do you have like a listener surveys on your website? Now it's I would say but densest collection of introverts the world's ever seen I feel great survey I can give you that if you're interested because people do take it really Even if you just put it on your website because they're like bored It's awesome and they'll take I've like 700 people wow Taken my survey and you can figure out like oh, okay, so this is like the average age and of the people like my Lissership is 80% male which bums me out you guys like what the fuck tell your female friends To listen to the goddamn show. I don't get it But then you'll know if they have kids and you'll know what kinds of jobs that they do and that and it's really interesting to me to know Like do most of the people listen to show Study science Or are they like I don't really give a shit about science. I just think that like it's fun. I don't know Yeah, I mean we we got a lot of interaction on professor blast off and I feel like it was a lot of science people Because they would write in and be like we had a lot of our listeners on the show Yeah, that's an easy way to like source guess But also fun too because like they want they knew kind of the silliness they were getting sometimes people would come in and not know and then There'd be all these weird bizarre things happening. They'd be like I know. We're just gonna chat about my research My whole life's work. No, no, no, that's secondary Tell me tell me how hoppy this beer it no But um, there were a lot of artists like so scientists, but there were a lot of artists as well like animators and illustrators And people that have jobs who like Really, you know a lot of men not need to and need something to kind of like take their mind away Oh, yeah, cuz that's the thing too like it's not a random sample People like I don't listen to podcasts. I don't have like you don't either that so it's a lot of podcasters are podcast Fnatic and when people are like what are your favorite podcasts? I'm like I'm terrible like I'm literally hiding my face I don't listen to podcasts. It doesn't work for me right when I'm on the elliptical I need visual stimulation. That's when I watch sitcoms And when I'm in my car, I listen to classical music because we talked about the road rage thing Something to calm me down. Yeah, I also if you haven't noticed fucking talk too much and If I were to listen to other people having a conversation it would be fucking frustrating that I couldn't like oh Join in Just not my way But they and then interactive podcast exactly fuck that noise till I can be a part of it No, but there are people who listen to podcasts because of the nature of their work. Yeah, and I forget about that Mm-hmm. It happens sometimes on the show where I'll be like if you're pipetting pH buffer right now and then I'll get tweets where I'm fucking pipetting pH buffer That's so cool I know what I know pipet I know what that means pH buffer is usually what you see or it's literally just Water with food color in it whenever you see really bad stock photography of science lab Where it's like I'm holding four beakers each with a different color liquid. Yeah, yeah, or I'm holding up a test tube looking at it like longingly And it's bright yellow. Yeah, it's like they're not analyzing anything right there It may be pH buffer because it's got a bright color. It's how you figure out what the pH is of something. Oh, yeah So we've moved on from like litmus strips It's more sophisticated than that. Yeah, like you put in a buffer and then you have a machine And you calibrate the machine to the buffer because the buffer is always a very specific pH And then when you test other things with the little electrodes in it then you'll know exactly So like you'll put in a buffer of like two and seven and ten and it has all these calibration points And then when you test another liquid it will give you like to the number Like this has a pH of 7.693 And you're like legit Whereas the litmus strips you're like somewhere between six and eight you know, I think it's not quite as Do you already have a PhD? No, I thought oh you started using it. I have a master's in neuroscience I started a PhD. I dropped out and then how did chemistry and all this get involved? I worked in a neuroscience lab and I um kept the cells happy and so it required a lot of chemistry To make our own medium the stuff that eat and shit in and clean it and I yeah, I was like the cell culture Bitch for a long time. So there's a lot of head for I would have been really into podcasts Yeah, but I didn't know about them because if you're dealing with like Brain tissue and cells and stuff and you have headphones on with classical music I mean that's an intro to a horror film. Yeah, but that I did that a lot actually But I also listened to a lot of punk rock in the lab. Oh, that's right. Yeah I would go to the lab after midnight Which is so weird because people come in and out all day within their dirty and they're annoying In fact, my cells and I get pissed so I would actually do most of my lab work in the middle of the night I was creepy. But yeah, like to think that you know when you lift off like I'm thinking of that's typically a start of maybe like lawn order episode or something Yes, whether you lift off the headphone and we can hear like I think you wore a rancid shirt Maybe when you hit my show you hear rancid like coming out of the headphone and like that's a typical Yeah, I don't think people would believe that. Yeah, what is it girl that here at one o'clock in the morning? Oh, that's happening in universities all over the country That's so cool. It is yeah, it's so funny how under their lab coats. They're just covered in tattoos And yeah scientists are an interesting bunch. Yeah, I like my people me too. I mean for you being Not admittedly, but like you have referenced several times like I'm an atheist. Mm-hmm. So like the pursuit of the brain What is it so is it just so bizarre that we're humans and have consciousness or like do you want to figure out things about it that might Explain why we have it or what it is. Yeah, I mean I think for a lot of people who are really into physics and a lot of people who are really into neuroscience and I could be wrong I don't want to speak for everybody, but there are these like frontiers That still exist in these fields and not that every field does because every field does have these like bleeding frontiers But like cosmologists for example are like yeah We don't know what most of the universe is made out of like that dark matter thing dark energy Yeah, we don't know we got to figure that shit out And I think with neuroscience it's the same way like that holy grail of neurosciences. How does brain become mind? I don't know I bring this up to the scientists of like I think I always go to that They're like well, you can't factor that in but it's like I always want to say why mm-hmm That's why and there is no why it's just just just happened and we're figuring out how yeah But then when you look back at evolution There kind of is a why oh this thing prevailed because yeah, but only in hindsight in hindsight Yeah, so the consciousness would you say like do we have a because like why So and some people think they consciousness is like heavily linked to language That there was this explosive neuronal developmental thing that happened when hominids developed sort of the sophistication to be able to communicate in a way that's you know animals communicate And I think we're learning every day that animal communication is actually way more sophisticated than we thought But there's still something about symbolic interaction like being able to like draw pictures or quantify Things with numbers or categorize with whether it's verbal or not written language that Totally expands our ability to think in an abstract way And so there seems to be some sort of relationship with language and and sort of that type of sophisticated thought But I don't know because I think dogs are probably conscious don't you But like is it a different kind of consciousness? Yeah, right like they probably don't have metacognition And that's the really interesting thing like they can't think about the fact that they're thinking That's what I've been thinking about a lot Yeah, it is like we are in a brain that only had it has limits But we never think that way if if like There was a huge board that was presented to you with an outrageously long algorithm Or just problem math problem you had to solve and then on the other room there was a bird And it was presented with like a physical problem to use a stick to knock something over The bird doesn't look at itself and go oh, I'm too stupid I don't know what this is It's dumb little bird brain. How do I do this? No, it just keeps trying over and oh, but we would look at the board and like I wish I wasn't so dumb Oh, I'm so sure And we're also okay because of that same thing We're capable of doing stuff that we talk about on skeptic sky my other podcast all the time which is we can Understand our limits and understand how to surpass them so we can say okay, even though My gut reaction tells me that this is the answer I know that I fall victim to confirmation bias all the time So if I think try to think past my confirmation bias and look at this from a skeptical point of view Then I can actually get to the root of the real answer to this problem and that's fucking awesome and Understandably most people don't think that way because it requires a lot of mental energy and it kind of It also requires a type of humility that's not fun. It requires you being like I'm probably fucking wrong right now And that hurt. I nobody wants to be wrong. It's like a shit feeling Yeah, but once you do it enough you just kind of get used to feeling shitty and wrong all the time And then it's cool because the shackles come off and you can be like I'm wrong all the time I can try this and maybe it won't be right and I can try that but it's great because then you can really I think start to exercise True critical thinking in a way that you cannot have without metacognition Certain people I I've had none that passed like what is true But you must know certain things you're like I've tested this beyond any level of reasonable doubt There are truths to being alive to being human I mean, but even those fundamentals if you talk to a physicist are like they're true in so far as they fit the model right now Yeah, so you know I think that luckily my background in sciences focuses mostly on the statistical side of the mathematical spectrum not like the Calculus side and so I see Better in terms of like probabilities and I think that that's really what truth is about It's about things that have higher levels of probability. I don't think you can ever say without beyond a shadow of a doubt That this is the way it is. It's never gonna change. It's yeah That's not being a very scientific thinker. It was a highly highly highly likely that you know This is the way it is because we've got all this evidence and we've got all this um Corroboration and you know, we we feel pretty confident that this is the way the universe works We've backed it out and we're gonna go with that until we have something that up in some model Oh, that's truth. Yeah in my view. Yeah temporary truths. Yeah. I mean, it's always temporary But sometimes it's temporary for 300 years Sometimes it's temporary for like a week. I mean, you know, it's just that's how it works. Yeah And it's cool to think that way because I think then you lose all of that bullshit that a lot of people have about how like scientists or Two materialistic and they're too up their own asses and why can't they just admit that there's love and passion and meeting and you're like What the fuck are you talking about like science just means that we've got a pretty good idea about things and that when we get a better one We'll fucking shift over to that. That's how I've always thought about it But you have a sophisticated understanding of science a lot of people don't they don't know that that's what science is Yeah, that's true I think the science is like literally people going like I'm right near wrong And God is stupid That's not science like that's a big any I'm cool with God. I just don't really buy it. Yeah, but I don't mind if other people do Yeah, I feel the exact same way yeah, and but if I'm honest sometimes they do these things I'm like now I now I hate your God. Yeah me too, but that's more like honestly. I hate what you're evoking in the name of yeah Yeah, yeah, because I grew up in that what about you? No, I didn't I'm well my mom's extended family very religious and like I Did last-come extending a long time ago, and I did some jokes about the Pope Very in a very harmless like it was John Paul the second at the time the oldest the this huge hump on his shoulder He wasn't even he was like the the quasi-motopole. Yeah, yeah, we just look so awful And I was like he's gonna be out soon, and I think like the Catholic Church could bring in more new members If they had like a better looking hot sexy young new Pope. Do we think the new Pope now is gonna hot? I think people do yeah, he's a vast improvement. I don't know if I could go so far as hot I mean his personalities. Yeah, like so liberal. Yeah, I think people go. Oh this guy. Yeah, he does cool thing like young He's only like 70 But that was like the whole joke the premise of the whole joke was just that like oh, you know like he'd be on the cover of magazines and he'd be this hot thing and My mom's aunt I went to I was doing some shows and where she lived and she brought me in clothes And she put a hundred dollars in my pocket and then she whispered in my ear stay away from the sacred The creepiest thing and I'm just like oh that it could not have had a worse effect on me as far as I go I'm not gonna go with that. I like 10 12 years ago something like that I have to show you this Instagram So I tweeted the other day about an episode the last episode I had with a comedian His name's Ian Harris and he's like the skeptic comedian and we were talking about comedy and then I Tweeted quote many atheists by nature are punk rock and quote I talk nerdy with comedian or core an atheism and his work being a skeptic comedian and then I linked to the show Mm-hmm. My dad replied to the tweet just remember that every knee shall bow and every tongue confess the Christ He replies to and then immediately after I think notice the error of his ways love you honey And I love that I do I had to I had to screen grab it's like when you're when you're not super religious But trying to be supportive I just can't help it. That's yeah, that's America. I know but I love that he supports you and loves you And I have took a long time did it really Very long time this dude called to interview me one time Yeah, and I ended up just talking his ear off the whole time because he was brought up in this sort of like cult And he was like I left the cold but my family in spider It was like Scientology S where it's like there's just a cut you off you know that and they like they couldn't do that So they just told the other parishioners like he's taking some time for himself or something that effect and sort of try to keep good Graces with their church and also their son and I was like I like that I mean at least they're giving they're fighting off that urge to do that thing which is so bizarre of like Well, if you ask it of me if you ask me to be cruel or heartless or all these things that humans are you would think religion is trying to stop you from doing Yeah, oh man. I know it's growth. It's real gross And it's nice to see when people like we were just talking about how you know believe what you want to black I could give a shit. It doesn't affect me until it affects me then I'm gonna be pissed Yeah, and like how people evoke the Lord's name to do horrible things You see the flip side of that where people you like where people rise up against what the expectation is of being a gross person Yeah, oh, but religion might require that you and they're like fuck that like religious personal to me I'm not gonna ever desert my child. Yeah, exactly. It's super cool You'll see these ultra-christy people are like yeah my kids gay get over it. Yeah, you can't touch My relationship with my kids and that's all you Yeah, a friend and her son has sort of prohibited her from seeing her granddaughter because she's gay and it Nothing makes me more angry than that. It's just so cruel and heartless and Spineless and hiding behind this book and just be like I want you to get into Kingdom of heaven So until you're not gay not much I can do I just I can't hate anything more than that and part of the reason I get so upset by it is because When you really do take a step back like big big back like you were talking about this very cosmic perspective Like being out in nature and like observing and experiencing How grand things really are this existential view of things and you're like really like you're pissy because this person is like got this one Quark that you find weird and don't understand because it makes you go you yeah or it makes you like be like But a penis goes into vagina and then I'm thinking about penises and penis is touching and it's freaking me out You know, it's like why and you know all those people who are like extra Fightful and awful about it. It like speaks to some sort of deep insecurity in themselves They're like but I like it when you kind of get towards my butt Fuck maybe I'm gay, you know, it's like this really weird thing that Ohio guy the representative Or state congressman or something like that. It was caught having sex with a man in his office I and I don't know why I didn't do this like 10 years ago I just wanted to start a website dedicated to those stories. Yeah, there's so many every year every few months There's one and yeah, of course it plays to that like the tighter you clutch to it and ring it out and go like But I'm not but I definitely I just hate it. All right. Let me just put this one in my mouth Everybody should be gay. Yeah, it's dumb It's so fun. It makes you wonder like if you could write one of the books like if you are just write an algorithm And press enter and just watch this ant farm crawl around and be like we put this new one in it says like people that have Thumbs shorter than X amount of we're gonna be hated watch it take place and suddenly you'd see people like March and I was like you short thumbs up edges well, and it had it's happened throughout history It's it's like some it's usually man obviously who like Gets powerful and then he's got some sort of really dumb insecurity because like mommy didn't hug him You know and like he doesn't like this one thing about himself So he bans all people who are like that from living. Yeah, you know, it's like you see it over and over anytime There's genocide anytime there. It's so like petty. Yeah, it's always the most petty shit Yeah, and you're like really when you really get down to it It's almost like a breath of fresh air when there's a geopolitical conflict that's complicated You know, it's you're like okay. Okay. Now I understand oh, but I see that side too. Oh, but yeah now I see that But when it's so simple and so petty and just so like juvenile Yeah, I just get mad like as a woman, you know, that's I think when you see women be like rap women rolled the world Fucking men I completely agree. It's so great like in Alabama with women like taking down Roy Moore essentially That's great. Yeah, I mean, oh man the have you seen D for vendetta? Yes, that's the what's her name when she shaved her head the worst accent she really doesn't help that film With that accent, but it's a good character I don't know why they just didn't let her be an American but The point no reason there's no reason. It's just so silly. Maybe people just don't buy it like Americans. They're too patreon One line written in the script. I'm studying abroad got it moving ahead But they had to maybe she just wanted to show off her chops or something because she has a great actress. Yeah, man That one with the movie itself is it ties into a lot of those things and like it's so apropos to the current state of things I've rewatched that actually. I've never seen it and no one really prepped me There's a he's good, but they didn't say like there's a like a soliloquy this dude gives within it where you're just like This could not be more appropriate But that's what everybody's saying about Handmaid's tail and I'm still scared to watch it because I think it's gonna freak me out Like it's a death of my soul and also oh my god, we've been talking for a long time I'm gonna let you go soon, but also Speaking of movies and good movies that are like really relevant, but also movies that I hated Mm-hmm. Have you watched all the Oscar movies this year? I've seen probably four of them depends on which I haven't seen the shape of water And I haven't seen Lady Bird yet. I haven't seen Lady Bird yet. I need to watch that I hated the shape of water. Oh really? Like with a burning passion. Maybe we'll revisit this later I really didn't care for the Phantom Thread. I haven't watched it. I love Paul Thomas Anderson, but it was I don't think it was the best year I don't know and I read all of these reviews of these movies and they're like they're layered and deep and I'm like no People are just stupid this movie was not layered this movie was not deep. It was not good It was just not a good movie and I don't understand what's happening in the world. Yeah I like to get out in the big sick. Get out was great big sick was great. I think three billboards was great I think itanya was fine. I haven't seen itanya actually billboards was just It was really fucking racist. Yeah, like in a way that made me uncomfortable. Yeah, there's just too much stuff too with like the racism I don't know. We get into film too much But it was the whole like the really violent scene and then everyone just carries on It's a bit but you know what I didn't get any context before I started watching that movie and about 45 minutes And I realized that it was a dark comedy And I was like oh, yeah, it's like Fargo. Oh this movie's great But at first I was like this is so weird. What am I watching? Yeah, and once I accepted that aspect of it I got into it more. I got I enjoyed it when I was watching I definitely enjoyed it, but then when I saw it was like being hailed as this Unbelievable thing. Well, that's what I'm saying. I think the standards are off You know how like it's a bummer that the awards are all based on what else was out that year because their years were Think it's got totally snubbed that were incredible and then their years were just like crash Yeah Last year when I liked Lala Land But I always felt like it should have existed in this kind of cult classic Yeah, it shouldn't have been an awesome movie, but then what's the one with Amy Adams and Jake Gyllenhaal the Well arrival was Amy Adams. Yeah, and now I got the other or she got snubbed She got another one. I don't know. I didn't see the other one. Oh, it's something at night night figure night creature. Oh, I watch it Yeah, it's crawler. No, that's not night crawler But that's Jake Gyllic-O-2 right? Yeah, yeah, this one's mostly like Amy Adams is the star. Oh, well, I fucking love her I'm gonna watch this movie. Yeah, yeah, I'll send it. I'll send you like it is I loved it I thought it was so overlooked. I thought it was one of the best movies. Yeah, I never even heard of it So it was pretty overlapped. Yeah, wow, and yeah, arrival for sure Goss and I loved that movie I did a whole episode with Phil Plake's whose science advisor on it. We talked all about oh, yeah He works on Bill Nye when I was there. I want to get him on my show. Wait, you were on Bill Nye I did warm up for Bill Nye on the first season and I was I was of course fondant on the second season Yeah, yeah, I saw oh no, you did it. I was thinking the first season guest in a panel on the first season And then they asked me to they hired me. Oh, nice. I did two episodes with Evan aired yet. Oh cool I'll be out later this year nice. That's so fun. Damn, we just Each other chips in the night. We need to hang out more. Yeah, you're fun. Thanks. So are you yeah? All right So oh, I end every episode with the same two questions. Okay, we got deep a little I think these will be good questions. I'm definitely interested to hear your Okay, your responses of them. Okay, think about the future. Okay, I saw your leather shoes And I thought they were my dog for a second. I was like oh, yeah, he's not here. He's at the groomers Okay, think about the future and Think about Whatever context is relevant to you right now like where you are in your head with your life with like Global issues whatever you want. It can be big. It can be small. Yeah Number one What is the thing that you're like upset about what have you been really kind of keeping you up at night like Possessed by worried about like the thing that's not looking good And then on the flip side of that Because you are hopeful and because you're you're actually have some optimism going for you What are those two things if you have to pick some right now? Interesting. Well, I think we talked about it a little bit I think When I would do those comedy clubs and the middle of nowhere I would the resounding response was there's a little too smart for them And it bothered me that that was something that would be can't sell enough nachos if the crowds not really You know head over heels belly laughing. So I think In the current state of things it makes me feel a little skeptical about the future of Fought out comedy. Mm-hmm. If that makes any sense. Yeah, but then the thing that gives me help is what we talked about as well Like you it's so vast in the ability these days to like Whether it's through podcasts or whatever to carve out a little niche. I I think that gives me some hope that like you can just kind of keep doing stuff and theoretically it should gain some momentum at some point You and I I think you're right. We have like a niche. Mm-hmm. Meish And hey, I don't like me. The shame like niche is trying too hard. Yeah, it's a boss. Yeah, it is This exactly like So yeah, I think you and I we have a niche with our show that like People who like it like it and maybe yeah, we'll gain more slowly but shortly That's like sometimes I'll be like oh, we should mark it more and yeah, but then also I talked to people How do I get more people to download and they're like you need dev celebrities and I'm like? Well, I don't want to do that. Yeah, exactly So I guess I just won't have that many people I live in a world constrained by my own stubbornness. Yeah, I know the answers to a lot of things and I refuse When I get told something like that like just get some influencers get some celebrities like I'd rather And then whatever terrible thing is that I just can't do it. I'm the same way It's like I do a show a smart show I don't dump people on my show like give me a smart celebrity's doing something really cool and smart like well talk to them But like it's not I'm not gonna seek them out because they're famous. Yeah, absolutely fuck that. Fuck that indeed Yes, and on that note Thank you so much for joining me. Thank you very much This is delightful good to see you again you too so much finding guys listen to the space cave download it subscribe all those things Oh, yeah, and everybody listening. Thank you for coming back week after week I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk nerdy Oh How to have fun anytime anywhere step one go to chumbacacino.com chumbacacino.com got it step two Collector welcome bonus come to pop a welcome bonus step three play hundreds of casino style games for free That's a lot of games all for free step four unleash your excitement Chumbacacino has been delivering thrills for over a decade So claim your free welcome bonus now and live the chumbacana life visit chumbacacino.com This is The best way to buy a car is the Werner way you'll find more value every day at Werner Hyundai That's more style more comfort and more warranty test drive the 2025 Hyundai Santa Fe with an all new epic style and comfort every Hyundai comes with owner assurance and america's best warranty A 10 year 100,000 mile powertrain limited warranty that protects you not just locally, but nationwide Enjoy five years of complimentary maintenance three from the factory plus two more from Werner Werner Hyundai dot com
