Hello everyone and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, February 3rd, 2020. And I'm the host of the show, Cara Santa Maria. I am actually right now in New York City, if I'm doing my math, right? And about to head out to Kazakhstan to watch a rocket launch, which I'm super excited about, but I'm really freaked out because it's going to be very, very cold. Wish me luck. It should be a lot of fun. And of course, if you're listening to this right when it drops on Monday, that means that there's an all new brain games coming out tonight on National Geographic Channel. So I hope you'll tune in and see what we're up to this week. All right, first I want to thank those of you who have made Talk Nerdy possible this week. Remembering that Talk Nerdy is a free service that I provide. So really the show is supported through ad sales, but I don't always sell ads. For example, this week there's no ad on the show. And so I really do heavily rely on the support from those of you who want to share to help it so that this show can continue to be on the air. And I have some really great supporters this month, this week specifically. I want to thank, I'm going to do these in order of lifetime support, I think, because I have some really top tier lifetime supporters. Let me just switch this up so I can do that. Wow, yeah, Jeffrey Suel. I think you get a legacy shout out. You are incredible. Brian Holden, second lifetime supporter, Gabriel Felipe, how to me, Gonzales. Phil T. Bear, David J. Smith, Juan, Ken Fyfer, Christian Jeffrey, David Compton, Juan Gutierrez, Jacob Rochester and Doug Petapier. Thank you guys so much. And then in terms of weekly support, those of you who are pledging at the top tier, but maybe haven't been doing it for as long. I also want to thank Daniel Lang. I want to thank the zombie drummer, Dutus Infanitas, Ulrika Hagman, Sinai, Pascuale, Jalati, and last, but certainly not least, Mary Nave and her son, Jim Cooper Schmidt. Thank you guys so, so, very much for keeping this thing going. All right, guys, this week is a really fun episode because I have the opportunity to sit down with Susanna Harris. She's a PhD candidate in microbiology at the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill, and the founder and CEO of PhD Balance, a collaborative community empowering graduate students to build their personal and professional resilience. So guys, without any further ado, here she is, Susanna Harris. Well, Susanna, thank you so much for joining me today. Thank you. It is an absolute honor to be here. Oh, I'm so excited to have a chat with you. I feel like there's so much that we have to talk about. But before we do, I thought it would be kind of cool to read the email that we received, recommending you as a guest. So, hopefully she's okay with it. She didn't write anywhere on here that we shouldn't use her name or share anything. So, this is from Anna and Anna said, I'm a listener of your podcast, which I love. It's interesting, but it's all very sweet at the top, but I feel weird reading it. But very nice things about talking already. And then she said, I have heard an interview with Susanna Harris and another podcast this week in microbiology and kept thinking how well she would fit as one of her interviews. She suffered and fought with mental health issues and is now established a group to give support to graduates undergoing PhD training, PhD balance. She's incredibly articulate and honest about her experience, very inspiring. Please check out this video. Thank you for your work in psych home and your promotion of diversity and science. You too are a role model. All the best Anna is not sweet. That is fantastic. Now I really want to know which Anna this is, but yeah, the internet people can be really, really lovely. They can be, right? And it's always refreshing when that happens too, because when you spend a lot of time on Twitter, you forget that. I think I'm coming to you. So, yeah, so she reached out. I immediately was like, yes, yes, yes, this is amazing. I watched a little bit of, like I've watched a couple interviews with you talking about some of the work that you do. So I thought we would chat about, I think, kind of both things today, both the academic work that you do, but also the kind of advocacy or maybe you could call it the kind of inclusivity and support that you do through PhD balance. So I guess to start, what are you studying where you at? Like, you know, what's your graduate experience right now? Yeah, what's my day job? So I am at the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill, and I've been here for about five years. I am studying microbiology, and specifically what I'm looking at is how different groups of bacteria will stick to plant roots. And okay. Yeah, it's a really fantastic project. It's nice to still be excited about that project. And the bacteria that you're studying are they bacteria that are like symbiotically living with these plants? Are they bacteria that are actually making the plants sick? Like what is the kind of, I guess, interest or the function around the bacteria? Yeah, yeah. So kind of, why do we care? I'm working on this paper right now, so that's the working on the introduction part. And that's all that's in my head. So the main bacteria we look at is bacillus subtlis, and this is a super common bacterium found in soils all over the world. Fun fact, it was found in the International Space Station. And... Oh, wow. Just kind of random. That's the one, huh? Right? There was like one... Yeah, one bacteria that was found there, that's the one. Yeah, yeah. But what's so cool about it, the reason, you know, they find that stuff everywhere is that it forms these really hard esports, which are basically like the seed version of a bacterium. And why we care about this is that when we add this bacterium to plants, a lot of different plants are then more able to grow, and they're more resistant to pathogens, so different fungus and bacteria that would normally invade the plant and kill it and reduce crop productivity. Adding bacillus subtlis has been shown from, you know, model organisms, like the one I work on to tomatoes and melons. And what we're really excited about is that we're looking at how different bacteria that are found in the soil might help bacillus subtlis to stay with the plant longer and allow us to use that instead of chemical fertilizers. Oh, very cool. So, it's, I guess, not the first thing that people think of when they think of bacteria as having like a strong protective mechanism, but this not only is, I guess, an evolutionary advantage, but also could be utilized by human beings. Potentially for commercial purposes. Yeah, absolutely. And in fact, it's already being sold by a bunch of different agricultural companies as plant additives. And one of the things we were really interested in is we're looking through the literature and found that there were, there was evidence that maybe bacillus subtlis and other bacillus species were really helpful, but in crop field settings weren't actually staying with the plant for long enough. Or at least not across its lifespan. And then we got this chance to talk with other scientists and more and more people kept saying, oh, yeah, we saw that we weren't really sure what to do with it, but it's already published that other people can do it. And so basically what we did is we came up with the system where we not only look at the initial colonization where the bacillus sticks still plant root, but we also look at what happens over time when we put it into a system that doesn't have as much of that sugar that the bacteria likes. And sure enough, we saw that the bacillus falls off of the plant root. Oh, fascinating. And is that kind of the the crux like the findings that that that you that you came to throughout your PhD research? A little bit. So, you know, as you know, with PhD research, you kind of end up taking these these very strange tangents where we originally realized it because I wanted to look at these inter species interactions between bacteria. So in the area around roots is called the risosphere. So, sphere just kind of that area around. And it usually includes the root itself as well as the soil around. And there are so many bacteria in that soil. And I wanted to look at how are those bacteria interacting with each other? Are they changing each other's behaviors? And we came up with this kind of this hydroponic system. And we're really excited to use the silicinate and MoDo. MoDo.us Visit modo.us for the best, free place social casino experience wherever you are. MoDo offers a huge selection of biggest style games with free spins, exciting promotions and always generous jackpots. You can waste your time with the others or you can win at MoDo. Register today at modo.us for your free welcome bonus. MoDo is a social casino no purchase necessary void with prohibitive play responsibly conditions apply. See website for details. MoDo.us If you're looking for a new spacious SUV, stop. Please don't pay more for less. Buy from Warnakia and save thousands. Interest rates as low as 0% or no payments for 6 months. Upside down on your tray, get up to 4000 over KBB from Warnakia. Test drive the Kia's Samantha with rugged good looks, advanced technology and luxury. If you haven't already made the switch to Warnakia, now's the best time. Get all the details at Warnakia.com. Make that switch, make that switch to Warnakia. Then it just kept failing. We're like, why is this falling off? Yeah, yeah. So, well that's why we started looking in the literature. We started asking around and saying, does anyone else see this happening? People said, yeah, but it doesn't really go with what is already talked about. We kind of just ignored that question side or it was brought up briefly, but we don't really know what to do with it. We found out that our system allows other bacteria to survive on the plant roots and to co-exist with the plant over time. That's really where we came up with this idea of, okay, maybe our system's not broken. We can publish the system. It's still really useful, but why is Basilis falling off and can we use this as a way to estimate what might be happening in those fields? That's fascinating. And so where along the kind of path are you? You have, and I guess we should talk about what some of these terms mean, but you are a PhD candidate now. Are you mostly finished with your dissertation? Are you still in the writing process? I'm still in the writing process. I'm fairly lucky here at UNC, at least in the microbiology department, that we are able to make our dissertation fill it with chapters that have been published already. So for instance, the system we came up with, we have a methods paper out there. So I'm able to use that as one of my chapters. The big hold up right now is that this final set of experiments that we're doing to pull together this paper, showing all these really cool results, just piecing that all together, doing the last bits of experiments, and you know, the science gods that be, I don't know, have realized that it's the final push. And so they're throwing every distraction that they can at us. Yeah, it's, the bacteria know. They know when you've got a presentation coming up or you need to get a paper out, and they're just like, yeah, not today. So you're, are you still having to collect a little bit of data to get this paper done? Yeah, I am. And it's, it's kind of an interesting time because my PI, my, the primary investigator who runs our lab recently accepted a position up at UMass, Worcester. And she, so she actually moved in December, and we are kind of packing up the lab, figuring out what to do with that. And so I have a couple, a couple months, maybe to get the rest of the data that I need, and, and really write this up to be able to graduate, hopefully in May. Oh, very cool. Gosh, you're so close. I'm so jealous. Yes. How much longer do you think you have? I know it's a horrible question. No, it's not. It's, it's an important question, I think. So I, I'm a third year. And if everything were to accelerate or to kind of go at the pace that it's been going, I would actually be doing the second half of my calls this coming semester in the summer semester. And I would be getting my proposal approved, and I'd be getting IRB approval. And I could apply for internship, which, which would mean then that next year, I would work on my dissertation full time. And then the year after I would do my, my internship, because for a peachy clinical psych, you, you do a full clinical psychology pre-doc internship in addition to all the practicum hours that you get prior to internship. Yeah, it's a lot. That's kind of a hybrid. It's a, you know, it's a scientist practitioner degree. But my, the TV show that I am on, it looks like we may be able to film another season. And it's just going to kill me to try and do all of that at once. So I'm thinking I'm actually going to take next semester. I'm going to take leave next semester, which will push me back a year. So I'll be on a six year track instead of a five year track, which I'm okay with. And that means that I'm about halfway finished at this point. So I would be set to graduate if everything goes right in, let's see, what year is it? It's 2020. So in 2022, is that sound right? Yeah, yeah, yeah, I think so. Yeah, I think so. Yeah, yeah. So yeah, we'll see. You never know. Life takes you on a lot of twists and turns. But basically, I'm done with my coursework other than like two classes, basically my calls. And my final assessment class, I need to take still. And then I'm about halfway done with my practicum hours. So this allows me some breathing room to not have to like lose my mind getting my practice hours done. My school requires just over 1500 direct practicum hours prior to, prior to interviewing for or applying for your internship. Wow. And yeah, and the internship in, in clinical psych is kind of like the match program in med school, like you apply to a bunch of schools, you rank them, they rank you, you hope that you match. Because there's, you know, a lot of people applying for these accredited sites. So the hardest thing for me is I think going to be that year long internship. As of right now, I've been able to, I've been able to kind of balance work and school. And I've been able to really like focus on my mental health as well and do, you know, a lot of the things that I, that I want to do that kind of bring me joy. An internship is going to just be a big lifestyle change for me because it's like a nine to five 40 hours a week classic position, which I don't, I can't remember the last time I wasn't freelance and didn't have like a really flexible, weird, build your own schedule. So that's going to be a big challenge for me. I know I'm going to like it, but it's going to be, I think it's going to be challenging for me. Yeah, well, and just seeing all the really cool different projects that you do and that you've done, I, I have to assume that, you know, you're going to be doing the 40 hours a week, but let's be honest, you're not going to just be working 40 hours a week. Yeah, I think that realistically, I'll be able to still podcast both on this show and on skeptics guide to the universe, but I probably honestly won't be able to do any TV stuff. I think I'll have to be keeping talks and things like that to a minimum, because otherwise I'm just not going to be as present as I need to be for the, for the clients for the patients. As it is right now, I'm, it's, it's starting to become really difficult because consistency is important in therapy, right? Like when you establish this relationship with, I work with kids in foster care right now, girls who are living in, in a residential facility. And every time I have to leave for a week and there's like a gap in their service or every time I have to switch from a Tuesday to a Thursday or a Friday, I feel guilty. I really do like it actually really affects me because I feel like I'm not being consistent for these kids who their whole lives have just been made up of inconsistent adults. And so the one thing I really want to offer them is like a consistent kind of, what's the word I'm looking for like guessable like they know when I'm going to be there, right? And, and it's reliable every time I'm there. And so every time I'm not able to do that for them because of the work that I do, it's, it's kind of like, it's not a good feeling. Yeah, well, I mean, I think that just speaks to like how dedicated you are not just to doing a PhD, right? Or getting the title, I think that that's so important when you're doing a PhD to, to be doing it because you have this passion for it. And it just sounds like you have even more than that, you, you feel this great responsibility to help other people. Well, and the thing that I think is important and like I'm really interested to hear your perspective on this is kind of like, there's a lot of different reasons people get PhDs, right? And I think you really can't slice and dice them and subdivide them and they all play off of one another. They're inextricably linked. I think for a lot of us, there is this deep kind of pressure and whether it's external or internal or some combination of the two, it's an achievement that we have kind of put, put into our consciousness as like the end all be all in our field, right? And once you have a PhD, you have the type of expertise or the type of authority where it's sort of not that it's beyond reproach, it's absolutely not beyond reproach, but it, it establishes kind of a, I don't know, a blanket, respectability in the field. That said, it also, I think for many people serves as a, as a credit to the eventual career trajectory that they plan to take. And what I see a lot of times, especially in some of my friends here in LA who went to really competitive universities, who got PhDs, you know, in very difficult fields and really, really unhealthy labs. They ended up leaving academia altogether and not just leaving academia, but actually going into fields where they could have probably gotten the same job with a bachelor's degree. Moto was a social casino, no purchase necessary, void with prohibit, visit motor.us by mortetails. It's time, Moto.us The best way to buy a car is the Werner Way. You'll find more value every day at Werner Hyundai. That's more style, more comfort and more warranty. Test drive the 2025 Hyundai Santa Fe with an all new epic style and comfort. Every Hyundai comes with owner assurance and America's best warranty, a 10 year 100,000 mile powertrain limited warranty that protects you not just locally, but nationwide, enjoy five years of complimentary maintenance, three from the factory plus two more from Werner Werner Hyundai dot com. And it's really interesting to see the, I guess the way that they sort of cognitively work through what that journey has meant to them, obviously they still use their PhDs every day. A PhD is something that is like massively universally helpful. But it is always really interesting to me to see what the kind of path is for a lot of people and sort of why they ended up pushing through and doing that thing, even if in the future, maybe it isn't, it hasn't been like a requirement on their, on the resume, for example. Yeah, no, absolutely that it's this, it's this like you said hybrid of just all of these different motivations where I definitely resonate with what you're saying as far as kind of credentials that I am a very opinionated person and there's something very attractive about being able to walk into a room and have a little bit of credit already going for me, especially I think I was, I was extra aware of that. And I was in corporate banking growing up in the Midwest, the group in Iowa. And one of the places that she worked was actually a very kind of old boys club that they actually, they had this thing and it's always going to stick with me where she went to this big corporate event and it was held at this golf club place, I forgot what the actual term for golf places. That sounds about right to me. Yeah, that's good. Or people play golf, but they actually, they chose this place not realizing that women weren't even allowed on the course. Yeah, and I think it just really stuck with me of, you know, I think still in our society, you have to kind of prove yourself a little bit more as a woman, especially in science or in business. And I wanted to have something behind my name that would kind of boost me back up to a place where people might pay a bit of attention. And then, you know, it's, it's combined with that I just really love science. I fell in love with microbiology one day in junior year of high school in some AP bio class. We learned about bacteria and viruses, I think for two days and I was like, that's the coolest thing I've ever heard. I just want to know everything about this. I want to understand, you know, and just be able to see the world in that different view. And then I found out that I could do that for a job and I just started working towards it. PhD made sense. And I'm certainly still very glad that I chose this path, but it is interesting now looking back and trying to understand, you know, why did I, why did I choose this? Did it make sense given my goals? And, you know, why did I, why did I stick with it? Yeah, especially like there were some really hard times in the middle. Kind of what else could I have done instead? Mm-hmm. And so now that you are kind of seeing the light at the end of the PhD tunnel, have you been thinking more about how your goals have maybe changed throughout the graduate school process? Like do you plan to stay in academia? Do you plan to go into science communication full time? Like do you do know kind of what you want to do after you walk across that stage? A little bit. It's nice to have, I just like deadlines. So it's nice to feel like this is coming to an end point. No, my goals have totally changed. So when I started grad school, I was already fairly sure I didn't want to stay in academia. I like the idea of the mentorship aspect of being a PI or a lab director. But I wasn't totally sold on the entire system. And that has certainly cemented itself. But it was about two years into my PhD, I decided to set aside some time to start doing a little bit of science communication. There's a really fantastic science center here in Chapel Hill called the More Head Planetary Man Science Center. And I took this training course over a year where they taught scientists to turn their own research into something that was hands on and exciting for about middle school age kids. I got the chance to go to these different middle schools in rural North Carolina and remember how cool science was. Yeah, and I, it was really exciting. It was super draining for me. I'm not an extrovert by any means. But then I found a way to still get that kind of practice. And now I get to be a trainer for the same exact system or that program and help other scientists communicate their science. And I think that that is my passion is definitely kind of connecting people who wouldn't necessarily communicate. So scientists really want to talk about their science. They have this idea that everyone wants to learn about it. And I think that they're, they're right. They just have to do it in a way that can be appreciated. So something along those lines, I'm looking into going into science communication for businesses that kind of looks like marketing. It kind of looks like, you know, working with research development as well as PR. But yeah, that kind of middle ground of how can we get these people to just have a conversation and see eye to eye. Absolutely. And the cool thing about a PhD, I think probably one of the coolest things is that, you know, for a lot of people, it's one of the hardest things you'll do in your life. And it really does show that, you know, by the time you've, you've hacked your way through, it really shows that your resource fall that you have been resilient. That you are, you know, capable of solving really complex problems, capable of, of failing pretty miserable, and then picking yourself up and, you know, trying again until you figure out something that works. And so really it prepares you for almost any position after you get through like it doesn't necessarily even have to be in your field. It definitely doesn't have to be in academia. It's unlike almost any other type of training where, you know, we talk a lot about like things like lume city or like brain training games and the literature tends to show that like, oh, doing lume city makes you really good at doing lume city or that, you know, the GREs are really good at predicting how well you'll do on the GREs. But a PhD actually is really predictive, I think, of a lot of like life successes. It really does prepare you probably because it's like it's horrible. It's like it's a really gross system that really needs to be overhauled. And if you can get through that, especially as a woman, you can probably get through anything. Yeah, I absolutely agree with that. And I think that one of the postdocs I worked under who, you know, postdocs have been my saving grace that in in microbiology or in a lot of fields of bench science that they are someone who have already gotten their PhD have already gone through the system, kind of have that heart and stance, but are still really excited about science. One of the people who really helped me, especially in the middle of my degree, she had as her PhD advisor, someone who was really just verbally abusive. But this person, she said, you know, I got to this point where this, this PI said, why would you ask that question, are you stupid? And I said back like, maybe, but I still want to know the answer. And I think that has kind of been my motto of, you know, coming in, I wanted to be really smart. I wanted to do really great at everything. And now I'm just like, I want to get it done. I want to learn something. And, you know, I honestly, I don't care that much if somebody thinks I'm stupid because I'm just going to keep going. Yeah, yeah, no, absolutely. Oh, and that must have been really incredible to be able to, at the very least, whether you have, you know, really good mentors or not, at the faculty level, I do think that a lot of people have similar stories where they were able to connect with a postdoctoral fellow or they were, even were able to connect with a senior PhD student, like somebody who is maybe in a cohort a year or two ahead of them to help them navigate. A lot of the real challenges and to help them say, oh, steer clear of that lab, that guy is going to like harass you or, you know, over here, you might find a lot of really good support or, you know, they're going to take it personally if you go this route with your research. So if you want to avoid that minefield, maybe you can go this route instead. There's so much kind of political and emotional. If like so there's so many political and emotional issues that you have to navigate when you're in graduate school that a lot of people I guess don't really think about. No, and I was having this discussion with my. It's time to play big. A motto social casino. America's hottest free to play social casino X areas. Motto US has five casino games. It's time. Play big win bigger. A motto. US. Motto was a social casino. No purchase necessary void with prohibit visit motor dot US for more details. It's time. If you're looking for a new spacious SUV. Stop please don't pay more for less. Buy from one IKEA and save thousands interest rates as low as zero percent or no payments. For six months upside down on your tray get up to 4,000 over KBB from one to key test drive the Kia Samantha with rugged good looks. Advanced technology and luxury. If you haven't already made the switch to one to Kia now's the best time. Get all the details at one to key at dot com. Make that switch. Make that switch to one or key. The PhD balance team actually it's cool. There's a whole bunch of us but talking about how oftentimes you start a PhD and you're told sort of nobody can tell you how to do this because everybody's path is unique which that's really true. But that's a bit like saying you know I can't I can't tell you how to get across this forest because you're going to take different steps than I did and there's going to be different branches on the ground. Really the best resources are the people who are going through it. Like you said who are a couple steps ahead of you or have recently gotten through and they're the ones who are going to reach back and say hey you know go go around this obstacle or you know that just just know that this is going to be coming up for you. And I think what's been really interesting to see is that a person's experience can totally depend on who is around them and how willing or able they are to help them. True yeah and I think you see the same kinds of pressures and the same kinds of. Support structures in place that I've experienced from working both in academia but also in media like kind of going the academic route and also going to Hollywood route is that especially for women for people of color for like intersectional individuals who are dealing with a lot of kind of like systemic and institutional prejudice. What you often find is that there are the people who understand that we're not going to get through unless we support each other and you find the people who have been unfortunately kind of have internalized the very kind of American and I think cis white male you know Protestant whatever view that like it's dog eat dog it's cut throughout don't make alliances because helping each other is only going to make it so. You know so you have to beat each other in the end and it's so unfortunate to see people who are dealing with the same issues who come from similar backgrounds kind of being competitive instead of being collaborative it's just a really but it's a real bummer when that is the outcome which unfortunately I think sometimes I can't blame the person for that being their mentality because there's so many pressures that are putting them in that position. Yeah I think it's it's a hard one right I think it's it's so cyclical of saying well the culture is is competitive and this is what you have to do to get by and I mean so often you hear people say like well once I'm established then I'm really excited to take down these things but you know I don't think in academia you really do hit that point of stability maybe you know when you're 60 70 or so and what are they going to do to you but. I think that we all have I think we all have kind of a duty to take care of those people who come after us to you know what's the there's the phrase of like science isn't done until it's communicated that I think that that's true of the experiences we have in academia as well where it's like well how useful is it for everyone to relearn the same lessons we should be able to share them and also learn from them and say this is not okay. You know the system as it is is not okay and we can't expect somebody else to fix it for us. Absolutely you know when I look at the listenership demographics of my show and there's probably some real sampling bias because these are based on you know I don't just have access to that information I have to do a survey so you can click through on any episode of my show if you're if you're pulling it directly from my website and take a listenership survey and it helps me for. Advertising so you know that this show is supported by selling ads and by patreon and advertisers want to know like who's listening to the show like is you know is our product going to be right for them so I look at these demographics and I see that the probably the vast majority of the listeners of my show have high school diplomas not all but the vast majority also pretty big chunk have bachelor's degrees and then I think compared to other shows I probably have a larger percentage of masters and and and professors level in professional learning. So I think a lot of the people that are tuned in right now may not even be aware of some of the real institutional failures and some of the real struggles and pressures that many of us experience navigating higher education. So I wanted to point out I retweeted a tweet yesterday. From someone named Jacqueline Seagal who's also PhD candidate but she's studying social psych and she wrote academia is hard for married women academia is hard for single women academia is hard for women with children academia is hard for women without children academia poses unique challenges for all women it's almost like it was designed without women in mind and then of course other people are not going to be able to do that. And then of course other people added to that you know people of color here here слож older adults here here you know a lot of other people that don't fit that kind of again cis hetero white male and rich that's another thing and like people in poverty of course academia was not designed for them. And it's interesting that a I've gotten all sorts of horrible responses from people and like at a certain point you just have to kind of mute it because they're like I can't even deal with this they just don't understand. And and like it's difficult for me when people I guess see something like that and instead of understanding that that is a historical fact try to argue as to why that's not our experience. Oh my god. Yeah, I mean we yeah like we get this all the time which you know it goes it goes one of two ways one is somebody says well I had a great time I don't know what people are complaining about. You know and and it's not I mean generally it's from white cis men at least in yeah in my feed but you know it's it's from people of all colors and all genders saying well not me so it's not real and I'm like. You're doing a PhD in astrophysics don't tell me you don't know how statistics work yeah you know and also like just because it doesn't affect me it's not real is like the definition of privilege. Oh yeah. Oh absolutely you know and you look around and I just I love that treat I'm going to go have to find it and retweet it. But oh yeah she it was so great I mean it resonated so much for me that I I just had to retweet and then of course one like one person specifically because I think that he he's doing a little bit of the MCLion and thing because he's obviously intelligent and he's asking for evidence over and over which is like okay but he said you know saying that it implies it was designed by someone saying that implies it was designed by someone in this case big bad man but it's a system that evolved and we'll continue to do so accusations aren't the basis for positive change which of course I can't help but respond to and say like please don't mansplain to me about like how we women this should be affecting positive change against institutional disenfranchisement like what are you even talking about and he was saying you know basically I think instead of labeling and attacking your communication should be based on common ground and empathy which is such an eye role I think my response to something along lines of like if you don't think women have been using that tactic for centuries your your mistake and it hasn't gotten us nearly as far as we'd hope positive change takes hard work and dedicated activism and I think that's sort of the crux of this issue is that like we have been quiet and subservient and I think in many ways manage the egos of the people who hold all the power for a really long time and it has helped and it's gotten us somewhere but we're still it's 2020 and we're still not seeing equal opportunity like not to mention outcomes so like at a certain point is the rabble rousing and the being angry and the like saying what we what we feel I mean isn't that how progress happens is that there's people at the bleeding edge unfortunately in in this system doing that and saying that can literally get you blacklisted oh yeah oh yeah I mean like I look at it I don't know I just imagine can you imagine writing a grant to propose the academic system as it stands you know that everyone yeah hey and I did you want to fund this I'm like yeah that look bad oh absolutely you know we're gonna put a bunch of people who have never had any management training in charge of all different sorts of people however the the managers are going to be from a handful of backgrounds that were originally trained from like one background the best free place social casino experience wherever you are moto offers a huge selection of biggest style games and now introducing live blackjack roulette and casino hold them these are so much fun moto always has generous jackpots free spins and exciting promotions register today at modo.us for your free welcome bonus moto was a social casino no purchase necessary void for heaven to play responsibly conditions apply see website hello if you're looking for a new spacious SUV stop please don't pay more for less buy from one a key and save thousands interest rates as low as 0% or no payments for six months upside down or your tray get up to 4,000 over KBB from one a key test drive the key of surrender with rugged good looks advanced technology and luxury if you haven't already made the switch to one a key now's the best time get all the details at one to keya.com there now in charge of this entire generation of people who have no real understanding of what is required of them everything that they're judged by is subjective the amount of money and resources they have are a sensibly based on on their ability but really limited by what titles they're working under whether it's the institution or the manager itself and and then by the way the the next job you get your entire future career is judged by that manager if that person doesn't like you anymore well a good luck with with good job afterwards there's not very many other people who are going to vouch for you and yeah you can you can get totally blacklisted and all of these all of these decisions are made behind closed doors and I just I can't imagine anyone trying to write a grant in good faith saying this is the system I would propose because it doesn't make any sense oh absolutely not and as that as that um twitter person implied which I fully agree with it it's a system that evolves but it when something starts in a really entrenched way even its evolution can be slow and can be tedious and you know the people who ultimately have the power I think are going to do everything they can in their in their arsenal to hold on to it and to propagate it and so you know that's where nepotism comes from and that's where you know uh squashed opportunities come from and I think it's always amazing when you look at the historical data and you you look at you know how how the system is rigged now and you start to talk about it people go oh come on there's not a room full of like like angry men twirling their moustaches and you're like yeah exactly that's I know there's not it's not a conspiracy in the traditional sense it's institutional that's like what systemic and institutional means yeah well and and also there actual rooms of men making these decisions right that yeah and just because they're not nefarious in their you know proposals doesn't mean that they maybe don't have massive blind spot right right well and and like that twitter person brought up that I wish this was based on common gravel of course you do because it's uncomfortable right these changes yeah are uncomfortable especially if you're already sitting at the top of the privilege pile like no one no one really wants to lose the advantage they have especially in a system that is based on competition as it stands right now and it's it's gonna take people across the board saying this is not sustainable and even if I'm successful if the entire system is crashing and we're hurting people and I'm not able to do my job because my co-workers can't do their jobs and it's it's just not good for me we need those people to let go of some of their just original ideas of academia they need to to look at social sciences at at clinical psychology read a management book you know if I if I went to a another microbiologist and said hey I have people doing all the time hey I have a machine that's gonna do your core work three times as fast that person is gonna be on their computer immediately doing price comparisons and understanding you know well how can I get this and can it really do that and it's amazing to me that they don't take the time to read some basic management books to understand like what kind of pressures are happening and how can I help because we know that people who are struggling we know that people who don't see their identities who are dealing with mental illness who are dealing with imposter syndrome but they are not as productive and and so it's you know you look at these these labs of incredibly smart researchers just really great logisticians in so many ways who just have this huge blind spot because well that's not how it was done when I was there absolutely and I think there's also kind of a fear or a discomfort in trying to get quote unquote to political or trying to like yeah to change things to be too loud to stick out too much because you know that's not my role that's not my role but ultimately one of the biggest negative consequences of all of this is exactly what you mentioned it's it's the internalized struggle that many many many people in academia face when they're battling the demons of mental illness and so what we see across the board is you know really high rates of kind of quiet struggles you know some universities are better than others about offering mental health support oftentimes you see this I think a little bit more widely accepted within the undergrad population then within the graduate or the faculty population and of course mental illness as we all know is something that is it is agnostic about who it wants to affect so it doesn't matter what your privileges it doesn't matter what your background is anybody can can struggle with these with these demons and so that's something that that you that you founded PhD balance to kind of try and tackle let us know what is PhD balance and kind of what is your your mission statement so PhD balance right now mostly exists on the internet and I think there's some really cool aspects about that actually but right now it's an online collaborative community where we're really working to provide resources for students to build kind of their own professional resilience but also their personal resilience and a lot of this is through opening conversation about those difficult topics that you're you're not going to be taught in a lecture but rather you're going to be taught by a student who's two years older than you who says I've been through the same thing or you know I also had an advisor who treated me this way this is how I got through or even just saying like you're not broken it's not your fault but let me help you and this was we originally actually called pH depression and the reason why it is PhD I did it yeah I know I loved that name I was probably the last person who signed off on that change but so many people couldn't say it if you hadn't heard it before and I was like oh yeah that's a problem and not the best branding and then you know we had a lot of people too who came and said you know I don't have depression I'm dealing with anxiety ADHD bipolar all these different things or they'd say I would call myself depressed I'm just dealing with XYZ and so we switched over to PhD balance to really reflect what you were saying at the start of balancing your life balancing who you are finding those things that bring you joy and seeing your PhD as a part of your life is something you really care about but it's not who you are PhD balance is definitely a passion project and I think what what's really nice for me is that I I started it as PhD depression as some random Instagram page that I tossed out there a lot of this was founded on this paper that came out in nature biotechnology it was just a small paper that showed about 40% of graduate students around the world were dealing with signs and symptoms of anxiety or depression and this was a really big wake up call for me and also the the science community in general you know these these statistics or similar ones have been found in humanities journals forever and what was really interesting to me is that I I saw this paper and I was like oh my gosh this is such new knowledge I wish that I had known this a year ago you know and then I got really fucking mad that I didn't because it turns out this information already existed but for some reason we weren't told it you know that if 40% of all graduate students or you know it's the lower end estimates of that 25% if one in four graduate students was dealing with chronic asthma and to no one like an only half of those people were getting treatment I'm pretty sure that everyone would stop for a minute and say what is happening and at least say how do we support this how do we make sure that people have the health insurance to go and take care of themselves and just learning that this knowledge was out there that it wasn't being taken seriously um I wanted to do something and so I just started an Instagram page where people would put up their picture the same kind of picture you see on Instagram the same kind of image you would see at a scientific website. Visit modo.us for the best free place social casino experience wherever you are. Moto offers a huge selection of biggest style games and now introducing live Blackjack, roulette and casino hold them these are so much fun. Moto always has generous jackpots free spins and exciting promotions register today at modo.us for your free welcome bonus. Moto is a social casino no purchase necessary void where prohibited play responsibly conditions apply see website particulars. The best way to buy a car is the Werner way you'll find more value every day at Werner Hyundai that's more style more comfort and more warranty test drive the 2025 Hyundai Santa with an all-new epic style and comfort every Hyundai comes with owner assurance and America's best warranty a 10-year 100,000 mile powertrain limited warranty that protects you not just locally but nationwide enjoy five years of complimentary maintenance three from the factory plus two more from Werner Werner Hyundai dot com. Antipot conference you know happy excited whatever and then the story that they really wouldn't share about dealing with mental illness about dealing with struggles and taking those statistics and turning them into humans and saying like yeah these these numbers are scary but who are the people behind them these are successful PhD students and of course they are because of you know 20 percent of graduate students who graduate are dealing with something like this they're everywhere that's this is just who PhD students are. Absolutely I mean I think that that's such an important thing not just for like you know obviously establishing the community and being able to look from the outside to say like look look this is the evidence like you see a statistic but these are like the it's sort of like the qualitative portion of the quantitative research but obviously the true import is the individuals who are in the community being able to learn from one another and share their stories right. Absolutely you know there's something to be said of just knowing that some proportion of the people around you are dealing with depression or anxiety but what does that mean you know that's there's still such a stigma around it and I catch myself dealing with it as well that these people are somehow less reliable or that you're going to be able to spot them and that was another piece that when that nature biotech article came out there were a ton of op-eds about it in science magazine and inside higher ed chronicles of education all of these really big publications that academics lean on to understand the status of the system and what was just hilarious for me is that all of them were accompanied by these photos of like stock photos of women crying in a window or you know a student just like sprawled out over their desk just desolate and and that's the problem right is it yeah sometimes depression looks like I'm just slumped over in the lab but more often than not it's me getting through the day keeping some sort of smile on my face making jokes and just kind of holding my breath until I can get home and land a couch and start the ceiling for four hours. You don't yeah I mean way more often than not because that's the only way people are going to stay in their programs honestly. Yeah absolutely um so it started just as this Instagram page and people asked like oh what did you expect that to happen I was like I don't know I thought like a couple hundred people would get together I could find a few friends we would be honest about our struggles and it just took off really organically it turned out that this is a really big need that people want to talk about it that people want to read these stories and that they really want to support each other the I think the the coolest things that I've seen from this project are people just commenting on each other stories saying hey yeah I had almost exactly the same experience that was really hard good for you or we've had people who have tagged us in photos where they have met up with somebody who also shared a story and that they've connected through PhD balance and have found a friend through that I love that I think that's really cool and it's just so important you know just to be able to kind of basically survive and I think honestly hopefully these kinds of movements um ultimately will I mean I know it's not the direct sort of agenda but ultimately will make their way back into the system and that the individuals because it is changing you know slowly but surely it is changing we're seeing more women we're seeing more people of color we're seeing more people of diverse backgrounds um starting to secure positions in uh in administrative areas or in like advanced faculty positions where they can bring a little bit of that mentality and that understanding into the role and so knowing that things like this exist knowing that there are um there are people in positions of power who potentially could read this kind of stuff who could become at least a little bit more aware um that's just so fundamentally important yeah I um I've gotten a couple opportunities to speak at universities and one of the things that I've really started to appreciate is how many people in academia really really really want students to succeed they're not necessarily the people in the labs um because a lot of times the people in the lab that's not their main job but most universities have dean of students office and they have a lot of them have graduate students offices and the people who work in there have chosen that career path because they care they want to see changes happening in the system uh and even the last couple of years where I've started to learn more about what's going on there are so many mental health task forces coming up there's so many just national initiatives to really sit down take a look at what's going on take stock and and start making these these big changes um and one of the one of the pushbacks that I hear from people who aren't in a PhD right because a PhD we're a fairly privileged population just as a whole you know and and that anybody who's who's doing a PhD one has has really worked for it I don't think you fall into a PhD program um but has experiences that a lot of like the huge majority of the world are never going to get they're highly educated they have the ability to attend a you know three to seven to ten year program um and so a lot of people will say well why you even care about PhD students or you know why why not focus on all of academia why not just stick with with college students um and the reason that I usually give is that taxpayer dollars are paying graduate students we know that people who are dealing we can use specifically depression we know that people who are dealing with depression take uh significantly more sick days and are much less productive without treatment and so for for people who are like well why should we care about this population well because you're paying us man like your money is what pays for me to go to grad school and to do the research that is going to inform agriculture other people are doing you know medicinal research that are doing clinical research uh and if if this population isn't being taken care of like we're just we're wasting your money so I really think that everyone should care about this whether it's because they are in it or they love someone who's in it or they just don't really want to waste money on a system that's not efficient yeah and talk about inefficiency I mean it's one of these situations where like it's hard enough as it is why do we consistently find examples where PIs and other kind of um people with institutional power like intentionally want to make it harder like in like and whether it's I don't know whether maybe intentionally it's not the right word because I don't think that's always the case I do think though you you hear that mentality from a lot of people of like ooh you know I can't make this easy for you or like you got to work for it because if you don't then you're not really going to appreciate and it's like dude I'm working with you have no idea how hard you know the people in your lab are working so it's just such a funny thing to almost like invent or create obstacles to efficiency there's the passive stuff but there's also like literally active obstacles that are being creative that's such a strange situation I feel like I'm I'm in a very privileged position I'm in a very lucky position in that I'm working on a PhD in clinical psychology which means that the vast majority of my professors are shrinks and they themselves are like so empathic right because that's like foundational to being a good therapist is that empathy is important to you unconditional positive regard um you know this like authenticity I feel like I can talk to them if something is happening in my life that is preventing my academic success um I feel like I often do have a really understanding year but at the same time when I see massive institutional failures it's that much more of a slap in the face um because it's like oh you should know better the girls like colleges um but yeah I compare that to my experience in the biology department when I was doing my masters in neuroscience and it's night and day and that's biology where there are still more women and people of color then look at things like physics computer science mathematics and it's like oof it gets rough out there um oh yeah well and so I kind of I split between two uh just really big fields one is microbiology and you know that's kind of my home base that's my my one true love mo do you visit mo d o dot us for the best free place social casino experience wherever you are modo offers a huge selection of biggest style games and now introducing live blackjack roulette and casino hold them these are so much fun modo always has generous jackpots free spins and exciting promotions register today at modo dot us for your free welcome bonus modo is a social casino no purchase necessary void where prohibitive play responsibly conditions apply see website pretty chaos the best way to buy a car is the Werner way you'll find more value every day at Werner Hyundai that's more style more comfort and more warranty test the 2025 Hyundai Santa Fe with an all new epic style and comfort every Hyundai comes with owner assurance and america's best warranty a 10 year 100,000 mile powertrain limited warranty that protects you not just locally but nationwide enjoy five years of complimentary maintenance three from the factory plus two more from Werner Werner Hyundai dot com love um but also plant biology and it's really fascinating how the older the field is the more entrenched in this kind of uh just i don't know i don't know if much easy modes of right word for it but it's definitely this very big validation of the the biggest loudest man in the room is is right um and yes patriarchal in a deep way yeah yeah yeah exactly and i look at uh you know i get to go to these meetings and the american society for microbiology meeting where i i did that twin podcast was really cool because of all of the different initiatives that were around there to make sure that international people were there that women were represented that people of color were represented uh that there were discussions about being LGBTQ all of these amazing things and then to go to some other conferences uh in in different fields and see the the huge differences in in perspectives from scientists of the same ages um but that i don't know it's you know these people are working in the same buildings together um but yeah i can't i cannot imagine working in like computer science oh no it would be rough you know and i think that there's also a deep parallel between um the lack of maybe awareness of inclusivity and the lack of prioritization of inclusivity and understanding and empathy i see a direct link to that between that and the institutional failures of suppression of science communication because i've definitely i've been to psychome conferences where older more entrenched more established individuals would say things like i don't agree with the term citizen science because i think that minimizes the work that real scientist do or would say you know just like bizarre things like um uh you know psychome is great and yeah sure it's important i'll give you that but like it you should never be uh you know taking up your lab time doing these silly things and you're just like how even is this person so out of touch with the needs and the requirements of like modern funding and of you know it's just it's bizarre to me but i see a link right because if a system is designed to keep multi like to keep different perspectives out and a system is designed to maintain the status quo then change is going to be really slow and it's so it's so bananas to me because we think of higher higher education as being fundamentally progressive and liberal right like that's sort of the stereotype within American society is that like universities are liberal institutions yet you see such conservative views and when i say conservative i don't mean politically i mean in terms of they do not want to change they want to keep doing what they've always been doing it's kind of the definition of conservatism and that's so fundamental to the systems that are in place uh i mean i so it's it's interesting because i sometimes get the question of uh you know do you get pushback for running this community you get pushback for talking so openly about your mental illness and i don't get pushback to my face because you can't think you can't say that it's it i'm very lucky that one i have been so open about this that it's sort of intrinsic to who i am right now and it's it's part of my identity and that it's not something that's very invoked for people to i don't know just a shit all over it's not that doesn't make you look good um yeah but i i have had a few chances to kind of peak behind the veil and um one of my one of the most fueling experiences that i've had was about a year after founding phd balance um i was asked to write up an article or a set of articles for a societal journal and just a kind of an op ed situation and they were very excited the one of the editors was very excited said we'd love to have a series of this we'd love to talk about graduate student mental health it's something that's very important to us uh and i said okay you know they said five i was like let's let's start with three um and i sent them over this pitch and he said okay i'll get it to the other editors that's the editors sent me back uh his response saying you know we we think maybe just one is is good um you know kind of the general stuff of what's going on what are some ways to help uh which would have been really boring had he not attached all the responses from these extremely high level professors you know this is yeah i recognized almost all of the names not because i knew them as editors but rather that like their papers are constantly discussed and they're they're the ones that you have to cite uh and in general it was sort of like uh you know this kind of played out right now a lot of people are talking about it but let's do something um yeah which i was like so played out you know yeah i'm like oh we're we're bored um but yeah uh god all this like preventing stewist side it's so played out like yeah exactly like uh sh** he's it's overblown um but the the one that like really fueled my fire to write a very different article um is that somebody said well if we're going to publish an article about somebody who's dealing with uh mental health issues with depression in graduate school we should really have uh in that same uh addition we should really have an article from somebody who's still really excited about science what as if you're not and as if like wait oh my god there's so many horrible things about this statement oh everything so the uh the article so stigmatizing it was awful i was curious so but it was it was one of the more farting articles to write because instead it basically i wrote an article that um that basically addressed every issue that they brought up of like it basically like why p i should give a sh** and why this isn't just played out uh and and why it does affect you directly even if your student you know even if you don't have someone in your lab committing suicide which is very common compared to the rest of the population um but even if it's just you're you're mentoring people who are really struggling the worst thing you can do is say like uh i just wish you were excited about science that's really the that's yeah yeah if you were just more excited you probably wouldn't be depressed so just let's work on that excitement yeah it's also yeah it's so insulting and it also i think having those responses really boosted the argument because it's you know some people i think look at these conversations they say oh that's a straw man nobody's actually saying that you you know shouldn't work on your mental illness or nobody's actually saying that there's not a place for you here or whatever but it's like nope that's exactly what they're saying oh yeah absolutely i mean it's it's lip service the same way that there's lip service for any underserved or any representative population where it's well of course we want diversity diversity is great we really strive for diversity and you're like how well we have exactly a year or at least imposing we have a day where we talk about it and we put it in an email one time and you're like wow that's rồi worse than nothing actually that is yeah exactly you know and and i love to what you said about like mental illness does not discriminate like it's gonna it's gonna hit everybody um中國 and then on top of that though is like mental illness doesn't discriminate but wow people do and the kind of stigmas that these intersecting populations face is just incredible where white people are more likely to get treatment it's it's a less stigmatized topic in our society people who are already undergoing just all of these other pressures that i will never face i will never understand don't necessarily have the support at home they're already fighting to prove that they're good enough they're already fighting to prove that they belong to be here um you know it's it's not that it's not necessarily imposter syndrome there might be a lot of people out there who are questioning that and and they are you know not not treated at high enough rates they aren't able to talk about it and we know that being able to find an identity in your social circle that you can talk to you can say hey you've you've dealt with this can i have this discussion is so important and you know like you're saying with the just the demographics in especially different fields you might have a situation where somebody is the only person of color in their department right you might have somebody who can never be honest about being LGBTQ because of the state that they're living in because of the specific town that they're living in because of their lab manager um and that's really where i think the the benefit of an online you know semi-anonymous community lies where people can find those identities um and can learn from those stories can find support and can just realize a little bit more of like no this is okay this is you know it's it's okay to need help it's okay to not be healthy and and have to accept that and say um you know i i am strong enough to go to therapy i am strong enough to try these really scary things to accept in myself that something might not be right right now uh and just to hopefully get the support that they really deserve you know you're you're giving so much of your life of your energy of your passion to academia i think academia owes its people so much more absolutely and you know in a lot of places they aren't even like my school doesn't even offer health insurance and so you know it's there's an expectation that you receive therapy if you yourself are training to be a therapist um it's it's not mandated but it's expected and i think it's a very good idea i think that all therapists should have therapy on their you know on their own as well and so there is that cultural shift where it's like oh we encourage this and we encourage the support and the help like you just described yet you got to figure out how to pay for yourself which is really hard for a lot of graduate students who are barely getting by you know on there and like being in a professional degree it's a completely different paradigm it's the same for lawyers it's the same for doctors we pay for our schooling we're not on you know if we're lucky we can get scholarships but usually we're not on fellowship we're not receiving um institutional support for the research that we're doing we're actually paying to do that work yeah and and most universities people have this idea that's mostly funded by undergrad but if they were only undergrad most universities would be functioning at a loss that in a lot of these uh r1 or or just research containing universities they are primarily funded by research grants which are primarily worked on by graduate students uh and i just i yeah there's there's a lot of well if you need help go get help and i just my favorite question ask of you know well where where should this person get help um if they're at university near you or what kind of resources do you know and and very quickly uh there's just not an answer and academics our our main skill is thinking right like i could be able to one of the PIs I work under actually is uh very physically disabled due to a congenital disease or genetic disease and using my words wrong but um you know he's he's very physically disabled based on this genetic disease and he is one of the most brilliant scientists in the field um able to do these just fantastic things very well respected uh because his his brain is amazing his memory is amazing his creative problem solving is amazing and all of those things memory problem solving creativity are really hurt by mental illness they're really not functional uh and and i just don't understand why you know our our main value is our ability to think and to think creatively it would that uh i just i guess i'm frustrated we have we have 15 year protective services on a piece of machinery in the lab that is used four times a year but why the hell aren't you giving health care to your students who are working i don't want to know how many days a year and and they're literally breaking down yeah yeah breaking down exactly yeah that's a good image but it's true it's absolutely true uh there's obviously so much here to think about i think for some people this may be the first time that they're hearing about these kinds of issues in higher ed um hopefully even if you listen to the show and you yourself aren't personally involved in um in graduate level education uh this has kind of opened up your your perspective to some of those issues because of course they do affect all of us downstream at some point Susanna um i was hoping that before we go i would have the honor of your answers to the top uh or sorry the final two questions that i ask all of my guests um and given kind of the the focus of the conversation today i'm definitely interested in in your perspective so um big picture questions here they are when you think about the future in whatever context is relevant to you i want to know number one what is the thing that most keeps you up at night that you're most concerned about um and on the flip side of that what are you kind of genuinely excited and optimistic for whoa uh i mean these are coming and i still wasn't prepared um i think the thing that keeps me up at night is is this fear that even with all the knowledge we have um that people are just gonna get worn out by the system that people are somehow you know gonna keep rising up to the ranks like it's always been and by the time they get to a position of real power um that they won't follow through with all this amazing work that they're doing as as grad students as postdocs to try to make these spaces more inclusive i think that that's that's really what keeps me up at night is is seeing all of these people struggle getting all of these really horror stories from people uh and and just wondering you know are we gonna see these same stories ten years from now 20 years from now and you know does it really matter enough to people that they will make that change um but what's really exciting to me is is to see that the conversation at least is opening that there are initiatives that are starting that people are talking about it and compared to ten 20 years ago this is fairly brand new especially in somewhere like academia where people just didn't talk about work life balance or or mental health uh and so i think that that in itself is a really tangible thing people i have idols even on twitter like gen hamstera is just such a rock star she talks about mental health about work life balance as as a faculty member um and seeing new young faculty members come out and start to talk about these same things that's that's what's really exciting is it's just seeing these people being really brave being really honest um and just going that extra mile to to try to make things that much better for the people that come after them i love that well gosh Susanna thank you so so much for joining me today can you let everybody know um you know where they can go if they want to be involved in PhD balance and also where they can follow your science communication where sure so uh if you want to check out PhD balance the easiest place to go is just our website it's www.phdbalance.com that's a place where you can read people's stories you can get resources a lot of our stuff is originally shared on instagram or twitter you can follow us along there at phd underscore balance uh we're always looking for more stories we're always looking for resources basically if you have something that you're like uh i wish i had this two years ago as a grad student or ten years ago as a grad student like just make it up because somebody else really wants it uh and then for myself if you want to follow along with the science communication i talk at nauseam about mental health and mental illness uh and just kind of just generally talk too much but it's uh you can find me also on instagram and on twitter at susanna l harris uh that's sus a nna the letter l harris uh and you can also find me at same exact names susanna l harris.com very cool well susanna thank you so much for joining me it was a really really important chat that we had today and i'm glad we were able to do it well thank you again so much it's been an absolute pleasure and shout out to anna as this is this is just super cool so thanks yes thank you anna and thank you to everybody else who keeps coming back week after week i'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk nerdy the best way to buy a car is the Werner way you'll find more value every day at Werner Hyundai that's more style more comfort and more warranty test drive the 2025 Hyundai Santa Fe with an all-new epic style and comfort every Hyundai comes with owner assurance and america's best warranty a 10 year 100 thousand mile powertrain limited warranty that protects you not just locally but nationwide enjoy five years of complimentary maintenance three from the factory plus two more from Werner Werner Hyundai dot com
