Hello everyone and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, October 28th, 2019. It's almost Halloween, you guys. And I'm the host of the show, Cara Santa Maria. We've got a great episode coming up for you, but first I want to thank those of you who make Talk Nerdy possible each and every week. Remember, Talk Nerdy is and will always be 100% free to download. And that's because of support from listeners just like you. Some people can't afford to support the show and we don't want to be a burden on them. So it's really cool when some of you can help shoulder that. The best way to do it is by visiting patreon.com slash Talk Nerdy. You can pledge anywhere from like 25 cents to $25 and beyond. And our top supporters always get a shout out on the show. So this week I want to thank who? Yerika Hagman. Oh, I'm so sorry. I totally mispronounced your name. I think it's Ulrika Ulrika Hagman. New supporter. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you so much. You also wrote me a really sweet letter. Pedro M Rosario Barbosa. Dudes infinitas. Phil Tiber. The zombie drummer David J. Smith. Brian Holden and Jeffrey Sewell. And of course there's so many more of you who support at different levels. And I just want to thank you all so much from the bottom of my heart. All right. This week we have a really, really interesting chat. So I sit down with Dr. Sora Kim. She's an assistant professor at the University of California at Merced School of Natural Sciences. But she's in this really interdisciplinary field. Her research kind of converges on paleoecology, climate change, environmental reconstruction, and stable isotope biogeochemistry. Don't worry. She's going to explain what that means. But ultimately what we talk about is better understanding global climate change by studying fossilized shark teeth. It's so freaking cool. So I think I'm going to let her explain it because she can do it a lot better than I can without any further ado. Here she is. Dr. Sora Kim. Well, Sora, thank you so much for joining me today. Hi. Hi. So you are actually not that far away, but you're far enough away that it would have been a pain in the ass to physically meet. Here's my assumption because I'm I'm an LA on the East side in Eagle Rock and you are where I'm a Merced California at the newest UC UC Merced. And so, okay, newest you see in the system. How long ago was UC Merced? How long ago did they open their doors? Oh, you know, like when they got established versus when they opened their doors or two different things. Oh, you're probably right. Do you know when they started accepting students? Might have been 2002. Okay. So it's new and it's the new isk, but it's still, you know, been around. Like people have gotten whole degrees there multiple times over. Yeah. We have reached that milestone. It is very much of a startup feel here, though, which is a very different kind of feeling to a university than most, I think. Oh my gosh. And you guys, I'm just looking at the wiki for your for UC Merced. You guys are lead certified every single building on campus. Oh, yeah. Like sustainability is huge here. It's amazing. Oh, that's so cool. Triple net zero commitment is expected to create zero net landfall waste and zero net greenhouse gas emissions by 2020. That's next year. That's amazing. Yeah. So like my kids go to daycare on campus or I guess only one of them is in the daycare now. The other one is in kindergarten, but her daycare building is I think lead certified gold. So it's pretty cool. And I think that they're going, yeah, like you said, they're going to zero waste relatively soon. And so even at the daycare, I mean, children poop in diapers and keen diapers. And so they're like, oh, what are we going to do about this? And you can't like make people do clothed, differing. So I think that they're looking into options of compostable diapers and things like that that are tied in with the tuition rate. Oh, wow. Yeah, because it's like, you know, you can encourage. Yeah. But you can't actually, you know, and also like as we know with any sort of environmental conversations about lifestyle changes, there are risks and benefits to a lot of things and, you know, convenience. And sometimes sustainability are not always in sync with one another. Sometimes they are. Yeah. They love new technology to allow it. But sometimes, yeah, like cloth diapers, I don't know if I could do that. Yeah, I mean, like we're also a town of 85,000. So we don't necessarily have like cloth diapers. I'm a bourbon, a trolleys like LA or San Francisco. Yeah. Like I actually did do clothed, I bring for both my children. And it's a huge like water issue, actually. Yeah, that's true. That's the thing we don't think about with trade off. Like I drive an electric car and I'm like, go me. I'm awesome. And then I'm like, oh, yeah, probably would have been better to drive like an ancient Range Rover because just what goes into the batteries themselves is not very sustainable. So there's, you know, there's hidden costs. Absolutely. Yeah. I just signed up. I just signed a contract to put solar on my house. So I am excited that like my sustainability and carbon footprint will be decontent. I will be decreasing soon. Oh, I want to get there soon. I think that's like the next step. And even if because my house is very, it has a small footprint. It's very tall and narrow. So there's not a lot of roof space. But even if I can offset the car, I think I'll feel really good about that. Yeah, but now you can like buy into solar farms and stuff too. That's true. You don't have to actually have them on your own roof, which is cool for people who kind of aren't in the position to be able to do that. Yeah. I love that. So I'm looking also at the, at the section on like the academics that are offered at the university where you are now. You have 23 undergrad majors and 18 grad programs. And which program are you in? So the undergrad majors that I support are part of are the environmental system science and the biology degree. And so here we don't do things very traditionally, partially because we don't have a very long tradition. There would be a tradition in a theme to you, Seymour said academics. It's very much in the vein of interdisciplinaryness. So our graduate programs are actually actually interdisciplinary and the grad program that I'm part of is environmental systems. And it is faculty across various departments are in it. And the faculty are housed within the School of Natural Sciences, which is where I am and the School of Engineering. So it's kind of this interesting blend of natural sciences and then the applied of engineering associated with environmental questions. Which is amazing and it sounds like probably the best way to do it because of course environmental science requires an understanding of biology chemistry physics. You know, like across the board, you need people from all of these different fields to like work together and engineering like you said. But your specific work seems like it has a really big chemistry component to it, but also a biology component. Before we get into like your research, why don't we talk a little bit about your path? Like what did you study to get to where you are now? I am actually trained as a geologist. No way, I love that. Well, that makes sense to very many people would necessarily guess given what I do. So yeah, as an undergrad, I was an environmental studies major initially and I was hanging out at a grad student party one day and I met a professor. He asked what my major was and I was like, I'm an environmental studies major. And he was like, what are you going to do with that? And I was like, I don't know. Like I like the environment. And he was like, if you like being outside and you actually want to do some like scientific skills, like you should consider being an or sciences major, which is sort of like geology 2.0. And so I looked into the major and it actually required a, what do you call it? A field study program where we like traveled around the most geology field study programs. You go to one field site and you study it in depth for a really long time and you live outside in tents and you're really hot and you get to know your colleagues very well. But I went to Dartmouth College, which means that it was very well funded. And so we traveled around the US and we were in the Chesapeake Bay on a boat for one week. We went outside of Teton National Park for a while. We stayed on a bridge in Montana for a while. We did a tour of various national parks throughout the US and ended in Santa Cruz, California. And it was like totally a mind, a life changing event for me to travel around the US and sort of dissect these landscapes and understand sort of the background associated with them. And so it was cool. And so then after that experience, I went into, well, I took some time off and I taught English in Korea. And then I decided to go to grad school. My grad degree is from the Earth and Planetary Sciences Department. But I actually kept sharks in captivity and essentially did a physiology experiment for my pee dissertation, which did... Veteran owned and operated. The bearded Viking mead crew is reinventing the ancient art of mead making with a modern twist. They're award-winning meads are handcrafted with high quality ingredients offering a rich variety of flavors that range from bold and fruity to smooth and traditional. Whether you're sitting there classic OG or enjoying creative blends like Chok Cherry Vanilla or Halopino Raspberry, there's something for every palate. With a commitment to quality and flavor, the bearded Viking mead company focuses on creating good times for a great meetup to bring family and friends together. So visit beardedviking.com today to explore their collection and get ready for your next meetup. The best way to buy a car is the Werner Way. You'll find more value every day at Werner Hyundai. That's more style, more comfort and more warranty. Test drive the 2025 Hyundai Santa Fe with an all-new epic style and comfort. Every Hyundai comes with owner assurance and America's best warranty, a 10-year 100,000-mile powertrain-limited warranty that protects you not just locally but nationwide. Enjoy five years of complimentary maintenance three from the factory plus two more from Werner Werner Hyundai dot com. Which must have been like a totally new thing to you. Yeah. I managed to like kill the fish that I had as a child. So the fact that I got to work with alive was actually pretty remarkable and amazing. That was like slide one. Like I kept them alive you guys. And we just talk about that for a little bit more. I'm really like how amazing is that. And so but then in my grad degree because I was doing this experiment with sharks and I kind of was interested in sharks for like looking at their ancient ecology and thinking about how they responded to climate change and things like that. But I was like, oh, like we actually don't know that much about modern sharks. So that's how I got kind of roped into doing that work. And so then I ended up taking a lot of ecology classes and doing a lot of biology work. And yeah. So I at this point, I'm trained as a geologist on paper, but I do a lot of biology and have also taken a lot of biology classes. Okay. So two things in there that were like good hints to me that will follow up on we're going to talk about the shark soon. But before that, you said that you taught English in Korea for a while. Is it safe to assume based on your name that you are Korea? Yes, I am super Korean super Korean. Were you were you born here? Were you born in Korea? No, I was born here, but my parents. I think that what's interesting about at least like my generation. Korean Americans at least is that like our parents came from Korea and by and large like we were raised in households where Korea. Or being Korean is like frozen in time from the late 70s or early 80s. Funny. And so like it's kind of interesting because like I, there is a Korean American subculture within the US, but I don't necessarily fit in with that. And so I feel very Korean in that like I spoke Korean exclusively at home. We celebrated all the Korean holidays and rituals and things like that. But I don't actually have very many like Korean friends and things like that. Yeah. You know, it's funny. My kids sisters. I have two twin sisters that are Korean that my father's wife adopted when they were infants. And so they had like a very different experience and that they were born in South Korea, but they grew up in a not at all Korean home. And so I think my father's wife and this was before they were married. So I met them when I was like nine, nine years old or something is when we started our relationship and they were like seven. But he or she, I think tried, you know, she would make Korean dishes at home and she would take them to like language school and they tried to do things that were traditional. But it was all varied. They're like a weird white lens. And so, you know, it's always really interesting to me when you look at like kind of intersectionality and what and culture and biculturalism and multiculturalism, how everybody is kind of ethnic identity is really, really different. There's so many within group differences, even if you're talking about what a lot of people might think of as like a broad culture. Like, oh, yeah, they're Korean. It's like, yeah, but what does that mean? Yeah, I think it's just nuances to it. And I do a lot of work towards diversity, equity inclusion or sort of thinking about social justice and equity within higher education and especially focused on STEM fields. And that is something that's always interesting in terms of like the lens that people talk about. These types of issues is that underrepresented minorities kind of get homogenized and the nuances get lost in the conversation of what should we be doing or how, what are effective practices and things like that. And I think that we oftentimes say like underrepresented minorities and that's just like a big group. Yeah, like, it means anything to be a gay black woman is the same thing as being like a, you know, Sri Lankan man or something. It's like, yeah, it's like, okay, there's a lot of variation within there. Yeah, and even, I mean, I have not really met very many other Asian American women. I don't know, whatever I call myself biogeochemists like stabilized copycologists. But I can guarantee like the other person that I would meet would not be me. Yeah, that's so, it's so interesting. Like, so my, for people who listen to the show, they might already know this by now. Even though I don't really talk about my, my work that much on the show when I'm interviewing people. But I'm, I finally got back to school after 10 year hiatus to like do my PhD. I started one 10 years ago and dropped out. And so I switch from, oh, thanks. I'm a third year. Woo, I'm getting there. So my master's was neuroscience, but now I've moved into clinical psychology. So like patient interaction is a big part of it. And my, my orientation is existential, which has a much more focus on the individual than on like. Sort of like trying to homogenize groups. And then my concentration is social justice and diversity. So it's like a big part of training. And it's so interesting reading basically the literature because it's one thing when you're reading about people's kind of philosophies, which is a big part of psychology. That's what I love about it. It's like equal part science and equal parts philosophy. But it is also really interesting when you read the actual research literature. And you see like that sort of the ethnocentric monoculturalism. That's what the term that we use a lot like ethnocentric monoculturalism in America is like white Christian men. Oh, yeah. Like they, they're the predominant power. We normalize them when we talk about like something being the case. It's the case. It's like the white Christian men case and everything else is the other. But the issue is that the other is bigger than the norm or the norm normalization. And like we just said, there's more like within group differences than between group differences. But we, like people are literally only recently realizing that a big part of like cultural sensitivity and cultural competency, especially let's say you're seeing clients is to know enough about a culture to not be completely alien to it, but also to not assume that you know about the person you're talking to because you read about their culture. Yeah, once. Exactly. Or even if you're steeped in it, right? You have no idea if that person is like rebellious against X and Y, but very traditional list in this way. Or you know, like this. We're also different. Yeah, and I mean, my husband is also Korean American, but our families are so different, you know, like the interactions between our parents are relationships with our parents. We both come from like fairly stable, you know, loving, very loving, not even fairly like very loving family. But it's like, yeah, there are differences. And when I was living in Korea, that was something that I like on the outside, you know, Koreans actually dress very similarly I found like I'm not someone that really follows passions and trends very much. I was like quite alarming for me to go to Korea and be like, oh, everybody wears a burberry scarf in this way. Yeah. Everybody has to have a burberry scarf. And so I had a hard time like actually visually picking people out of crowds, but then like in meeting people, I had had such limited interactions with Koreans before I lived in Korea. But then when I was living in Korean and embedded it within the culture. Oh, no, there's like a whole spectrum to this like culture and socioeconomic groups and all of that. Like you would like there should be and like you know that there is, but I don't know, like those nuances are hard to pick up on until you're there. Oh, it's so true. I mean, I'm lately been really interested in research. It's not my field at all, but it's one of my professors' fields. This comparison or this relationship between creativity and whatever the hell that means. And so like obviously you have to measure it by other constructs like things like openness or you know the ability to change your mind very quickly or things like that. But this relationship between creativity and travel, creativity and buy or multiculturalism, creativity and being bilingual, like exposure to lots of cultures and how it actually affects your ability to be cognitively flexible. Because I think one of the things that's a real kind of bummer about American society specifically is that, and I don't blame people for having never left the town that they grow up in because I know financially it's very burdensome to travel. Especially if you live in the States and you don't live in a big hub. And you know, we're like a big island basically that's like really far away from everything. We don't have the benefit like a lot of people in Europe do of being able to get in the car and drive to another country. And so I get it, but also I kind of, I feel bad and I worry about people who have literally never left and never been exposed to other cultures and never been able to just experience all the cool stuff that the world has to offer. Because honestly I feel like it's a real privilege that I've been able to travel as much as I have. Oh yeah, and I mean I love traveling and I think that that was like one of the best things related to being in graduate school and also the research that I do that I do travel quite a bit. And I think that like sort of what you're touching on related to traveling and sort of seeing other places and the importance of that. That's actually like the foundation of like why we need diversity in higher education. And in veteran owned and operated the bearded Viking meat crews reinventing the ancient art of meat making with a modern twist. They're award winning needs are handcrafted with high quality ingredients offering a rich variety of flavors that range from bold and fruity to smooth and traditional. Whether you're serving their classic OG or enjoying creative blends like Chuck Cherry Vanilla or jalapeno raspberry. There's something for every palate with a commitment to quality and flavor the bearded Viking meat company focuses on creating good times for a great meetup to bring family and friends together. So visit beardedviking.com today to explore their collection and get ready for your next meetup. The best way to buy a car is the Werner way you'll find more value every day at Werner Hyundai. That's more style more comfort and more warranty test drive the 2025 Hyundai Santa Fe with an all new epic style and comfort. Every Hyundai comes with owner assurance and America's best warranty a 10 year 100,000 mile powertrain limited warranty that protects you not just locally but nationwide. Enjoy five years of complimentary maintenance three from the factory plus two more from Werner Werner Hyundai dot com. Like how people approach questions and problems and come up with solutions or experiments. It's shaped by sort of their their background and their cultural standing and and all of those factors. And that um that academia especially in stem fields is so based on the predominant like white male Christian perspective means that we're really limiting what our capabilities are I think. I know I think it's sometimes hard for people who are like in privileged positions or in like normative positions to understand like. Okay, because they'll say well what is like being trans for example or being bisexual or being Korean American or being a woman have to do with you know climate change like I just or like have to do with maybe you know the molecular expression of some specific thing and it's like. That's such a narrow point of view because it's not just about the research question but even it even does have to do with the research question but even beyond that it has to do with how you approach problem solving what kinds of tools you use how you think about whether or not something is feasible in terms of financial burden or in terms of you know the number of steps parsimony like all of those things are culturally prescribed and it's hard for people who are normative in the culture. Yeah, to think outside of that main view. Yeah, absolutely I think that is true and I mean geology is like in geosciences are one is one of the fields that is the least diverse of all of the sciences. Really I had no idea I always thought it was like just kind of like math computer science and physics or the really bad ones and then like chemistry is getting better biology is getting much better and then psychology is actually kind of completely flipped and it's much more women and it's very diverse because of course the nature of psychology is that it's like welcoming but it's still you know has a long way to go don't get me wrong and also we have that leaky pipeline problem where no matter what field you're in and I think that's the kind of a way to get that. We have that leaky pipeline problem where no matter what field you're in at the tippy top it's still all white dudes yeah and in some ways it's just a matter of time that things have to cycle through but yeah in geosciences things are not good like there was a study published. Last year in nature geosciences that found that diversity in geosciences had not changed in 40 years like in terms of like the male female ratio they've changed but in terms of ethnic diversity no change and in some disciplines of geosciences not a single black person gets a PhD. Yeah, you know I had yeah I had I had John Urschel on my podcast recently a couple of months ago and he is an X NFL player who's getting his PhD at MIT and mathematics and he's a yeah super cool very fun story really smart guy and he was telling me you know as a black man in mathematics like he didn't have he doesn't have black professors yeah he's like I've never met another black person my see it all like that just isn't a thing that happens you know and so. And it's one of those things of course and we probably don't have to like be to dead horse I got to hit that expression but you know it's very hard for people to see themselves in a position and determine whether or not that job is even a viable option for them if they never ever seen somebody who looks like them doing that job yeah and I think that. To a lesser degree I can really relate with that and that really resonates with me because for a long time I had never actually been directly mentored by a woman much less a woman with kids and so when it came to the time I think I'm pretty sure I want to have kids I was like oh gosh like am I going to be a stay in academia. And and like is there anybody I can talk to you about this yeah and like that you stood me also like. Through the problem yeah having said offspring. Yeah it was like a major major freak out for me and I I remember that I had recently sort of come to this realization I did not have. Women and especially women with kid mentors and so I had like. I had gone about like trying to find people to be my mentors and this capacity and so when I found out I was pregnant I called. Swim and I was like so worried and she's like no it's going to be fine it's great like and and it has been fine I it's stressful it's hard but I think that that's the case for most engaged parents with young children. And that there are challenges but and I think that also in my case in reflecting about these types of things with. In terms of through the lens of diversity you know like for different cultures there are different there's a different importance level and prioritization of family whether it be with to your parents or. Having children or being married and being with like relatives and things like that and. Oh it's so true especially like here in the States right the normative culture is like individual list it's a very isolated from. Other generations you don't have multi family households unless you are you know a first or second generation from another culture or somehow it maintained after multiple generations but it's. It's even though we're nation of immigrants it's rare that that sensibility has you know state throughout the generations yeah and so I think that that is also. Can be like a big inhibitor for for people to stay in academia. In terms of like diversifying academia and seeing themselves with this is like a viable path forward. What is it common like I mean we're talking about kind of how progressive and forward thinking your campus is is it common that there are daycares available on university campuses for the faculty. Yeah I would say it depends depends on the campus but quite a few universities do have now daycares available on campus and if not they have. They have like relationships with daycares nearby that might have like small discounts and things like that gotcha and of course I guess there's the benefit of like having if you have a psychology department but those researchers are like yeah we'll watch your kids. For like early childhood development education department or something like that is also yeah it sort of all ties in together as well but. Yeah it is interesting sort of navigating this and when I was a grad student it was not my radar at all as something to think about and worry about but now as like an assistant professor with young children is something that I think about all the time. Yeah and I mean and being a young professor to I think that you know we talked a little bit about role modeling I swear we're going to talk about your research soon but I'm looking at a at a press release about some of the work that you do and there's this wonderful little snapshot of you in the lab with like a very young female student and an almost equally young it looks like kind of Latin American male student. And like how like you were just saying that you didn't have that when you were in school I think you know a lot of people are age or older didn't have that especially depending on the field that they were in but how cool that you then get to offer that to your students I mean and these are undergrad students but I could see that you know somebody was struggling with like having. You know deciding on family planning or figuring out if they want to stay in grad school or what they could come to you and they could talk to you about these things yeah I mean that is. I would say it is not an insignificant part of why I've chosen to stay in academia and specifically come to UC Merced. I I had originally accepted a tenure track faculty position at the University of Kentucky and. But there the population is not as diverse and when this opportunity came up one of the things that really spoke to me was the diversity of the campus and so we are something like 60% Latinx us to undergraduate student population I want to say that we're close to maybe 10 or 15% Asian and we're not particularly like the. The majority Asian center represented at universities are like Korean Japanese Chinese but we're actually more. South and Southeast Asian populations and so yeah we serve a really diverse student body of I think I want to say something like 60% of our students are also hell grant recipients so we're okay. Coralie high financial aid and then close to 60% are also first generation college students. Wow. So that adds up to more than 100% Yeah some of those things cross over but how cool is that like you know but that also makes means it as professors you guys are tasked with being you know being mentors you're not going to be able to get away with not being there for these students who don't. Veteran owned and operated the bearded Viking mead crew is reinventing the ancient art of mead making with a modern twist they are award winning needs are handcrafted with high quality ingredients offering a rich variety of flavors that range from bold and fruity to smooth and traditional whether you're serving their classic OG or enjoying creative blends like choke cherry vanilla or jalapeno raspberry there's something for every palate with a commitment to quality and flavor the bearded Viking mead company focuses on creating good times for a great meetup to bring family friends together so visit bearded Viking dot com today to explore their collection and get ready for your next meetup. The best way to buy a car is the Werner way you'll find more value every day at Werner Hyundai that's more style more comfort and more warranty test drive the 2025 Hyundai Santa Fe with an all new epic style and comfort every Hyundai comes with owner assurance and America's best warranty a 10 year 100,000 mile powertrain limited warranty that protects you not just locally but nationwide enjoy five years of complimentary maintenance three from the factory plus two more from Warner Werner Hyundai dot com necessarily have the culture at home of understanding the college experience and being able to support it in a way that you know somebody whose parents are doctors would have. Yeah and I think that that is something like while I myself I'm not Latina but that I come from immigrant parents who didn't necessarily understand the American educational system and universities and even graduate school and no one in my family had a PhD until me that I can relate on that level with my students very well I think and when students are saying that like yeah like I really want to stay in California because my family is here and I want to be close to my family I'm like yeah that's totally valid and that's okay for you to feel that way you know like yeah whereas I think that in more traditional academic type of mindset it would be like oh you know that's just part of academia you know we got to move a lot. Yeah better get you so you got to move yeah my my major professor she's in her 70s now and she's been a psychologist for you know a very long time and she was when she was in grad school she had young children and she told me that she literally had professor to look her straight in the eye and say well what's more important to you your PhD or your kids and she would be like both I can't imagine but that's you know that's the culture yeah and I mean when I was in grad school I got engaged and I remember that one of my classmates also had gotten engaged but she got a ring and so it was like much more obvious to people and I remember being in the mail room and a fairly young male professor who had also just recently gotten engaged been like oh there's like there she goes like she's not going to continue in academia you know and I was like I also got engaged I just don't have a ring you know yeah so like called mad on it and and then he like was like oh well and I don't know like it should you we should be able to be like whole people as academics um well and we are other people should see us that right and that's the other crazy things like you just got engaged to yeah like what is wrong with you because I mean what is that imply really like talk about sexism like that implies to that like your male partners I'm going to assume maybe I shouldn't even assume but that your male partners require so much caretaking that you can't possibly stay in academia yeah what yeah I mean I would say that I was able to stay in academia because of my partner that he like I mean he moved with me like I did my graduate degree at UC Santa Cruz and then I went to Wyoming and University of Chicago for postdocs and then I took a job at Kentucky and then I moved back to California so he has been with me on that entire circuit yeah and all the while like having two kids and so um like I tell my um my graduate students all of them that who you choose is your partners actually the most important decision professional decision that you will make because of like some old fashioned sensibilities but rather like the degree of support that you have and their willingness to move or you know um in the case of women sort of support them by not necessarily conforming to gender roles in the household for example and being willing to help out with laundry and dishes and all those other things that are often given over as like the mental load of women yeah child care yeah exactly and that yeah having an actual partner who who works with you to get through these things is super super important to your professional success but yeah I think that those are types of conversations that don't usually happen necessarily in um mentor or like advisor kind of relationships but I'm I think that's actually very important to have those conversations and to be open to them if we want to start doing something about diversity in academia um and promoting students from diverse backgrounds not necessarily to become professors even but to stay within STEM or to finish their degrees and stuff oh for sure and you know like I think sometimes when we talk about women in academia the conversation does go to you know child rearing or to some of these other you know what we think of as traditionally um uh things that are traditionally in the realm of women um and the truth is that those are very important conversations but but there's so much more like we were saying you know being near um your aging parents for example or maybe having to do additional work in order to be able to support or fund your academic endeavors or you know whatever the case may be a lot of people I think historically have been like well handle your shit like that's not the role of a mentor whereas it's like no that's absolutely what a mentor is instrumental in helping somebody do because you cannot be successful in academia if you don't have good mental health and you don't have um appropriate life work balance and those things are not just things that you can turn a switch on those are daily decisions and and for some people you know like myself who struggle with mental health issues those are things that are you know they're they're ongoing and to have understanding professors can be life changing no and I think that um it's yeah I I spoke with our new incoming graduate students in my program and that was one of the things that I actually said to that was like yeah this is grad school it's really intense and uh while you were most likely like excelled as undergraduates like there's going to be a lot of strata stress and maybe some anxiety that comes with graduate school and um it's important to take care of yourself both physically and mentally and the great thing about being with the UC program is that um that the graduate students are represented by union have amazing health care and for me when I came to grad school is the first time that I had health insurance you know and dental insurance and vision insurance and it was awesome and totally life changing and it's like yeah you guys should totally take advantage of it because we as your faculty advisors were paying for your health benefits and they're not cheap so like yeah so we can totally take advantage of that and and get the help that you need both like I mean physically and mentally and let's not just count the importance of mental health here um I I have to say that like it's so wonderful to be able to talk to somebody about these issues these concerns who isn't necessarily in a field that you would think would raise these issues like it's just by virtue of being you and of having the considerations and the interest that you have that these things are you know equally important to you but your work is like is on like climate change and shark teeth you know you're not a social scientist you're not working in in psychology you're doing this really really interesting work that feels like it's very far fetch but of course all this stuff applies to you so I want to talk about that work you're one of these press releases calls you a paleo ecologist which I think is a very cool title is that the title that you generally would use if you were describing like what you do or who you are as a scientist um it really depends on the audience um so I'm like some strange combination of like ecologist physiologist and chemist but I think about things through like geologic time um and so I'm just the nature of my work is highly interdisciplinary and it kind of depends on who the audience is to how I describe myself um I oftentimes tell my students or my friends that when I get on an airplane and I don't actually want to talk to the person that's sitting next to me when they start to try to you know have small talk with me I'll say oh I'm a stabilized to buy a geochemist and like I love that they're like that feels so hard they're like okay never mind nothing good to say to you but then like you know if I'm feeling like I'm just gonna like you know have a glass of wine on this plate and just I don't know her whose Facebook or whatever and like not worry about working and somebody asked me what I do and I'm like oh I study modern and ancient sharks and then people are like oh well the last time my favorite like a shark week story will talk to me forever about sharks so uh yeah I think that because I'm so interdisciplinary and most people I don't even know how to describe myself so I don't expect that other people would necessarily understand how I would describe myself that I just kind of tailor it to who I'm talking to yeah well and I mean I think sometimes uh hello it is Ryan and we could all use an extra bright spot in our day couldn't we just to make up for things like sitting in traffic during the dishes counting your steps you know all the mundane stuff that is why I'm such a big fan of chamba casino chamba casino has all your favorite social casino style games that you can play for free anytime anywhere with daily bonuses so sign up now at chamba casino.com that's chamba casino.com no purchase necessary vgw group void for prohibited by law 21 plus terms and conditions apply if your facilities manager at a university you know students rely on the cafeteria for breakfast lunch dinner and the occasional late night snack so when a dishwasher breaks down and dirty plates pile up the mess hall can turn messy in the blink of an eye enter granger with over a million industrial grade products and fast delivery the product you need now is never far away so you can turn that dishwasher back into a lean clean washing machine call click ranger.com or just stop by ranger for the ones who get it done within the sciences the stages of research have different implications for for the audience right so you know we're gonna talk to we're gonna talk about like how you do what you do but before we talk about how you do what you do what you do what you do maybe it's important to talk about why you do what you do and what the outcomes of that are like and that's where probably the ecologist side of things come in isn't it yeah so what drives my work is really trying to see how organisms will respond to essentially climate change environmental change and so a lot of my work does focus on sharks but I also have projects with pronghorn with wolves with lake sediments with plants um let me see I have this whiteboard where I write all of my projects down you have a project with rats uh huh yeah so I have a lot of different projects a lot of different types of organisms but the we are very I mean the reality is that we are facing some dire consequences to climate change and I think that in California it is very very apparent perhaps especially right now as we're like going through rolling blackouts from prescribed by eG&E from wildfires yeah and so like climate change is a real thing and in reality like the earth is still going to be here like it's been here for a real long time it's just a matter of like the devastation of climate change is how humans and life as we know it continue and so if we want to actually be able to manage and conserve and especially protect biodiversity we need to have a sense of like what are the tolerances that were capable of dealing with in terms of climate perturbations and the geologic record is actually a great place to ask those questions because in rocks in fossils we have evidence from past climate change experiments most of which have like not necessarily gone so great and so from this record we have to sort of deconball a variety of things being like what was the temperature what was the CO2 concentration um how did animals that survive like what did they do how were they able to survive the animals that didn't survive like why didn't they um what was their ecological tolerances uh and so that's kind of um where my my research sits very cool and so it's the reason that you're able to do research you know predominantly on sharks and looking at shark teeth but also on like you said pronghorn and and you know sediment and rats and all these different organisms or like ecological systems is the reason that you can do such widespread kind of reaching stuff because the core kind of methodology or you know what you're actually doing by looking at these isotopes is similar um throughout each different maybe organism yeah so I the method that I use um is really the the common thread through all of my research and it's stabilize the top analysis and so um yeah stabilize tops are the same element but a different number of neutrons and so it the slight difference in weight makes the um um interact differently through different chemical biological and physical processes and so in fossils uh we mainly have oxygen and carbon a store in their uh the hydroxy appetite for their enamel or in sharks and their enameloid and so that's what I'm analyzing and I took this deep dive into physiology with my PhD dissertation that I sort of referenced before because there are nuances to the physiology of different animals that regulate how these isotopes are partitioned for different groups of organisms uh for example oxygen isotopes are really um regulated or the sorting of the heavy versus light isotopes is really heavily determined by the temperature of the environment where the uh hydroxy appetite is forming and so for a mammal who are homeosteurs like the changes in oxygen isotope values are actually changes probably in the environmental water that they're drinking whereas because they are changing their like they're maintaining a core body temperature that's pretty consistent yeah whereas then for sharks because they're living in a aquatic ecosystem and their ectotherms it's a combination of both the temperature of the water that they're living in and then also the oxygen isotope value of the water that they're living in and so it's kind of there's more confounding factors but it's important for us to also understand that system as well as terrestrial mammals or marine mammals are hard to study with this method but are doable but uh yeah so um yeah uh the reason why I'm able to study so many different systems is because of my methodology and I while I got into what I do because I love the outdoors in reality I just spend a lot of time in essentially a chemistry lab it's funny I I I hear this when I talk to paleontologists a lot too they're like you know you do all that when you're a grad student but they're you're just in the lab after that I'm interested though like and maybe this is kind of a naive or silly question but how is utilizing stable isotopes to kind of understand the ancient environment how like what's the difference between what you do and like radio carbon dating for example just finding out the age of things because doesn't that also utilize isotopes yeah so a carbon 14 is what's used in um in carbon dating and that's a product of radioactive decay so it's very important to have time constraints on the environmental and ecological changes that are happening and so various methods of dating these events and um situations are also important which is so carbon 14 dating that is a very important field as well uh and I'm interested in not only like the timing of when it happened but then what was the intensity of the change so for example in terms of climate change like how much did the temperature of the water change or how much did um the size of sharks change in this environment versus that environment uh and that what was the water temperature in those two environments or what was the salinity of the water that the sharks were living in um and so tying those sorts of ecological components with also the timing of it is is important so interesting so it's the radioactivity of the isotopes that allows you to figure out when something was was in existence but you're actually looking at stable isotopes like not radioactivity and that gives you information about like it gives you a fingerprint yeah it gives you sort of fingerprints of potential ecological or environmental change um and so I will say though that with C14 dating um you can only really I think that it's only good for about oh man it's been a long yeah it doesn't go back that far right you have to use different isotopes for super old things so for a lot of the work that I do because I'm looking at things that are on the order of like 35 to maybe 56 55 million years old I don't use um radioactivity isotopes or I don't use C14 dating um I do have some projects that are related to lake sediments and for that we do use C14 dating because those are very modern um I think they're very modern but they're still like 10,000 years old but like you know humans were around that and like it's it's still within our our lifespan which you know on an ecological scale or I'm sorry on a geological scale is super manner so you're looking at things that are like you know I think we sometimes forget that sharks have been around like through the dinosaur not through but like during part of the dinosaurs like sharks are old like really old yeah they've been around for 400 million years uh yep through the dinosaurs they have been around for a very very long time they have actually been quite successful in their role as carnivorous marine organisms um cold-blooded organisms and it's kind of fascinating because they've actually only gone through two bottlenecks in terms of their diversity and so um they they've been successful through periods of mass extinction and climate change and so they that was kind of what made me interested in in digging deeper into studying them um when I had started my PhD uh folks had not really done very much uh shark paleo ecology and I would say that it's still not super widespread but even with modern shark ecology it had not really been explored um with stabilisotope analysis and so that's why I did um I kept sharks in captivity and and fed them different things and looked at their soft tissues and physiology hello it is Ryan and I was on a flight the other day playing one of my favorite social spin-slot games on chamba casino.com I looked over the person sitting next to me and you know what they were doing they were also playing chamba casino everybody's loving having fun with it chamba casinos home the hundreds of casino style games that you can play for free anytime anywhere so sign up now at chamba casino.com to claim your free welcome bonus it's chamba casino.com and live the chamba life sponsored by chamba casino no purchase necessary vgw group void for prohibited by law 21 plus terms and conditions apply. it's calling you to experience extraordinary at derby week rise to excitement at dawn of the downs step into glamour at opening night powered by lgne and ke you feel the heartbeat of a community at five o' two's day share a kindred and celebratory spirit at wednesday and thurby presented by old forester derby week 2025 april 26th to may third thrilling awaits learn more at cantucky derby dot com. um yeah so it's kind of been interesting and cool to sort of see this technique mature and develop uh sort of in sync with my my professional development. yeah i mean okay i know this is kind of a side note but like what were the outcomes of those two bottlenecks because usually when there is an evolutionary bottleneck like you'll have a new kind of sort of i don't know branch or a change right that occurs like how do you know that there are two bottlenecks and how did they affect the shark. i don't know that we necessarily have a great answer for that honestly um cool yeah we love that i love that about science it's like dissertation yeah there's always something to learn yeah there are different i think that they were on orders of sharks but i there were maybe a couple orders that went out but um it's not super clear if like certain size classes or certain um uh like if the they weren't necessarily living in a certain type of environment that went extinct either and so i think that that is very much like to be determined oh cool so it's not like with whales where we can class them and say like those are baline whales and these are non-baline whales and these are two different kind of evolutionary like arms and they have different features and traits like generally sharks or sharks. yeah they do have differences like there are ground sharks versus lamina form sharks lamina forms are mostly like fast swimming go long distances but then there's also crossovers within different groups as well it's not as cut and dry as the whales for sure um gotcha the whales get complicated too and you go back yeah they do yeah they get really complicated i recently had Nick pines and maybe it's not that recent anymore yeah on the show and we talked a lot about the you know paleo i don't even know what you'd call that paleo mammology yeah of whales and it was fascinating um i was like gosh i never knew i know there were so many questions to be asked about whales yeah uh Nick and i actually we went um we spent i think i was a week or 10 days in um in Peru together when i was in grad school uh looking for fossil whales and sharks uh oh cool oh that's amazing world's colliding yeah and of course um you know you you work a lot with teeth because these are i mean they're kind of i don't want to say easy but they're easier to find than than bones right because sharks just like constantly make teeth and lose them yeah and sharks don't have bones so uh oh well there you go yeah they're all cartilage your body so they maybe only have cartilage mineralized cartilage but uh and their teeth are made the appetite that makes up their enamel which is actually called enamelite and in shark's teeth uh because it's formed slightly differently and has some different properties to it but it's a floro appetite so it has a lot of fluorine in it and that actually makes it more resistant to um degradation in the fossil record and so it's pure sugar probably goes through i don't know many thousands of teeth in its lifetime and so that in combination with also that their enamelite is so much more resistant to um degradation make it that our fossil record has a lot of shark teeth um yeah i mean i even have one i have a big megaloduct from my bookshelf here and it's so cool because it's like you know it's old it's so old but you hold it in your hand and you feel like it could have been from today yeah i mean it's a fossil it's the wrong color but it's really cool to like hold a piece of an ancient creature in your hand like that and then of course you do much more than hold it in your hand you're able to actually investigate at this like atomic level basically what's been going on with this animal and you're looking at environmental change to try and understand climate change but i'm i'm interested like isn't what we're dealing with right now this anthropogenic climate change sort of a different class we know that we've been through some really serious swings in the climate we know there have been multiple ice ages and we know that it's been very very hot it's been very cold the glaciers have been almost completely melted there've been times when it was like almost all glaciers but didn't all those changes happen a lot more slowly than they're happening now absolutely the rate of change today is what is so alarming about today's climate change um so yeah today is a very very different ball game in terms of the rate of climate change and how animals will respond but still if we want to have any sense of what it was like in a time that it was very hot and with high CO2 concentrations looking at this period of time called the Eocene which is from 35 to about 56 million years ago is a good time to look and so some of the work that i have going on right now is to look at responses to the shark community off of the coast of Antarctica during this time period and so during this time period the drake passage was opening and that's the area between the southern tip of South America and the Antarctic peninsula and so with the drake passage opening um and then also the tazmin straight opening that's uh near australia on the opposite side of Antarctica with those opening they allowed for the Antarctic circumpolar current to form uh but before this these openings the there was no Antarctic circumpolar current there was no glaciation at all on Antarctica or the Arctic and it was really warm um the Arctic and the Antarctic had this one group of santaeger sharks at both the very north and the very south um and the temperatures and other fossils that are in the area suggest that it was pretty warm um we're finding temperatures on the order of maybe like 16 to close to 20 degrees Celsius so um very different realm than today uh and so during this time period we're sort of studying how the changes in the shark community like the differences of the different species but then also the temperature their body size um and maybe we're exploring different ways to get at their diet as well um to see how those changed through time fascinating and so is this the research project is tied to a recent um kind of really large NSF grant that you and uh researchers from really all over the world are working together on yes um i actually have two NSF grants that recently got funded so thank you to NSF oh very cool and are they for two different projects or do they combine for it for a single project no there are for two very different projects they're common thread are stabilized tips and sharks um and so yeah this the one project is exactly what you're talking about or what i was talking about and what you're referencing is um an international team and so i am working a lot on sort of the sharks and stable isotope analysis the other um paleo shark specialist is dr. Yerging Krivit from um he's at the University of Vienna in Austria and then we also have a component of um of a new dimmium isotopes to track sort of how different oceanographic currents were happening with this time since we're looking to track uh the extent of opening of the Drake passage and that is with uh dr. Howie Sher he's at the University of South Carolina and then we are sort of wrapping it all together with um with analysis in climate modeling and for climate modeling we're looking at the difference uh orientation of sort of like the tectonics with the gateway and the positioning of the continents uh different CO2 concentrations through time and then what's really novel about the climate models that will be running uh is also that the hub isotope tracers in them for both oxygen and new dimmium and so that is with dr. Alex John at CU Boulder and dr. Matt Huber at Purdue University uh and then what do isotope tracers do? they are sort of isotopes are what we're actually measuring in these teeth uh in terms of the data that we're collecting and so by putting them into the model we're hoping that the outputs from the model we can compare them to what we actually get from the shark teeth and use it as a way to sort of say like oh well this model is probably more accurate than that model um or that this model these components of it look like it might be better for like near shore sharks but it looks like it's not so good for the sharks that live really deep in the water column things like that very cool yeah so this really is not something that's keeping us sort of honest and has actually into Antarctica and collected fossils and thought very deeply about the geologic history and geologic record there is dr. Thomas Morris who's at the Natural History Museum in Sweden. kacha and so this really is not just a multidisciplinary team but also like a multinational team so you've got perspectives from all over coming together i mean um right and see crest here when you have a busy schedule it's important to maximize your downtime one of the best ways to do that is by going to chamba casino.com chamba casino has all your favorite social casino games like spin slots bingo and solitaire that you can play for free for a chance to redeem some serious prizes so hop on to chamba casino.com now and live the chamba life sponsored by chamba casino. This podcast is sponsored by talk space you know when you're really stressed or not feeling so great about your life or about yourself talking to someone who understands can really help but who is that person how do you find them where do you even start talk space talk space makes it easy to get the support you need with talk space you can go online answer a few questions about your preferences and be matched with a therapist and because you'll meet your therapist online you don't have to take time off work or range child care you'll meet on your schedule wherever you feel most at ease if you're depressed stressed struggling with a relationship or if you want some counseling for you and your partner or just need a little extra one-on-one support talk space is here for you plus talk space works with most major insurers and most insured members have a zero dollar copay no insurance no problem now get eighty dollars off of your first month with promo code space 80 when you go to talkspace.com match with the licensed therapist today at talkspace.com save eighty dollars with code space 80 at talkspace.com publishing is going to be fun yeah fun with that writing process well I love that the thing that I'm excited about is I I'm very excited and like all of my collaborators and so that that's good yeah very intentional part of how I have built various projects since I have gotten my PhD and such is that yeah like mentor once told me at the university Wyoming he was like oh yeah life is too short to work with people that you don't like yeah and he's right and it's so true and so I think that that's sort of been my mantra that I've stuck to since that is to make sure that I work with people that I like and then I enjoy their company and who I want to see when or talk to when I'm thinking about my science genius yes absolutely that's so important I want to go out to another NSF project only because you mentioned your meglet oh yeah my other NSF project is actually to look at why megleton went extinct or to try to figure out why megleton went extinct and to see if it was changes in oceanographic patterns and processes or if it could have been related to diet as you're learning more about megleton and collecting your data and developing these theories can we please talk about maybe making a new documentary for Discovery Channel where we help people understand that megleton actually is extinct and we have a conversation about why instead of people thinking that megleton is still out there swimming in the ocean yeah yeah that would probably please well we should start with the Discovery Channel featuring more women yes please yes we will do both of those things at the same time two birds gosh isn't it frustrating I mean obviously I could talk to you for hours and hours and hours and I'm going off on a thousand tensions but like isn't it so frustrating like what we talked about for the first whole half of this representation in both the sciences and of course I'm somebody who works in media as well as the science communicator so like you know this applies almost to the same extent if not worse in media like Hollywood has its own huge problems with representation isn't it in addition to that so frustrating sometimes to feel like we're swimming upstream in a landscape that for some reason feels the need not to celebrate actual scientific discoveries but to maintain narratives that are based on intuition or that are based on shock value or you know whatever the case may be instead of weaving actual science what we know to be in a good approximation of truth into our median narratives it's so frustrating when you watch a program that's supposed to be on a science-based network and you're like well none of that is true and we know that why are they still saying this yeah absolutely I think that I'm really an outsider when it comes to shark ecology and shark paleontology I wasn't trained there are specific sort of faculty and universities that really specialize in shark ecology and I come from none of those places there are also places that really excel in paleontology and well the University of Chicago is one of them but and I did do my postdoc there but they don't do a very traditional flavor of paleontology I would say and so I'm not like really trained in either of these things and so I really come into shark paleontology from an outsider's perspective and I read these papers that make these assertions about the ecology of ancient sharks or why they were able to persevere like why they have so many teeth or this or that and like but we should be able to test this yeah yeah why are we not using data for this they're like we should be able to also see this in like modern sharks and why are we not collecting data so that we can translate between modern and ancient ecology and so that is kind of a lot of what I would say motivates my work is I'll just hear somebody say something or read something of like oh anecdotably people say that like for example the shark teeth in this area are a lot smaller than this area and it's like well we can get a pair of calipers and measure this actually foe yeah that's like not even that hard to do like you could do that on the cheap and and so it's kind of been interesting that as this outsider and thinking about these types of questions and and I just call it like arm-wavy science and like when you dig back into the literature of like for example things saying that like sharks with pointy teeth are like grabbing at fish whereas sharks with serrated teeth are biting a tearing flesh but if you actually look at modern sharks it's not so cleanly delineated between those types of foraging behaviors and so there's all I mean shark teeth have to be shaped the way that they are for a reason like they're not deciding to expend all of this calcium which is like a pretty limiting nutrient in many cases to just come up with all these teeth and all the different shapes and sizes and stuff you know so yeah yeah let's start you know like poking at these things and digging deeper into them um and so my research program kind of goes off in a lot of tangents not just in terms of organisms and um time periods but also questions into things like that as well I love that well it must keep you really um in it you know what I mean like because you're not you do have a singular kind of theme and like a broad singular focus but you're able to really explore and you know take multiple tax that must keep you really interested all the time in your research because there's kind of always something new yeah I mean it might actually be a fault but I have learned that I can't switch between too many projects in one day or else my like the wires in my head start getting crossed and certainly like shorts in my brain and then some days I'm like gosh I am really tired and it's because like oh yeah I like did a lot of mental work on four different projects today and um but it is really interesting to me and I think that I because I have sort of this interdisciplinary research program I can part of that is being able to speak the language of these different sub disciplines and such so um I find it super exciting and fun to talk to oceanographers and ecologists and physiologists and um geologists and chemists and just on this whole host of various people and so usually when I meet people and I ask them what their research is like oh I have this like random question related to sharks like could we do this and then it just adds like another project to my board I love it I love it so okay we talked about like these two big grants that came in I think both this year correct yeah yeah so so those are two big projects that obviously you now absolutely have to focus on because you're being government funded to do so um are they I know that you're working on a lot of things but are these kind of like where your head is at right now is there anything new on the horizon that we didn't talk about or is that kind of going to be your focus for the next probably you know um a couple of years at least um well now I actually have two other projects that are uh actually three other projects that are probably taking a whole lot of my bandwidth as well uh one is a project looking at historical wolves and how um climate change and human interaction uh has affected the variation in their diet um within individuals and among individuals uh through time through historical time and uh that's work that my postdoc Dr. Robin trailer has been working on uh with me and then uh I also have a project where uh when I was a graduate student I had the um awesome opportunity to go to Japan for an entire summer and uh work with um a professor uh Dr. Sho Tanaka who he actually uh was the first one to describe Mega Mouth Shark which was um I think that it was discovered like in the late 70s it's kind of crazy that like a fairly large shark we didn't know about until the late 70 yeah but I went to work with him and I didn't know very much about sharks at that time but uh he helped me collect a bunch of uh various shark tissues from deep sea sharks off the coast of Japan and I kind of I mean part of it was I didn't have hey it's Ryan Seacrest life comes at you fast which is why it's important to find some time to relax a little you time enter Chamba Casino with no download required you can jump on anytime anywhere for the chance to redeem some serious prizes so treat yourself with Chamba Casino and play over 100 online Casino style games all for free go to chamba casino.com to collect your free welcome bonus sponsored by Chamba Casino no for just necessary VGW group void for prohibited by law 21 plus terms and conditions apply this podcast is sponsored by talk space you know when you're really stressed or not feeling so great about your life or about yourself talking to someone who understands can really help but who is that person how do you find them where do you even start talk space talk space makes it easy to get the support you need with talk space you can go online answer a few questions about your preferences and be matched with a therapist and because you'll meet your therapist online you don't have to take time off work or arrange childcare you'll meet on your schedule wherever you feel most at ease if you're depressed stressed struggling with a relationship or if you want some counseling for you and your partner or just need a little extra one-on-one support talk space is here for you plus talk space works with most major insurers and most insured members have a zero dollar copay no insurance no problem now get $80 off of your first month with promo code space 80 when you go to talkspace.com match with the licensed therapist today at talkspace.com save $80 with code space 80 at talkspace.com the the resources in terms of money to analyze the samples but then the other part of it was that I don't think that I necessarily had such a clear interpretive framework for the data set either so these samples have been untouched since they were collected in 2005 or something but I have three undergraduate students in my lab who are working on these samples and so one student was working on a liver and muscle tissue samples and then I had two students working on a teeth and their teeth are actually kind of cool because shark teeth are continuously growing and there's different rows of teeth and so we are analyzing teeth from different rows to get a sense of how their diet is changing through time which is also kind of what muscle and liver tissue also do and then my last project that I'm really excited about is actually much more related to hormone and energy balance and so a close colleague and friend of mine at the University of Kentucky she studies sort of how hormones regulate energy and water and such so she raises rats in a laboratory setting and so we actually took out the gonads of male and female rats and then kept the gonads in some of them and then we fed them all the same thing and we're trying to track to see how you know these hormones actually regulate the nutritional physiology of the rats and so in wild ecological studies we oftentimes look at differences of stabilized tips and we say that it's because they're eating different things or foraging differently or something like that but we're actually finding that there are differences among individuals just based on their hormone levels so it's like oh like maybe we should think more about you know the physiology of the animals and sort of like what life stage that therein as well I love that and that almost takes us back full circle to the stuff we're talking about at the beginning about humans you know this idea that we so often will homogenize an entire group based on certain characteristics and just assume that you know those characteristics sort of account for the majority of the variants but ultimately there are a lot of individual differences even in animals that were bred not to be utilized in the lab and yeah how important is it to understand that so yeah that's so fascinating Sora it's so many cool projects going on right now and it's true kind of if you were to pick them off the wall you might think how are any of these related but then you start to see this kind of central thread as we figured out through the show so I don't want to keep you for much longer even though I think it would be really fun to get back together with you sometime in the future and catch back up but before we do go I have to ask you the closing two questions that I ask everybody when I have them on my show because I feel like you're going to have potentially a different perspective and of course you work on these big ecological issues so who knows those might feed in but are you ready these are kind of big picture questions okay so I want you to think about the the future in whatever context is relevant to you it could be your work it could be you know something personal it could be kind of bigger picture global issues and the first question is what is the thing that really does keep you up the most at night that you're most concerned about you know maybe even pessimistic borderline cynical what are you really really worried about and then on the flip side of that so you know we bring things up a bit what are you most optimistic about what are you excited about what are you genuinely kind of looking forward to hmm I think that I have the same answer for both oh cool I love that I love the flip side answer yeah and for me it's um whether I'm doing right by my students uh I think is what both keeps me up and gets me really jazz and excited um that I worry and think a lot about uh mentoring and how I'm supporting and advocating um but then also sometimes like you have to have those hard conversations and really draw boundaries and um and make sure that people realize when they're not understanding or when they're not behaving or not being respectful you know like I don't try to police people's behavior or anything but um and like what is that professional and personal life yeah um so that like keeps me up because I do want to do well and I am very straightforward with um my colleagues but also my students and in some ways with students I could probably get away with not having some of those uncomfortable conversations but I force myself to because I think that it will only like serve to help them in the future sort of it really well that awareness um and in reality I want them all to succeed and so to help jump start that process is important um but then like I'm also really excited for my students and where they're going and what they're doing like a lot of the students who work in my lab um like the graduate students I have first generation I have students who moved here um from the other side of the US but also the other side of the world like one of my graduate students he came to work with me from Italy and uh so I'm excited for their work um for my undergraduates I hope and I try you know to give them meaningful research experiences that they um get excited to continue and STEM and that they have opportunities and that they uh consider and want to go to graduate school um and that I've been sort of like a positive influence in terms of professional development for them uh and so like I can sort of see them developing and maturing and producing data and getting excited uh which is also super cool so um yeah I think that that's probably what I spend the vast majority of my time and energy like rolling around in my head uh associate with my students and they're like potential and what they're doing is is the research as well that I'm excited for the directions of my research I think that when I started my dissertation I had these grand ideas of looking at shark paleo ecology um and thinking about deep time questions and then I got kind of sucked into this vortex of modern ecology but uh it's really cool right now to be able to say like oh yeah I'm like working on these like really interesting and cool problems like you say megalodon and like people usually have some kind of response to it uh it says cool to have a project a funded project where the National Science Foundation like deemed that our ideas were like worthy and good enough to to put some money at and um and then similarly like my project with uh the Antarctic sharks I mean my collaborators are people whose papers that I have read for a long time and that I yeah that's so cool working with them is awesome you know and uh super validating so I it's it's all very exciting and cool very exciting very cool and totally bad ass I have to add soara this has been so much fun I've learned an awful lot I'm interested um for everybody listening uh you know where can they learn more about your work is there like do you keep a website or you active on social media or anything if they're interested in following the the cool stuff that you're up to yeah I do have a website uh it is soara.leakim.org um and then I also am on Twitter my handle is soara.lkim and um I am also on Facebook but that's more personal stuff so probably not as relevant but a lot of my posts um especially on Twitter I have to do with uh diversity equity inclusions or social justice uh it's so very cool so that is very much like a core of what I do and what I think about um and I think while oftentimes it is treated especially in STEM it's sort of like broader impacts and like outreach activities I actually think that to start being part of the change we have to incorporate it that it's a thread within our research program and our teaching and our mentoring and not seen as like this other category of things to do when we have time or energy oh my gosh I'm like here here I don't know I I can't clap my hand I can't do enough clap emojis or 100 emojis for that um so with you on that that's so great I just started following you I'm excited to see all the things you talk about well gosh soara thank you so much I had such a blast chatting with you today yeah it was wonderful thank you so much absolutely and everyone listening thank you for coming back a week after week I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk to nobody how to have fun anytime anywhere step one go to chambacacino.com chambacacino.com got it step two collect your welcome bonus come to pop a welcome bonus step three play hundreds of casino style games for free that's a lot of games all for free step four unleash your excitement um chambacacino has been delivering thrills for over a decade so claim your free welcome bonus now and live the chambalife visit chambacacino.com if you're a maintenance supervisor for a commercial property you've had to deal with everything from leaky faucets to flickering light bulbs but nothing's worse than that ancient boiler that's lived in the building since the day it was built 50 years ago it's enough to make anyone lose their cool that's where Granger comes in with industrial grade products and dependable fast delivery Granger can help with any challenge from worn out components to everyday necessities call clickranger.com or just stop by Granger for the ones who get it done
