 If you're looking for a new spacious SUV, stop. Please don't pay more for less. Buy from Warnakia and save thousands. Interest rates as low as 0%. Or no payments for six months. Upside down on your tray, get up to 4,000 over KBB from Warnakia. Test drive the Kia's Sarentha with rugged good looks, advanced technology and luxury. If you haven't already made the switch to Warnakia, now's the best time. Get all the details at Warnakia.com. Oh, make that switch, make that switch to Warnakia. Strike gold this March with the luck of the drive event at Warner Hyundai. Hyundai offers more style, comfort, safety, and tech. And you're in luck because this event offers even more savings. Test drive the 2025 Hyundai Palisade, a perfect fit for any family with its seven available trim levels and three rows full of comfort and convenience. New Hyundai's come with owner assurance with America's best warranty, a 10-year 100,000 mile powertrain limited warranty. Nationwide, feeling lucky, visit Warner Hyundai.com. Hello, everyone, and welcome to Talk Nurtie. Today is Monday, September 13, 2021. And I'm the host of the show, Cara Santa Maria. This week we've got a great episode for you. But before we dive in, I do want to thank those of you who make Talk Nurtie possible week after week. Remember, Talk Nurtie is and will always be 100% free to download. And that's because I rely on the listener support of people just like you. If you want to pledge your support, you can visit patreon.com slash Talk Nurtie. Or you can learn more at Talk Nurtie.com. This week's Top Patron is Rob Shrek. Thank you so much Rob for your very, very generous support. Also at the top of the list, I want to thank Daniel Lang and Mary Niva. And I want to thank Brian Holden, Christopher Pitts, David J.E. Smith, Dutus Infanitas, June Separa, Ulrika Hagman, and Robert Chris. Thank you all so, so much. All right, let's dive into it. Super interesting chat for you guys today. I had the opportunity to sit down with, well, remotely, of course, with Dr. Walter E. Massey. Oh my gosh, I don't even know where to begin. Chairman of the Giant Magellan Telescope Project. He was the first African-American professor of physics at Brown University, the first African-American president of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the Triple A-S. Also the director of the Argonne National Laboratory where there's a Walter E. Massey Fellowship established, first African-American chairman of the Board of Bank of America. Oh, and he also ran the National Science Foundation. So yeah, what an astonishing career. And I mean, those are just the highlights so much more. So I had the opportunity to sit down with him and talk about his new book in the eye of the storm. My time is chairman of Bank of America during the country's worst financial crisis. But don't worry, we also talk about physics. We talk about leadership. We talk about race in America. And so, so much more. So without any further ado, here he is, Dr. Walter E. Massey. Walter, thank you so much for taking the time to join us today. I'm pleased to be here. Thank you for having me. Absolutely, and good morning to you, sir. Although I'm not sure where you are hailing from. It's morning here in Los Angeles, where you connected from. We are actually on Cape Cot for the summer. Oh, wow. Lovely. It was 1 o'clock here. Yeah. Beautiful day. Was there was there flooding? Was there any effect from the hurricane? No, we had two. We had three, which missed us completely. And we had either. And it wasn't so much the hurricane, but we had several tornado warnings. So we were up all night watching, because none of them landed, but they came right, the warning to a right and out neighborhood. So it was pretty harrowing. Yeah, but it sounds like you dodged a bullet for sure. We did. We did. That's good to hear. And I can imagine in your, I'm looking at your Wikipedia, in your, what is this? Let's, let me do my math really quickly. 83? Is that right? 83 years? My age? Yeah. Yes. 83, in your 83 years on this planet, you have probably seen and experienced quite a lot, both harrowing and, of course, humbling and exciting and very emotional. And I'm so excited to be able to spend some time with you and learn a little bit about your life and your story, especially for folks who don't know about Dr. Walter E. Massey. So maybe we start at the end and we work our way back. I follow your guide. Yes. So you have a new book out. It's called, In the Eye of the Store, My Time as Chairman of Bank of America during the country's worst financial crisis. And when I got this book across my desk, I remember thinking, well, this is not relevant to me or to talk nerdy. We're a science show. This doesn't make a lot of sense. And then I started to dig. And I started to dig. And I started to dig. And I realized, what is a physicist doing, chairing the largest financial institution in the country through a financial crisis? The story just gets more interesting and it gets deeper and deeper. And so let's start at the end, work our way back to the beginning. How did you become the chairman of Bank of America? I had been on the board of Bank of America for about 16 years in 2008. I had joined this chair as a member of the Bank of America company in San Francisco before it merged with nations back and became the new Bank of America. And another question might be, well, how did I get even on? But we're on that side and that's another story. But when I was director of Argonne National Laboratory in Chicago, which is one of the oldest and largest energy research labs, national labs in the countries where Enrico Fermi first started when they discovered nuclear fission. And so when I was director of Argonne in Chicago, there was a very prominent physician, even though I was a professor of physics at the University of Chicago. I was also director of our company. And it brought me to the attention of, I had corporate leaders in the city, because as director of this large facility, I was a research facility, but had a budget of about over $300 million, about $3,000 employees. So we were an economic force in the region also, an economic. And that's brought me to the attention of the corporate community, where I had to work a lot on this. And I was asked to join boards. And one of those was a bank called the First National Bank of Chicago. So that's where I first got banking experience. So throughout my career, I kept doing my science, education, administration, but I began to serve on boards. So in 2008, I was a member of the Bank of America board. And we had a combination leadership, chairman and CEO, the same person. That's quite common. In fact, that's the most, I guess, normal configuration of boards, one person is chairman and CEO. I have a son company that have a separate executive chairman and CEO and the chairman, older, CEO, the entire board, and the CEO reports to the chairman. So back of America during this 2008 crisis, we bought Merrill Lynch. And I go into some detail in the book to tell the reader about the situation then. And the fact that when we bought Merrill Lynch, we put us into deep financial trouble, to the extent that our shareholders voted that the bank separate those positions of chairman and CEO. And the board voted to do that. The shareholders voted to do that. That the board elected a new chairman to my surprise, to my shock. They elected me. And I had no warning. Are you ready? I hadn't, I had given it no thought. What else? Now, there was a further thing for my mind that were other people on the board who I thought were that when it came to a vote, I would support them. Never thinking I would be the one to be asked to do it. And it was an honor, of course, chairman of the bank of America. It's quite something. And I was pleased. It was taken aback. But I thought, well, OK, I've been on board a long time. And I had been on board where there were separate CEO and chairman, Motorola fancester and McDonald. So I had seen what a chairman did. And I thought, OK, I can do that. It's about two days a week. And you obviously, the board, you set the agenda, you appoint committed chairs, you make sure things are moving well, you stay in touch with management. The bank is then touched with the federal reserve and regulated. And it will be, I'll have a lot to learn, but I can do that. And then that was a Wednesday. Next day, Thursday, I got a call. From the federal reserve, the agency is which always sees large banks. And people have heard of the federal reserve, I'm sure. Oh, yeah. I got a call from the federal reserve in Washington telling me I should go to Richmond, Virginia the next day. OK. And meet with the local federal reserve president and Richmond, which overseas to back. And I would get a message that I should take back to the board. And that point out in the book, that changed the equation. Because at that meeting, I was told there were a number of things that had to be corrected in the bank. And they were looking for me as a new chairman to make sure these things happen. So I became a full-time job. Wow. And how, I mean, you had been serving on boards, as you mentioned, for quite some time. You had been doing a lot of philanthropy. You had really kind of diversified the work that you were doing. But you're trained. And we're going to obviously come to that. You're trained and had been historically a physicist. A physicist for a very long time. Is there a lot of, I guess, translation that you can point to there? Things that your experience as an academic really helped prepare you for in taking on this very fast and seemingly overwhelming task? I've been asked that quite a bit in various forms. That question, and maybe even more precisely, is there anything about the physics, my physics training, and experience, then research that translates into leadership and other organizations and big organizations? And I think there is something, one of the things that I took away from physics, and I still take away, is a sense of confidence, first for me, that you can master a difficult subject. And you sort of learn how to learn and how to take on public physics is wonderful. It's a lot of fun if you enter. But it's not easy. It's a lot of mathematics, how major both in math and physics. And these are things that require you to make sort of a commitment to learning. And you have to have a belief in yourself that you can do this. And I think once having done that to physics, I began to think generally when I was given the opportunity to take on new challenges or forced to take them off, because I was put in a situation. I would be apprehensive, but I would think, well, OK, here's how you do it. And I would stop and think about it. So that's one thing I think I did take away from my theory, a problem solving capacity. And the belief that one can solve difficult problems. Yeah. And this all kind of started way back when you began your academic career at a historically black college in Atlanta, which of course, now you are a president emeritus of. And that's more house college. You did your undergraduate degree there? I did. I did, which is more house college from Mississippi, out of the 10th grade on the Special Board Foundation scholarship. Oh, wow. Yeah. And in the book, and maybe I should explain it, you read it to the police. It's about my time as chairman of Bank of America, but I flash back and recapture growing up in Mississippi, being president of more house, doing science. So there's a thread one might say a through line about my experience that year at the bank, which I think is fascinating. And it's often for people who have some curiosity about that price is 10 years ago. I hope it's explained in terms you can understand. But even more, I try to use that as a basis for writing a short version of my memoirs. I have written a much longer version of my memoirs that my publisher and I thought was just so long that it would be good to sort of write them in different volumes. So this is the first of what I hope would be other. Kind of like an entree to the writer. What? Kind of a derv. Mm-hmm. Yeah. And so I think sometimes, even for younger listeners, such as myself, I was born in, you were born in 1938. I was born in 1983. And so when I think about the Civil Rights era, it's something that happened before I existed. And so I reconstructed it based on documentary, based on interviews, based on what I understand about history. To me, it's history. You know, my mother was born in the 40s. And this is the history of my country. For you, this was your life. You graduated college in 1958. So that's a solid 10 years before we lost MLK, before we lost Bobbie, before this sort of, you know, what we think of as being the culmination of a very dark era. But you were living throughout the 40s and 50s in the face of Southern discrimination in Mississippi. That's true. It's very interesting when I speak now to young people. And everyone, mostly young, I'm wonderful. It tends to happen, right? I tend to have a lot of this. I take it for granted that people know these things. And I have to stop to, of course, they do. And you speak of the 50s and 60s. Well, I grew up in Mississippi in the 40s, born in 1938. And it was way before the Civil Rights movement, even though there was NAACP local chapters doing things. But when I grew up, and I talked about this, it was total apartheid, like segregation. I mean, total, you know, black color. We were not black. We were called it color, water fountain, that's why it was water fountain. You couldn't shop in certain stores. You couldn't eat. This was before any city ends, which happened in the early 60s. Total segregated schools, movers, we had to go in the back, the clubs, outdoor fire escape to sit in the balcony, and the earp you could go in at all. So, you know, that was my childhood. And then I went to a more house when I was 16. I didn't finish college. I got this four-time-day scholarship to go out of the 10th grade. And at more house, we began to see glimmers of the Civil Rights Movement, and then when I was a student, because that's one of the King's juniors, was pasted, haven't these, perhaps, church, and this area. So, you have solved through that, lives through, and continues to live through that entire early period. And then moving in the 60s, one thing from, again, to be much more public and much more engaged. And so, you know, I want to obviously, I want to talk soon about your academic life and about physics. Obviously, as a science podcast, that's the focus of our show. But while we're on this very, I think, important topic, just because I'm so personally fascinated and equivalently concerned, I'm wondering as a child growing up, as you mentioned in the segregated south, in a partite state during Jim Crow, part of your understanding of reality was that there was a deep racial divide in our country. How aware were you as a child of racial violence? I mean, obviously, this is an era of lynchings. This is an era of terrible, overt racial violence. Did you, were you protected by your parents or by your family from that? Was it a very overt, and like, was there an awareness in children's minds? It was not as overt in their minds as one might expect. First of all, this was a time when there was very little media. So even though things might be happening 20 or 50 miles away, if the papers didn't cover it, and they didn't, because the papers were white. There was no social media. It was not even, we got our first television set, when I was 10 years old. So you didn't get the news. That's one part of it. Secondly, I was protected by not just my parents, and I'm not sure who were protected, because it was an embrace, nurture. I'd point out in the book that people always surprised when I'd say in spite of growing up in media, or I had a parent to have a child of them. My mother was an elementary school teacher and principal. My father worked at one of the few only progressive companies in the spirit, which I talk about, Hercules' power company. And we had a community. Went to all black schools, but the teachers were black. I'd say my mother was one of them. And so we didn't see everyday violence in our community. We had the racial encounters, the racial slurs, the insults. The closest I came to real violence, I was seeing it was, and I'd think about this in the book, when the police, a couple of white police, killed our pet. It's German Shepherd, because my grandmother wouldn't sell it to them. And I was about five, and I came across a dog lying in its pile of garbage. And I would, you'd get insults like the bus driver, and she had to ride the back of the bus. And sometimes they wouldn't let you off. It'd your stop. They would drive us, wouldn't let us off until we, in this neighborhood of white, who were, I hate to use those words, but they were, it was kind of lower class white, as a derogatory term, I won't use it. And they would throw rocks at us and jails. Interesting enough, we were not afraid of those, we throw rocks back at them. They were not the powerful structure. Right, right, yeah. We knew the real powerful structure. Yeah. So, and I have a good education. When I went to college out of the 10th grade, I'll teach you a black, but schools would tell the segregated. I found out later just how inferior our facilities were. Later when schools became integrated, you see what the whites didn't tell. But my parents, cousins, my friends, we had a community. Now, I have questioned whether or not I'm filtering this through my own memory. And perhaps I'm blocking out things. And my childhood was not, as I'm telling you, I know it is. But I went back to Haddishburg, where I was born, and this place I'm speaking about. A couple of times, and I was writing the books, what was my old friends, my closest friends, who I think about in the book, and all this. And they remembered the same way. So I feel valid, the valid data by then. Yeah. And so when you went on after you did your undergraduate degree at Morehouse, you were mentioning this realization or recognition of integrated schools. So when you went on to do your PhD at Washington University in St. Louis, is that one of the first times or places where you started to see the sort of deeper reality because that wasn't integrated school? It was, I was in the year. No, I began to see it earlier. Mm-hmm. And Atlanta, I think, when I went to Atlanta, and we visited, even though the Morehouse, we visited Georgia Tech, for example, another, I don't know if I was going to Henry, but other white campuses, and you began to see Dan. It was mostly being in the city, and then visiting Detroit. I visited Detroit in the summer, it's quite awesome because my biological father lived there, my mother and my biological father, where the divorce before I even remember, maybe I was two. But she got pregnant when she was a sophomore in college, with me. And my biological father did not stay married long. She remarried, and the man who raised me, I call him a father. But I spent some of my biological father and step mother in Detroit. And it was in Detroit that I began to see, the real difference in what I had expeed new and had is correct. Right. And also you spent quite a bit of time towards the end of your PhD, and really started a new chapter in your life in Chicago. That's true. After I received my PhD at my first job, was that hard-gone national laboratory, but subsequently I became 20 years, 20 years later. No. About 11 years later, I became director of this lab that I was speaking about earlier. But I was a postdoc then, I'm into engineering position. And that's what I began to do in my initial research. Our gun is located about 30 miles, 25 miles. So Southwest of the city, it's operated by the University of Chicago on the contract with the Department of Energy, and all of the national labs had that model. Some of the other labs, people might have heard of Los Alamos, which is the Weapons Lab, Livermore with a new group, Hydrogen Bomb with design. And now the Sargon was operated by the University of Chicago. So I opted to live in Chicago as many of the scientists did and commute out to the laboratory. And that's why I met my wife, Shirley, in Hyde Park. Only we connected, didn't actually meet in person, I think by phone, the day before Martin Luther King was assassinated. Oh wow. Yeah. And my birthday, they professed, and he was assassinated for four, 1968. I mean, I don't even really know how to ask this question, it's not so much about how significant was the earth shattering is paradigm shifting, but how involved in the civil rights movement, how important, because I see as your academic career grew, so then did your advocacy, and so then did your work in, you became the advisor to the Black Students Association, you became a chairman of the Black faculty and staff association, ultimately you held positions within organizations that elevated an empowered Black physicist, you know, how, how would you sort of describe this lockstep movement of your development as a physicist, and also your sort of racial awakening and your role in fighting back against racial discrimination? I think Martin Luther King's assassination was a triggering point for me to become more engaged. So I said, I went to give the list and the dates. I finished college in 1958, I went to Howard actually for one year in graduate school, but I didn't stay there in Longstore, but I went to Ben Washington, you know, my PhD in 66, I went to Argonne, Miss position, I was deeply involved in research. I wasn't even teaching Argonne, there was a fully researched laboratory, so I was doing physics. That's what I was doing. And my thinking then was, you know, when I got my PhD, there were maybe 20, roughly 20 other blacks in the entire country of the PhD in physics, well, knew each other. And I tell, well, here's my contribution here, you know, I'm going to be a role model to the physics, try to recruit others and help others become engaged in this field, but people have invested a lot in me to get me to this point. So I should be, I should try to be the best physics I can be, you know, that should be my contribution, right? Well, so people are doing other things, so, and they're only about 20 of us, I should do this. So I was doing research and then, mine looked to cane, went to Morehouse of course. So it was much more, I hate to say it was more personal to me, the most big, but it resonated more because all of us at Morehouse grew up knowing about, had more house about Martin Luther King, Benjamin Mayes, who was president, when I was there, was Martin Luther King, mentor. And he just wanted to have, so at Morehouse, you just, Martin Luther King, you can bat it in your psyche, and think kind of. And, that his funeral, I was watching by myself, my partner, Scott, and Benjamin Mayes, developed a eulogy, and the funeral was held on Morehouse College's campus, and it was televised. So all of that was, yeah, it was, it was just so emotional for me. So, that's when I decided that I really wanted to be more engaged, that I didn't want to just, do the free research, and it happened that I got an opportunity to go to a university in Illinois, or a band-up. And I thought, well, yes, you should be able to be on a college campus, they're going to be black students, they're, they're ways you can engage more than just going to do it. So that's what I did. I went to a band-up, and you said, how do you juxtapose all of these things with the physics? Well, this one little seven-dipitous events in my life was still been made fortunate for me. Urbana, not only was a place where there was, they were recruiting a number of black students from inner cities. So there were a lot of them there for that time. They made it 500 and one, yeah. And Urbana, University of Illinois, Urbana had the best physics group, and one's the best in the world in my field. So I had this opportunity to go and be with this fantastic group, condensed them out of theory. It's what I did. The reticum says, this is looking at properties of materials at barren low temperatures, like super conductive, superfluid, so that's tried to make Urbana. Well, I got involved. The first night I was on campus, before I'd even unpack, I slept on the floor, and put it in there a bit. I'm blank as I had. I got a call about 12 third and I said, this professor, Professor Massey, I said, who was, you didn't know I'm the professor? I never did call before. Wow. Oh, wow, yeah. I've gone to class. Yeah. I said, this is David Aderson, and I'm president of the Black Student Association, and they've arrested 250 Black students. What? And we are looking for faculty, and Black faculty, particularly, to come help us get them out of jail. And that was my introduction. Trial, but higher. Wow. So we've right there. So I've, I became advised until the Black Student Association, I've gained a founding chairman of the Black Faculty and Staff Association, and I really got deeply engaged in, issues on campus having to do with Black Student. And I hear, you know, I hear stories when I talk to my friends and the sciences, especially my Black and Latinx friends and the sciences, who there's a struggle, and I can imagine that it was even more amplified in this era where there were, like you mentioned, there were only 20 people, but there's this struggle between, I want to advocate, I want to be involved, I want to be a role model, and I want my blackness and my scientistness to stand firm as my fundamental identity, but at the same time, I don't want one to necessarily interfere with the other. I don't want to be tokenized in one role over the other, like being a Black scientist, especially in an era, or a physicist, especially in an era when there were very few other Black physicists, did you ever feel like early on, at least, a sense of resistance to like want to embody that role as a voice for Black students, as a voice for Black science, or what did you always sort of feel in your heart of hearts that it's part of the job, and it's actually something that you're sort of proud to lead and to fulfill. Well, I thank you, Captain, the feelings of a lot of us, even now, I speak with young Black physicists, you know, this desire to contribute to racial progress by being deeply engaged, but also the desire to do your, you know, be at the top of your profession, because up to all, that's why most people went into, one doesn't randomly, you know, fall into doing physics. Right. Very high achieving, yeah. Wake up one more to say, I think I'll be high in the job. So you devoted a lot of work and time, and so you want to be the best for numberies. One, you want to be the best because you like what you're doing, hope you love it. And secondly, not being the best in the field, is another way of, quote, letting down the race, right? Yeah, right. So there's that pressure too. You've captured, I think you've captured it. Well, well, so that's, in fact, something similar led to my big change in my life in Korea. I got so involved at her ban, that I, of course, I felt I was just putting out fires that I wasn't, I wasn't really, I didn't feel I was really making any deep contribution. On the science side. On the racial side. Oh, on the racial side, okay. And yeah. Because I was dealing with student issues, students would come to me, that the president administration would come to me whenever that, I was, every black, five other staff, associations, advice into the students. Right. So whenever there's a issue, you're there. And there were only about five, 10-year try, black five of the, at the entire university of the North, Banna where they had maybe 2,000, I just didn't know both, that was exactly not enough. But they had a couple thousand of them. So, wow. You know, you, yeah, you're yet. And I was not, not unique in that position. And still it happens to, it's almost a trap for black on the other minority type of it. They could called up on all the time to be the point of contact, they're repressed for the person you call upon to be engaged in racial issues, especially when you're on tenure. And then, when it's time for a tenured decision, you haven't, they haven't done that enough work. Right. Right. They haven't published that book, or they haven't written those papers, and all of that engagement with the students, those issues, doesn't count. So it just doesn't. So, they get, and I used to warn young faculty at Black faculty about that. Don't, don't, I just have to call them that trap. You know, you have to, you have to, figure out some way to deal with. So anyway, I decided that I was, I was, I was not, not in my optimum, uh, mode of doing research, and I was not really making any deep contributions other than being the firefighter. Uh, and an opportunity, and the thing that made me think about, well, what is it I can do that will combine both? And I was teaching an introductory course to, I was also taught graduate course, and this was one for undergraduate. And I had a number of the students at the University of Recruited from Chicago and Philadelphia, Black students, and they were not prepared. They simply, now you have white students not prepared also, but they were more so as a group. And they simply had not had the adequate high school sign. Had nothing to do with that intellect and their political ability. They hadn't been taught. The courses they'd had were not proper. And I got interested then in high school science education. And so I had an opportunity to go to Brown, and I talk about this in the book, because a colleague of mine from Urbana had gone to Brown. And he had to become a visit. And I spoke with him about what I wanted to do. And that seemed to be a place where I could do both. So I helped found something called the Interested in Teachers of Science, Iktos, to try to provide the kind of undergraduate education for people who wanted to be science teachers, and especially who were going to maybe teach in urban areas. So that was a way I felt, I could make a long-term, more strategic difference. And it's something that I would enjoy doing and I knew how to do, I know to teach a bit. But I could learn how to colleague and education, and together we would be going to put together this program. So that's what's that shift to get me more engaged in doing things in academia, with respect to empower in nurturing and educating. Black students, they're trying to improve the quality of science for Blacks. And ultimately, this culminates in a leadership position, moving from, as you mentioned, keeping your head down, doing the work as a physicist, but also as a professor, into being in a leadership position and a role model position that transcended sort of racial barriers at the time, and ultimately encapsulated science and science achievement because by a decade later, within the next eight, nine years, you served as the president of the AAAS, and then the director of the National Science Foundation, which I mean, tell me about the change or the development to be in those positions. Did it happen kind of slowly and surely, so that by the time you had that responsibility, it just felt like the nest logical step, or was it like, holy, how did I get here? My life has never been a series of nest logical steps. So it's not meant to me, it does not happen. They've always been surprised. It's fortunate, it's a pleasant surprise. But going to Brown, I said earlier, really did change their trajectory in my career because once I began to put together this eight-told program, I had to learn how to do administrative type things. I was the director of this program, it was a multidisciplinary program. We had a major grant from the National Science Foundation, and it involved, I had to get five of it from chemistry, physics, engineering, education, bringing all of these people together to try to help put together the program. It wasn't just a physics and science, and history. And so I became kind of known around Brown's campus, much more than I would have if I had just been a physics professor over there in the physics world. And also I became aware that actually I was, seemed to be pretty good at this, bringing people together, and getting people to focus around a common object, and being in that leader-set position, and that people like working with me in those episodes, and this was kind of a surprise, it was like they were ready for physics, you do a lot of work alone. Yeah, true. And as a result of my becoming known around town, I think it was something. I was recruited to be Dean of the College at Brown, which was a big position. We were all the same then, talking undergraduate curricula, you know, at the Highly School. So that was a big surprise. But that was my first real administrative position, and I learned a lot there about leadership skills, management skills. And that's when I was offered the director of our gun from Dean, Dean. The Dean's separation at Brown was the key point that made me think, maybe I just don't want to spend the rest of my life doing physics alone. Maybe this is a wrap. Also, I saw the world, in this kind of, these positions where you're leading institutions, you can have a big effect, much more of, and a more visible effect on issues that are important to you. Then you can just by doing research alone. Right, because not only were you in these leadership positions that had a large, sort of, you were choreographing in many ways, education for large swaths of the population, but ultimately, as you moved into leadership roles at the AAAS and at the National Science Foundation, you were also setting the stage for academic achievement for decades. Like this is, I don't think, I'm not sure if the listers all, and I don't even know if I fully appreciate what exactly the AAAS and what exactly the National Science Foundation really do, but it is a lot. It's an awful lot for contributing to scientific achievement within our country. I like the word choreograph. I'm going to use that if you don't mind. Yeah, of course. I will try to acknowledge you in the fight. I may forget on occasion, but I think that is, and that's interesting. That's a good description because you are not, so much the actor, you're not the, the facility, the person doing it, but you are trying to bring resources, people, facilities, and things together to bring accomplished this goal, like choreographing a dance or a play. That's interesting. So the AAAS is the American Association for the Advancement of Science. And it is the, I think the world, but certainly the nation's largest multidisciplinary science association. It's a membership association, and probably every one who's assigned to the law of triple AS, has engaged. But it also carries out a number of programs and activities. Many of their programs have to do with science education and science efforts for minorities. And so when I was president and then chairman of the board of triple AS, I was engaged in programs that dealt with science education, particular science for blacks, and then you began to get more of my Latinos getting into becoming into science. And also I was involved, I got involved in international science activities and especially in Africa, in the black Africa. This was before South Africa, you know, had it's Mandela and it was still a part of that. So I was one of their founders of the African Academy of Sciences. And I'm still a fellow there. I just have to get to do the same thing for African communities that we were thinking about trying to do here for blacks in America without any science. The National Science Foundation is a government agency. And it is the agency that funds all of the scientific and engineering research in university through automation. And it's the give you a scale, the budget of the NSF now is about $6 billion. It was much smaller when I was there. But it's probably the most, it is the most influential science agency in the non-medical sciences. People may have heard of the National Institute of Health which fund the Biomedical Sciences the National Science Foundation fund the physical, mathematical, and engineering sciences. So that's sort of a thumbnail sketch and bill of organization. If you're looking for a new spacious SUV, stop. Please don't pay more for less. Buy from Wernakia and save thousands. Interest rates as low as 0% or no payments for six months. Upside down on your tray, get up to 4,000 over KBB from Wernakia. Test drive the Kia's Serentha with rugged good looks, advanced technology, and luxury. If you haven't already made the switch to Wernakia, now's the best time. Get all the details at Wernakia.com. Oh, make that switch. Make that switch to Wernakia. I mean, you were appointed so again to sort of contextualize the history. You were appointed as director of the NSF in 1990, which means that you were serving under President Bush, the first bush, HW Bush. And I can imagine that that must have been an interesting position to be in. And I mean, I think by today's standards, we think of President Bush as a relatively progressive Republican president, by today's standards. But at the time, his racial track record was not amazing. Some of the things that his party stood for were not amazing. And I can imagine that it must be a strange feeling to work so closely with an administration that has not historically been, or that historically has been at odds with some of your own core values. You know, it's just an extra layer of, let's say diplomacy that you have to manage. Well, actually, for that era, he was a fairly progressive person. Yeah, especially for Republican. Republican to a quite different. They were so well. I mean, he did come in after Reagan. So there is that, you know, definitely so. Yeah, maybe before we end, we can talk a little about how we are now. And that, yeah, that is definitely the plan because for somebody who has a wide view of history, I'm very much interested in your perspective there. But I was when I went for the interview. I didn't I wasn't seeking this position. Mm-hmm. I had been engaged on a number of advisors, one, the president's council on science and technology, president's advisory council on science and technology, peak cast. And I'd met the president and the science advisor. That's when I was director of Hargon and then vice president at the University of Chicago. But I was asked what I would allow the president to nominate me. It's he doesn't appoint you as a Senate conferred. You nominated me to be conferred by the Senate. And it's a six year term. And the reason for that is sort of like the chair of the federal reserve. It's an attempt to keep it from being an old Berkeley political position. Right. Right. So it extends the term of the president themselves. Yeah. Now, of course, president can always try to fight. Does can farm with anyone. Right. But when I went to the interview with the head of the office of White House of the personnel, it said, well, the National Science Foundation is not called a political office. But I do need to ask you belong to a political party. I said, yes, I'm a Democrat. But he said, well, you do realize that as a presidential appointee, you have to support the president's policy in your area. Science and science technology. And you have to defend the president. And when you go to testify on the hill, you have to support and testify and support the policy. Can you do that? That's why I have until agree with his policies on size, which idea he was very supportive of science. He was very supportive of the NSL program and science education. Because in the time, science was not an overtly political. Science was bipartisan. There were, of course, issues that embryonic stem cell research, or that had some third rail. That's true. That's true. Climate, we were doing just starting a climate research. Climate change was not political. No, you're right. This was just an era that science and education were core foundational goals of both parties. Right. The Senate was controlled by Democrats. As was the House, I think so. The Senate was. Yeah, no, the House was government. And the chair of, so the chairs of the committees that all of us all that have oversight of the NSL that determined their budgets, the Senate and the corporations committee subcommitted when chaired by Democrats, Senator Barbara McCullochsky of Maryland. We became friends. She was a Democrat. So all of the people I had to deal with were, even though I was under a public administration, we all, I got support from both sides of that. Right. Science was, it was not saying to be that as it is now. Yeah. And I think maybe, you know, although there's so much we skipped over and there's so many things I wish we could spend time talking about, but of course, that is also the point of, you know, the podcast being a, a, just a taste so that people will of course check out the book and the eye of the storm. One of the things that, you know, we had sort of foreshadowed that we might want to finish on is the big change that we've been experiencing now. And I think it's easy for many of us, especially those of us who are young who are sort of maybe grew up in the Clinton years, a touch of the Bush year, some, you know, some of us early on the Reagan era, which is a little bit of a, of a special circumstance, but definitely during, and then who lived through Obama's presidency. And now we're living in this era where, you know, the Trump era is at the forefront of our mind still. We've got the global pandemic. We have, you know, intense, intense overt racial divides in our country. And I think sometimes the perspective and the context is, I don't know what the word I'm looking for is it's not lost, but it might be a little bit confused in the sense that you hear narratives. You hear some people saying it's worse than it's ever been. You hear other people saying it never went away. It's always been this bad. And then you hear other people saying, you know, it's always been this bad. There was a time when it was overt, then it went back under the radar. And now it's overt again. And I'm just wondering, somebody who's lived through so much of this in different pockets of the country too, you know, in big urban centers, but also in more rural parts of the country and, you know, in a very divided south, what has been your take on sort of where we're at as a nation in terms of our, our humanity in terms of our progress in terms of, I don't know, you know, like just our health and our strength. It's very scary to me. Let me address the science problem. So I am, I think we made so much progress in science in terms of democratizing in many ways of many more women, for example, many more blacks, Spanish. However, we are not, we just would not anywhere near where I thought we would be, you know, I've told these years. If I went, and I think back to my time in Brown, and we had a very, very good representation of blacks then. So almost a golden era if I look back. If we had just grown, you know, annually, nationally, in a sort of linear way, we'd be just so much further here. So I'm disappointed that we in this, that the scientific community has not been really more aggressive and proactive in creating opportunities, not just creating opportunities, but actually being proactive and bringing in to how feels are more blacks in particular, but other than those else. So that's the science. But we've come along that more than 20. Yeah, that's for sure. A lot more. And maybe that 20 is an order of magnitude. There were 50 of them. You know that. So now on the racial side, I think it's more, more complex than those always been this bad. We just didn't know it, never been this bad, nothing has changed. Well, clearly a lot has changed. I mean, you and I have in this conversation, right? A young black woman interviewing me and a black person. This wouldn't have happened. We have, we just have so many, we had black president and people say, well, it didn't change anything, but what they did, I'm not, it happened. So things have changed. However, I don't recall even over all these years being as concerned about the racial strife that seems to be building up and they kind of overt. I should say manifestations of racism that came out really during the Trump era. Right, almost like it, like a huge step backward. Yeah. Yeah. Now people might say, well, it was there and people thought that way they just didn't see it. Well, I think that's significant when people can't say things and they can't exhibit things. It makes a big difference on society as a whole. It's, it's not insignificant that people say things publicly online now as opposed to not saying them and just feeling them. So whether that's true or not, maybe you know, I'm not sure people always felt that way. I think people can change. I, I'm, I believe more people who may have been, you know, hadn't thought a lot if it wasn't white. It's that well, okay, I don't have any issues with the black people. I'm not here and I go over. Well, they have been incentivized now. I'm not feeling to exhibit the worst instincts. Yeah. No, you're right. I've been to psychologists and sociologists and tell you that. So it's not that what they were always like that. I don't believe a lot of these people are always. I think with the right leadership, a lot of those people would have gone the other way. You know, I mean, been convinced that we should, they should exercise that better instincts. That's a, that's a famous phrase that better parts about nature. Yeah. You know, it, it feels to me almost like there's this by modal distribution now where you see that the progress is, is way more progressive, right? Like you have, like you were talking about the fact that you and I are having this conversation, the fact that you hear young white people talking about privilege and you see white people marching in BLM marches in numbers that you never expected. So the allyship and just the kind of cross country progress is, is, is extreme on one hand, but then you're right. There's also the, the overt dog whistling and the emboldening and the sort of room that was, the space that was made to almost go back to an era where you could publicly spit at people where you could use racial slurs where you could, I mean, it's, it's mind boggling because I definitely never saw that growing up. And it's not even a dog wrestling anymore. Right. You're right. It's a smile. It's right. Yeah. Yeah. It's explicit language. Yeah. Right. So I try to just stay positive about it. And hopefully we will get through this and the things that makes me feel positive are young people of all races. And just seeing how they are reacting very differently to all of this. And I think that's a, that's the hope of our future and I feel very positive about that. Well, and that sort of that, that takes me to the very last question, Walter, like that I would love to close out the hour with you on, which is, you know, I ask all my guests the same two closing questions because they all come from different walks of life and they all come from different sort of scientific perspectives. And, but these are deeper. These are a little bit more humanitarian questions. And so of course, with all of your insights and all of your experience, I am, I'm really just interested and excited to hear your take. And, and these are big picture questions. So, so I want you to tell us the listeners from your perspective in whatever context feels relevant to you right now. So it could be very personal. It could be, you know, at the, at the community or the country level, it could be global or of course as a physicist. This could be a cosmic perspective. Number one, I'm wondering, what is the thing that keeps you up the most at night, the thing you're most concerned about, maybe even a little bit pessimistic, even could be cynical about. But then on the flip side of that, as you mentioned, your, your kind of hopefulness and your positivity, where are you finding your optimism? You mentioned, you mentioned young people and that may be your answer to the question. But yeah, ultimately, what is it that, that keeps you hopeful? I think we have covered it. The thing that keeps me up at night and a negative way. And it did, frankly, really effectively, greatly when Trump was president. I mean, it affected me cycle, psychologically, it just did. And it was just, that was just scary. So glad that's changed. So I sleep a lot better. Mm-hmm. The thing that I think about positively, are young people and I'm sitting here in our house at Cape Cod, which I write about. But looking at pictures of my grandchildren on the wall here, they're now, 2018, but these pictures go back to, and they're 5'60. Well, and I see their friends and their colleagues. I see the kind of interaction that they have. And I also see young people in college campuses with twice what I like about academia. Every year, you're always around young people. Students by the never ages. You do, you do, you do, you do, you do, you do, you do, you do. And I think it's young people. And they can be frustrating at times because they haven't lived through things, and those attendances, they all, of course, think about it. You know, it's like three of, people say, oh, I, you, I had to walk three miles to snow to get to. Right. No shoes. Right. Right. Right. Right. So, you know, young people can be frustrating at times due to their lack of their start of context, but on the other hand, that's a positive. They aren't, they aren't burdened by some of the things that we are burdened by. My age. And they will make changes. They will make changes. And I think, I'm keeping it hopeful. They're seeing what they're engaged in, makes me think those changes are going to be better. For better future. Hmm. Well, everybody, the book is in the eye of the storm. My time is chairman of Bank of America during the country's worst financial crisis. Dr. Walter E. Massey. Thank you so much for taking the time with us today. It was an honor. It was a privilege. I learned so much. And I really had a wonderful time chatting with you. Well, I've been to Canada. I appreciate it. Thank you so much, good bye. Absolutely. And everyone listening. Thank you for coming back week after week. I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk to you today.