 Hey, parents of Gen Z, lively technical college is perfect for the tool belt generation with professional skills focused training, fast track to high demand careers and low debt for big rewards, lively technical college, for the tool belt generation, higher learning and higher earning. Hello, everyone and welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, December 20th, 2021. And I'm the host of the show, Cara Santa Maria. And it's our last episode of the year. Can you believe 2021 is almost over? It just blows my mind thinking about the fact that we are about to start year number 22 of this century. What? What of this millennium? What? It honestly sort of breaks my brain thinking about it. It's been a it's been a tough year for a lot of us and for those of you who are able to be near to loved ones this holiday season. I am so happy for you and I wish you a warm and loving holiday. For those of you who unfortunately won't be able to be near your loved ones because you're separated either by geographical distance by difficulties imposed by the pandemic or by loss. I do hope that you find peace during this holiday and that you are able to surround yourself with with the things that you love, hopefully with some of the people with whom you have a good relationship and you're not alone. You're not alone. I know the holidays could be a time of joy for many and a time of great suffering. And so I just want to let you know that I am thinking about you. We are going to take a two week hiatus. So we will be back with a brand new episodes of Talk Nerdy in 2022. The first episode will air on Monday January 10th and that will be episode 389. What? Mine continues to be blown. Before we dive into this week's episode, I do want to give just like a big warm holiday shout out to those of you who make Talk Nerdy possible. I know I say it so much that sometimes I feel like it loses its meaning. So I've got to really break it down. It's just become something I say but it's something that I really feel deep in my heart. Talk Nerdy is and will always be and has always been since the beginning 100% free to download. It's important to me that this is a free service that's provided for anybody who wants to listen and learn and expand their horizons. But it's not free to produce. It requires work. It requires that I pay the editors. It requires that I pay my incredible assistant and it requires that I take a significant amount of time out of my academic career working on my PhD and out of the other various jobs that I do in order to spend the time that's needed on the show. And so yeah, the sort of financial model of the podcast is that I sell advertisements and I rely heavily on support from listeners just like you. I have a tiered system using Patreon. If you want to learn more, you can visit patreon.com slash Talk Nerdy and learn about all the tiers and what's included. But as low as two dollars, you can get access to an ad free episode. But so many of you out of the goodness of your hearts and just your intense generosity contributes so much more than that to the show. So I want to give just a really, really heartfelt shout out this week to the top contributors to Talk Nerdy. Starting with the three coolest people in the universe, they include Daniel Lang, Mary Neva and Rob Shrek and following that, the coolest people in the galaxy, including Brian Holden, Christopher Pitts, David J. Smith, Dutus Infanitas, Frederick Fast Markison, Gabrielle F. Hadamio Gonzalez, June Separa, Leonard Prince, and Ulrika Hagman. And of course, beyond that, there are so many cool people in the solar system. And there are so many cool people on the planet. Oh my gosh, thank you all from the very, very bottom of my holiday heart. It really does mean a lot and you guys make this whole thing possible. All right, enough gushing. Let's get into the episode. So I had the wonderful opportunity this week to sit down remotely, of course, with Dr. Stella Kafka. Now she's the chief executive officer and director of the AAVSO, which is the American Association of Variable Star Observers. The AAVSO is an international nonprofit organization of, you guessed it, Variable Star Observers whose mission is to enable anyone anywhere to participate in scientific discovery through Variable Star Astronomy. We talk all about what that means, how you can get involved and why it really matters. So stay tuned because here she is, Dr. Stella Kafka. Well, Stella, thank you so much for joining me today. It's actually a privilege. Thank you for having me. I'm so excited to talk. It's been a while since we've gone astro on the show, which is funny because I feel like sometimes it clusters where I have a lot of astronomy episodes together, but this year has been astronomy light. So I'm really excited to kind of end the year. You're actually my last episode of 2021. Yeah, yeah, to talk all about astronomy and especially we're going to talk a bit about your work at the AAVSO. So maybe before we even get to your background and all of the cool places that you've worked in and really interesting projects you've worked on, tell us what is the AAVSO? Ah, the AAVSO American Association Variable Star Observers is an organization that was founded in 1911 out of the Harvard Observatory. When the then Harvard Observatory Director gathered a group of amateur astronomers and trained them to actually take data for his own science, his own scientific project. So it's a, it's a, what we call a citizen science organization. From the very, very beginning, it connected professional and amateur astronomers for science. Now a hundred years, a hundred and ten years later, actually we just had our 110-year anniversary. It's a truly international organization. It has members, observers, researchers all over the world who are interested in some of the most dynamic phenomena in the night skies. What we call Variable Stars. Now Variable Stars are stars whose brightness is changing with time. Within time skills that we can actually measure. So think about brightness changes within an hour or within a night or within a week. And the way that we observe them is by going out and measure their brightness. There is a technique of how to do it. Measure their brightness and then measure it again and measure it again and see how it changes. So those kind of variations are giving us information about the inner workings of those stars. What the mechanism of brightness change is causing this kind of brightness changes. What kind of mechanism is causing the brightness changes. And also it helps us understand the physics of those stars. Because remember, we cannot exactly go there. We can't take a scoop of anything. We take pictures near close by. So all we do is analyze their light and in this case, brightness changes. So that is pretty much at the very heart of this organization to actually train and connect non-professional astronomers with professional astronomers for this kind of data acquisition and for scientific projects that result from that data, those datasets. So being international means that we have a very diverse community. This means people with different needs, different priorities, different interests, different professional preparation, different habits and cultural backgrounds that are united under the international brela of the AVSO and international brela of astronomy. Astronomy has no borders, right? So we have individuals who are interested in using variable-start data for the research projects. We work a lot with educators and their students who want to introduce astronomy in the classroom. We collaborate with a very dedicated group of volunteers. And of course, we have our observers, those who acquire data using their telescopes or CCDs or DSLR cameras or even the binoculars and share this information with a wider community through the AVSO International database. So what brings us all together is our love of the night sky. I wish to understand what is out there and how it works and explore. You know, we're not sure explorers and that is what the AVSO is doing here. Provides the support to these four exploration. I love that. And of course, you yourself are not an amateur astronomer but you are of course a professional astronomer. And now the director of the AVSO. So how does one come to run an organization like this? Oh dear. We start from. So here's an interesting anecdote about myself. I consider myself a daughter of the AVSO. It's because of the data that are in this database. My thesis, my PhD thesis in astronomy used that data. So I feel that that data actually empowered my degree. So in principle, my astronomy career started because of the data of the AVSO. It's something that I really like thinking because I belong in this family right at the very beginning. Now, it's when you're asking how on becomes a director, do you mean with kind of trajectory I had or? Yeah, I mean, it seems like you've only done a lot of a lot of obviously research and work at the academic level, you know, like your academic credentials kind of have been really varied and on this path. But also you have quite a bit of management experience because you're sort of wearing both hats. Yes, I am. And that's what made me a good fit for this position. So I got my PhD from Indiana University. So I'm a true hujer. I spent six years in Bloomington, Indiana. And yes, I do have a hoodie that says hujer. I loved that experience. Honestly, it was one of the most beautiful experiences in my life. But I felt embraced and I felt empowered and I felt that I could do anything I want when it comes to research. I was studying some really, really fun stars. And frankly, I didn't want to graduate. But my thesis advisor said that you cannot retire as a graduate student. So it's one of those cases where they're like, you know, congratulations. Here's your PhD. Now go into your desk. Financial crisis. You don't want me anymore. But from there, I went to Chile at the Serritor Lolo in Tare America Observatory where I was a site director for the RAU program, research experiences for undergraduates program that the observatory was running. And I applied a little program for Chilean students. So and I was doing my own research. So it was had a fellowship there. And from there, I went to Caltech at the infrared processing and the NICES center. Working with satellite data. So I was working on the same stars that I was interested in. But looking at them through different goggles. From there, I got a fellowship from the NASA Strobiology Institute, which I took at the Carnegie Institute in Washington, in Washington, DC. That was a very interesting project. Pretty much I was studying how the activity, the magnetic activity flares, imagine those kind of phenomena change in stars that can host planets and how that kind of activity affects habitability of the planet. It was really cool thinking about it. Anyway, so I spent three years in DC and from there, actually I decided to try something new, something crazy. Sometimes, you know, you have to do that with your career. And I went to the American Institute of Physics where I joined the publishing group and I was working on scientific journals. It's a completely different world out there when it comes to publishing manuscripts for scientists. And actually, it had the opportunity to work on a new journal and launching new journal on material sciences and get to know that community as well. Oh wow, which is not your background at all. And the thing is so... Right, right, right, sure. Yeah, yeah, it's physics, it's physics. But you are also an astrophysicist. Correct, I'm an astrophysicist. Astronomy and material sciences, there's a teeny tiny, it's a big difference, you're absolutely right. It's more, yes, you're right, it was a different field, different individuals, I was dealing with, different scientific community, extremely competitive, as all scientific communities are. But material sciences are sciences that affect our everyday life in the sense that they improve material for our cars, material for our houses, material for prosthetics. And they're studying nature in order to see whether behaviors of animals can be used in engineering new technologies. For example, they're studying the web of a spider. This is really actually very durable, how the kind of material is that and whether we can actually use it somehow in our everyday life. There's lots of branches of material sciences that pretty much have applications and affect us in our day to day. I learned a lot actually, it was really fun. But the same time, the position of the executive director here at the ABA is so open. And as you said, I already had the management experience and I already had the scientific credentials for this position. So here we are seven years later. Pushing citizen science and engaging a very, very passionate and really fun community to some of the most dynamic phenomena in the night sky. It's really fun. So for those who are curious about your accent, because you mentioned that you spent quite a bit of time in Chile, but you were of course born and did your undergraduate work. So you spent most of your formative years in Greece. That is correct. It was born and raised there. And this is where I got my bachelor's in physics. The University of London is in Greece. And when you go home or when you go back to visit, do people say that you have a super weird accent? Like have you picked up kind of the Spanish flair? I have not. I am in the US now, right? So I picked up any. But you know something, I learned how to speak Spanish when I was in Chile. I didn't know any other time. And I cannot speak French because of that. I have a French degree, but it's my French are transformed to Spanish. It's very interesting. Yeah, sometimes they get in the way of each other, the Latin languages. Exactly, exactly. But no, I don't have an accent. I talk to my parents every day. So you still sound just as Greek as you ever did or they like wow, you sound so American now. No, no, no. No, my brother would tease me to no end. And where are you based now? You're based near Harvard in Cambridge. We are in Cambridge, Massachusetts. And so of course you're sort of at the headquarters, but the AAVSO being an international organization and one that is so focused on citizen science, I can imagine that most people who are involved are doing observation at their local observatories or even from their own backyards. That's very true. So we have observers all over the world. And you know, this is one of the beauty of the AAVSO. The communities work was not disrupted even by COVID. Exactly because we are we find ways of connecting without seeing each other, right? So when 2020 happened and COVID happened, we're all stuck inside, no travel, no nothing. Our community found an avenue through variables that are astronomy to actually do something to even distract them from their everyday kind of craziness that's happening in the world. And it remained connected. So if not anything else, one of the things we learned is that social distancing is not social isolation and we are in this together. So yeah, people all over the world in mountains and in cities, in the desert and right next to lakes, they're taking data on variable search and they are discussing the science that comes out of it. Some of them actually are interested in analyzing their own data or work closely with professional astronomers and collaborative efforts. And present, of course, their data through and their the results of the research through our journal here at the AAVSO. So tell me why do variables, variable stars matter? Why specifically variable stars and why are so many people interested in observing them? So have you ever wondered when people say that a specific star, specific galaxy is 20,000 light years away? Have you ever wondered how they know? I mean, you can't just measure that, right? You can't like send a tape measure out into space. People are telling you that the sun is five and a half billion years old. The sun doesn't really come with a birth certificate, now does it? How do we know? Right? If people are telling you that a specific dot in the night sky is not just one star, there are two stars together is what we call a binary star system. How do they know? Frankly, I mean, through the most powerful telescope on the planet, the most powerful telescope, stars look like dots. I'm sorry if I'm bringing it for you. Yeah, remember that when I took, I mean, I took one astronomy course, my background is neuroscience and psychology. So even though I did so much science, it was in a completely different direction at university, I took one astronomy course as part of my undergraduate training, and I chose stellar astronomy as opposed to planetary, and I remember going to the observatory for lab and thinking, wow, they look the same. Like the only time something looked different through the telescope was when it happened to be a binary system. And you're like, wow, there's two. Make it either one in the telescope, it's two. But really, you look through the telescope and you're like still just a little dot. And you know, the binary system that you where you could see the two components are very rare. Yeah, I'm sure. But that didn't right. But at the same time, even when we're talking about fundamental properties of stars, how do we know stellar radii, how do we know masses, how do we know ages, how do we know temperatures and magnetic fields, how do we know habitability, where they can actually host planets. And even then, how do we know that they have planets? Right. This is happening through stellar variability, through magnetic. Because they can't tell just by looking. Not only can't tell just by looking, but sometimes you really need to collect a lot of data in order to actually assess some of those properties. So that is the big value of variable stars that makes them a science that is imperative for our understanding. And from there, of the universe, right. And from there, we're wondering whether the universe is expanding, collapsing, or doing whatever. And we're using variable stars for that as well as supernovae. So pretty much the dynamic universe is our source of information for most of the things that we know and most of the things that we're hoping to find out. So yeah, that's why we're spending variables. So tell me, here's the more probably difficult question, or at least difficult to explain for an audience who maybe never took an advanced astronomy course. How does observing a change in a star's brightness tell you how far away it is, tell you whether or not it's potentially has habitable planets, tell you how old the star is. So what we do is we take those observations and we put them on a graph. And it's literally monitoring how that starts changes. And at the end of the day, when you collect enough of those observations, and the graph is pretty much brightness change on the vertical axis with time. So it's very similar to actually measuring the changes of the height of the child, right? Right. Right. Time. You're just marking on the graph that you know, last year, this time, it's three feet high, and then four and five, etc, etc, as things move forward. This is the same thing that's happening with stars. So you measure the variability one night, say, you mark how bright it is that night. Then you go out the next night and you measure it again, and that has changed. And then you keep measuring those kind of changes every night. That's every night is just an example, right? It could be every hour, depending on what type of star you have, or it could be every week or every month. And then I can imagine, sorry to interject, but I can imagine that what what ends up happening when you have people all over the world making these types of observations and measurements is that you have these points of comparison. Exactly. So at some point, you take the graph and you look at the shape of those variations. The graph is called a light curve. So makes sense. The state of those variations, depending on the shape of a light curve, we are learning how those stars change to begin with and we extract extract information from them. And so obviously, you use this sort of example of a child growing taller and taller. And of course, we would see a trend line in only one direction in that situation. But some stars get brighter and dimmer over time, right? Absolutely right. Some stars do get brighter and dimmer over time. So here's another example, a nova explosion, which is actually when a star cannot digest material that it eats from its components, stellar cannibalism, right there. So if we can't digest that material, then it throws up. And that's throwing up is appearing as an eruption. So it's a very rapid increase in the brightness of the star, right? And then as the star's stomach is relaxing, a very smooth drop in the brightness. So again, shapes matter in this case. And even though your periodicity, something like that happens more than once in the life of the star that we have observed it. And all these are giving us information on stellar cannibalism, extreme phenomena in the universe, something that we can definitely not reproduce here on Earth. Yeah. So when you were doing your dissertation research, actually using data that was obtained through AAVS. So I'm curious, what was the focus of your dissertation? And has that been a predictor for work that you did in the future? Or did you sort of switch gears after that? I did not switch gear. I was working on this kind of stellar cannibalism. Oh, okay. The star that is eating its companion. And I was trying to understand different phenomena. And for that, I needed as long as a baseline as I could of data. Now, a graduate student, stays in grad school for what? Five to seven years. We're talking about both masters in PhD, right? So within five years, for the phenomena I was interested in, I couldn't collect enough data. I needed much, much larger baseline. Now, I would either stay in graduate school for 20 years, of 30 years, which is very attractive as an idea. Or I would find a way of a database that had this kind of data. And this was the AAVS or international database. For some of the stars that I studied had a hundred years of data in them. Remember, the organization is old, right? 110 years old. So I used that kind of data and new information that I managed to gather through access to different telescopes to synthesize a behavior about those stars. To try to understand trends in their behavior and try to understand how they work. And you were specifically looking at Novas? I was looking at Novas. I was also looking at the poor abused little star and try to understand how interactions with its abuser sort of affects all kinds of phenomena there. It's really interesting. It's not psychology that we're doing there, but more about interactions, like physical interaction, which we start with. And when you say that, are you talking about like a binary star system, where one star is being like, has their material being taken by another star? That is correct. Very cool. What I'm talking about. So those stars are called cataclysmic variables. Wow, that's intense. I know, right? Storvers are known for coming up with really pompous names. But it really does describe the interaction between the two stars because they result to all kinds of cataclysmic events. This extreme outbursts and stars changing in their appearance because one star has its brain, it's a little atmosphere, then it looks something different in cannibalized. So it's it's they are phenomena that are happening in this star in short-time scales and long-time scales. And by studying both, we try to understand how even they start their lives and where they might end up. Some of those stars might end up as supernova type 1A, which we use in cosmology, for example. So try to understand processes that the cannibal uses in order to to to become supernova eventually are extremely important for cosmological purposes as well. So there is this interconnection in astronomy between phenomena that everyone, a little phenomenon that everybody is studying in order to build this big puzzle that is called universe and trying to understand how it started where we are and what's going. And also where are place in the universe is. Yeah, it's interesting because you know this idea of studying variable stars, it's it's it's a way to collect and interpret data that has so many potential outcomes. And even if you look at your career trajectory of studying these binary systems, these sort of cataclysmic systems that lead to all sorts of events over to, you know, ending up right before you you you started running the AAVSO working, you know, in an astrobiology institute, which of course astrobiology is out there in the universe, could life be supported? What would it look like? Where would it be supported? And and I mean, those seem like wildly different fields, but of course, the same data informs them. Similar data, that's that's correct, that's right. And it's again, you have to be willing to make this kind of zigzagging in your life your career. In my scientific career, I was extremely lucky to have the luxury to follow projects that I am 100% interested in. So no one ever told me, oh, you have to work on this project or else, we're not paying you. It's a great privilege, right? So I was always trying to solve puzzles that I thought were important and they were trying to get some answers. And you have to actually always admit in science that you will never solve that big picture puzzle. But knowing that you contribute to what that puzzle requires to eventually be solved is actually very satisfying, it's extremely satisfying. And at the same time, engaging individuals who don't have a professional preparation in astronomy to my science was a very rare luxury. You know, in the astronomy is this kind of very special beast where non-specialists can actually make very meaningful contributions. You will never go to a amateur dentist. You will never go to an amateur mechanic, but depending on how well you know them, you will not find an amateur chemist making these kind of contributions. In astronomy, amateur astronomers are actually collaborators of scientific projects. So it's a community that makes astronomy so rich when it comes to techniques, when it comes to ways of thinking, and it's the fact that those individuals bring in their own professional preparation to the scientific, thought and scientific method that makes the AVSO and the variables that are community so special. And I'm loving it. I love that. It's also cool. Yeah. Oh, sorry, go ahead. No, I just, I agree with you. We're in violent. I was actually going to say that it's so cool that not only is there like, obviously, the citizen science component is fundamental, right? It's the heartbeat of the work. But also there is a strong science communication component and how rare in a career, especially a very academic career, which I do think we're starting to see a turn. We're starting to see more positions that are specifically made for psychom, more professors and more department supporting psychom work amongst their graduate students and amongst their faculty. But historically, it's been quite rare. It's sort of been looked at as like a weird side project that will have better not take time away from the lab. And so how cool that not only is there the strong citizen science component, but there's also the strong science communication component to your work where you get to really engage and take time talking about the universe with people who aren't academics. I think it's essential actually, because the bottom line is that as scientists, we have this privilege of exploring the universe. But we also have the obligation to tell those who are paying for our salaries, what we find. So if you think about it, the ABSO is a private organization, but most academic positions are actually all of them are publicly funded. Professors at universities, universities are funded by state money or whatever money I'm not really sure about their business model. So and as scientists, we cannot keep asking for money for telescopes and space missions, etc. without giving something back. We are not entitled. We need to understand a little bit more consciously that part of our job is to be accountable to tell people how that money is being spent. And without communication, this is pretty much the whole science field becomes just a very exclusive club. I know what you're talking about. When I was in the gradian school or when I was much younger, we would go to conferences and even presentations of science would be so dry that was boring, it was really boring. Because you're presenting scientific facts, you don't have to make your presentation like sheet after sheet of equations, for example. So I think that scientists have become more comfortable with communicating lately and much better at sharing results in the way that people, non-specialists can actually understand them. And with each other as well, because yes, I am working on variable stars, but I'm not working on galactic dynamics, which is a different field of astronomy. All right, don't work on our own solar system stuff. Right. So you have a shared language with other astronomers because you you know studied the same things, the same background stuff in school, but ultimately, they need to be able to communicate to you beyond that shared language because you're not aware of the work that they're doing necessarily. Exactly. And I don't necessarily use their jargon in my work. Exactly. Yeah. So yeah, it's not just science communications that professional astronomers have become much better at communicating themselves. I love that. Yeah. It's so important, you know, and I think speaking to this sort of broader cosmic, I guess, you know, no pun intended but view of sort of the big wise and the communication of sort of the purpose. You know, one one of the things I long grapple with, I study my background is neuroscience and then I did psychom for 15 years outside of academia and then I did a career change recently, went back to school and I'm finally towards the end. I'm finally accented at working on my PhD in clinical psychology. And one of the things that you find psychology trainees and academic psychologists grappling with is like, what is the purpose of therapy? Why do we do it? And what's the ultimate hope to get out of engaging in therapy? And you know, it's you would think there would be a simple answer, but really it's, you know, practitioner to practitioner and patient to patient or client to client. It's vastly different and I see the same thing when I talk to philosophers and when I talk to astronomers, it's sort of like, what makes you tick? Like, why do you study the cosmos? And how does that translate to your place, to you as a human being living here on this rock in the larger universe? But see that astronomy is providing this kind of perspective. And because it provides this kind of perspective or what kind of scales or time scales or even where we are in the universe. Astronomers, I think, have a sense of humility in general. At least astronomy should be teaching as humility. Because just think about it, we're going to live on this little rock around kind of a common star. The sun is not anything special. There has been around for like five and a half billion years. And what, we're going to live for a hundred years? Yeah, look at me. It's one of those things, right? So I hope that if not anything else, astronomers do take that step back and recognize where we all belong. And are able to communicate that. So we're talking about not sweating the small stuff. I think that this is one of the reasons why people actually came up with this particular expression. Because the bottom line is that the hundred years in our lives, it's not a very big time period. We'd better enjoy it. It's been, it's long been fascinating to me and interesting to me and very emotional to me how much of a connection I find working in human psychology with philosophers and cosmologists. It's funny that with these like wildly different fields, there are ultimately rumenations. That's not quite the right word. But like contemplations on very similar themes, these very big picture, how do we fit? What is, you know, how perspective, timescale perspective, connection perspective. And I've, I've long thought it was interesting that astronauts, cosmonauts, you know, individuals, so depending on the country that they come from, who have had the opportunity to actually observe Earth from a different position from, as they call it, the sort of cosmic perspective or the view from above, very often speak about a massive perspective shift that happens when they see how small, how fleeting. And vulnerable. Yeah, and vulnerable. Yes. I mean, can you imagine we're experiencing hurricanes here and extreme storms? Can you imagine someone from the International Space Station looking at them from off down? Actually, I saw a picture from ISS of EIDA not too long ago. And I was looking at it in lip corges. It looked, it looked majestic. That's the word I'm looking for. And then I thought that you know that thing is going to be overhead in a couple of days. And it was not majestic anymore. It was scary. It was one of those things where you're like, oh my gosh, even our own planet is so dynamic in the phenomena it has that we need to understand and respect it. Yeah. So yeah, it's perspective. It's, it's all about perspective. It's like when you're in something and, you know, and you're being thrown around by it, it can feel so violent. When you're outside of something looking at it from a place of calm and security, you can often appreciate its beauty in a way that it's that it's hard to do when you're actively experiencing it. And yeah, that translates to psychological or mental health that translates to observations of like you said, these cataclysmic events, which you would not want to be anywhere near those stars. Well, that was actually happening. So nice to be at the telescope, safety, observing them eating popcorn, listening to music, stuff like that. And try to reconstruct this three-dimensional, actually four-dimensional image of something that is doing crazy stuff out there from the safety of planet Earth. It's really great. What if I told you there was a new innovative approach to help you feel and function better? It's what you would expect from North Florida's Pine and Wellness. Voted once again the best alternative care health facility in Tallahassee. And the term to describe it is designed clinical neurotrition. It recognizes the interconnectedness of neurology and physiology, the importance of addressing both to optimize health. Schedule a consultation at healthytallahassee.com. If you work in quality control at a candy factory, you know strict safety regulations come with the job. It's why you partner with Granger. Granger helps you find the high quality and compliant products your business needs to inspect, detect, and help correct issues. And the sweetest part is everyone gets a product that's as safe to eat as it is delicious. Call 1-800-Granger. Click Granger.com or just stop by. Granger for the ones who get it done. You know, I have a kind of a random question. Obviously when we think of telescopes, oftentimes people, you know, in their mind they go to like a backyard sort of like Newtonian telescope that they're looking through with like one eye and they're not thinking about like large observatories and radio telescopes and you know telescopes that look at all the different aspects of the spectrum. And of course most observatories, you're collecting data much, much beyond sort of the visible spectrum. But that said, go back to sort of your roots of standing two feet on the ground looking into an eyepiece and then you know whatever it's connected to being able to see a condensing of very far away things through a series of lenses. Have you ever experienced, when I was a kid and I used to you know do some amateur astronomy and even going into college, I used to have a little bit of an anxiety experience, a panic experience of feeling somewhat groundless when I would allow myself to get lost through a telescope or binoculars. And it was it was a little bit frightening but also exhilarating for me. Have you ever had that momentary groundlessness when you're sort of out there but your feet are still on the ground here? No, no, I haven't but I've had a different, a similar experience but different outcome. I observed a lot with big telescopes and one of the good things with those is that they have very sophisticated equipment and you can tell them what to do during the night and they go on autopilot by themselves. You have to check them, you have to keep checking the data as they come in but there are some time periods where you can actually step outside. Those big telescopes tend to be in very remote areas and away from light pollution. You get to step outside and look at the night sky yourself. And I remember one of the first times I was in Chile and the moon was not up. A completely dark night that was looking up and the whole sky looked still and it was full of stars. I could see the center of the Milky Way galaxy, our own galaxy from down there and it was so bright that I could actually read the headlines of a newspaper and I was just standing up there looking at it and everything felt this kind of stillness. Maybe that's the ground in your describing which was humbling. It was, you know, again Stella saying, hi, I'm important, look at me, I'm not even a speck of dust on this planet but looking from this planet outwards, just gives you a, at least gave me a feeling of belonging. They're like, hey, this is where I am on this little rock but I am part of this. And this, the, the, this in this case is vast and it's beautiful and dynamic and who knows what's happening out there, right? Yeah, I was going to say there's very likely, I mean, we don't know but it seems quite likely that there are other, you know, living organisms. I don't know if I want to say beings but yes, living organisms elsewhere, maybe they're contemplating their own place in the universe, maybe they're just working on reproduction but regardless, you know, that we're not alone, it's very likely that we're not alone and that we are divided by vast time and space but that there are others out there potentially contemplating the exact same thing. How cool is that? How cool is that? You know, I'm curious, I'm curious Stella, which by the way, I love that your name is Stella, I'm sure people find it all the time, like you were meant to do this job, right? But I'm curious for people who are listening who are like, I want to be involved, I want to contribute to the AAVSO. Tell, tell me a little about how one might go about becoming a citizen scientist in this sort of place, having not done anything in the past, you know, let's say I'm coming at it from a very naive perspective but I'm curious. But this is what the AAVSOs are all is to actually take you from nothing to even doing your own research projects if you want to. We have a wealth of educational material from manuals to online courses to webinars to workshops to mentors, we have a very active mentoring program, we have a very active health desk here at Headquarters, so even when you start your own observing program and you get a little bit more involved, if you have any questions and doubts, etc. You can just call us, we've received phone calls here, or send us an email, our webpage is an amazing resource, AAVSO.org, and this is where all of our armatiliar is available, even free of charge. I mean, you don't have to become a member in order to be a citizen scientist. We appreciate people who become members of course because we are a nonprofit organization that doesn't really have a huge stream of revenue and all those activities and the tools that we provide and the material we provide is in principle being paid by memberships, right? At the same time, exactly because we know that anyone who wants can actually be part of this exploration of the universe, we are providing all this information there and we're hoping that people would just take the first step, which is go through our webpage, they can look and ask questions and join us. Anyone can be a citizen scientist. I love that and I'm looking right now and it's true, it's so easy, it's laid out so cleanly, you can, number one, there's a tab that says get involved and it talks about research and volunteering and how to become a member and how to contribute but there's also literally a tab called getting started and it's got sort of the what is it, how does it work, here are some tutorials, here's how you can connect with a mentor, here how to video, scroll down. Okay, scroll down on a webpage, you'll see a cadre of like these nice big boxes, right? Yeah, it has all our resources centralized so you can find things like, you know, where the observing sections are, which are groups of individuals discussing specific variable stars and what they are and how you observe them and stuff like that, tools and observer resources, okay fine, you have a pair of binoculars, how a nurse do you get started with your binocular program, which is, you know, from okay, I have my binoculars and I know how to observe, what a nurse do I observe, there are billions of stars up there, right? Right, and what do I write down? Like, how do I do that and where do I find my star, right? And things like that, how to submit an access data and actually we have projects for students as well with existing data so you don't even have to have your own resources if you want to do a project or educational material is there, the journal is there, our presence in press is there as well and of course membership. So as I said, we are using our web pages as a central way of resource, we also have forums, discussion forums that are open to everyone. So if you have a question, you can actually ask someone there or even discuss science and someone will definitely respond. So there are different ways that we're building communities around the area so when it's science and I can tell you those communities are extremely passionate, very active and very enthusiastic. I love that so much, that's wonderful. So such important and actionable recommendations for everybody listening today. So Stella, I don't want to keep you too too long today. I do close each episode with the same two questions. I ask every single guest the same two questions and of course we've got around out the year doing the same thing. But before we get to those big picture questions, I'm curious if there's anything that, you know, we didn't discuss anything with your work with the AAVSO, with kind of things that are on the horizon that you want to make sure that we touch on before we close out. No, I think they were fine. Oh good. Okay, so look at that. We recovered. We had some nice death and breath. Excellent. All right, well then on that note, I am curious about your perspective on these two big questions. So, you know, if you were to look at the last seven years of talking nerdy of the podcast and the 380 some odd guests that I've had on the show so far, I ask everyone the same thing and obviously their answers very wildly depending on what kind of science they're involved in and kind of what's relevant to them at that moment. So as a cosmologist who has their sort of their finger on the pulse of what's going on in sort of the world at large, I'm curious your take on these two questions. The first one is when you think about the future in whatever context is relevant to you, so this could be very personal. It could be community. It could be global and of course it could be cosmic. Number one, what is the thing that's keeping you up the most at night? The thing you're most concerned about, you know, where you're finding your worry, maybe you're even sort of your feet are dangling in some cynicism, some pessimism, you know, what is really concerning to you? And then on the flip side of that so that we do end on a more positive note, I'm curious where you are finding your hope, where you're finding your optimism and where you're kind of genuinely and authentically looking forward to the future. So what's, what keeps me up at night, this climate change, it really does. I feel that our planet has been abused for a long time and it's not a safe place to be. It's, you know, weather patterns are erratic, people's livelihoods are at stake. We also see, we already see disruptions in the food chain. We see disruptions in the way that we operate, right? I live in Cambridge, Massachusetts and our winter, every year starts later and later in this season. So it's cold outside right now, but I think that the snow season starts sometime in February and it goes all the way until June, which is unusual, right? That is not how seasons work here. So yeah, that keeps me up at night and we can talk, we're taking hours talking about that, what gives me hope to keep pushing is that people finally realizing the value of science in making informed decisions. And I think that it does have to do with the fact that scientists have become more human, right? So they have become more approachable in communicating the value of their science, communicating the results so that people will actually, your everyday person, your non-specialist in principle, will is able to understand the outcomes of these science. I love the energy I get from a younger generation. I love it, love it, love it, love it. Those individuals are passionate and they're very determined to make a better future for themselves and for our planet. So I think that although we are all doom and gloom when it comes to climate change, I think that actions are being taken and will be taken to provide some quality of life in the future. And this is because of all these young women, men, individuals who are taking their future in their hands. Like you know something? Enough is enough. We are going to save the world and they're super heroes in their own. So yes, that. And you know, the fact that I'm dealing with a professional astronomical community, a professional scientific community, but also I am very involved in the non-professional community and I see citizens being interested in science, not necessarily doing science themselves, but trying to understand scientific results and discuss them and ask, ask the right questions and ask really difficult questions for me. It gives me, it makes me happy. It makes me happy. It really does. It's just you know, it sciences for all. Keep asking. Just accept that sometimes scientists might come back and say, I don't know the answer. You know, there's so many open questions right now that that's why actually scientists are still employed, that are still under a survey that we just don't have all the answers. That's yeah, that's in my little science world. I love science really. It's not and it's serious, but we're having fun by being serious. It's everybody. We're having fun. Oh, well gosh, Stella, thank you so much for taking the time with us to celebrate this wonderful science to give some, you know, actionable advice about how how everyone can get involved and to sort of round out 2021 and hopefully enter in to the new year with with some hope and some optimism and and some excitement. Thank you so much for being here with us today. Thank you very much for having me here. I wish you a happy new year and please stay safe and same to you and to everybody listening. Happy holidays and happy 2022. We will be back with a brand new episode of Talk Nerdy starting on January 10th 2022. I always take two weeks off for the holidays for hiatus. So we will see you guys then and then till then. I'm looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk Nerdy. Press play on Encore, Isalia and binge watch gorgeous blooms all season long. Encore, Isalia's Rebloom in spring, summer and fall. So you don't have to wait all year for the next big show. More compact, more sun tolerant and more cold hearty with vibrant bloom colors and sizes to fit your landscape. Encore, Isalia's are a must watch. Ready to add the number one best selling Reblooming Isalia to your watch list? Order direct to your door at EncoreIsalia.com. Press play on Encore, Isalia and binge watch gorgeous blooms all season long. Encore, Isalia's Rebloom in spring, summer and fall. Ready to add the number one best selling Reblooming Isalia to your watch list? Order direct to your door at EncoreIsalia.com.