 If you're looking for a new spacious SUV, stop. Please don't pay more for less. Buy from Warnakia and save thousands. Interest rates as low as 0%. Or no payments for six months. Upside down on your tray, get up to 4,000 over KBB from Warnakia. Test drive the Kia's Sarentha with rugged good looks, advanced technology and luxury. If you haven't already made the switch to Warnakia, now's the best time. Get all the details at Warnakia.com. Oh, make that switch, make that switch to Warnakia. Strike gold this March with the luck of the drive event at Warner Hyundai. Hyundai offers more style, comfort, safety, and tech. And you're in luck because this event offers even more savings. Test drive the 2025 Hyundai Palisade, a perfect fit for any family with its seven available trim levels and three rows full of comfort and convenience. New Hyundai's come with owner assurance with America's best warranty, a 10-year 100,000 mile powertrain limited warranty. Nationwide, feeling lucky, visit Warner Hyundai.com. Hello, everyone, and welcome to Talk Nurtie. Today is Monday, November 29, 2021, and I'm the host of the show, Cara Santa Maria. To my American listeners and those who celebrate American holidays worldwide, I hope you had a wonderful Thanksgiving. And I want to let you know right here at the top that I am grateful to you. I'm grateful to you for sticking with us these past, gosh, what is it now, like seven years? Ooh, that's bananas. I'm grateful to you for supporting the show in the many ways that you do. Rating and reviewing it on iTunes, on Stitcher, on Google Podcasts, on all the different platforms where you might listen to podcasts, purchasing, Talk Nurtie merch from the Talk Nurtie merch store, and sharing about it with your friends and family, and last but definitely not least, pledging your support on a per episode basis at patreon.com slash Talk Nurtie. Remember, I recently changed the tiers to make the show a little bit more accessible. So now if you pledge $2 or more, you are eligible for an ad-free version of the show. All you've got to do is once again, visit patreon.com slash Talk Nurtie to learn more. I want to give a shout out to my top patrons this week. They include Daniel Lang, Mary Niva, Rob Shrek, Brian Holden, Christopher Pitts, David J. Eastmith, Dutus Infanitas, Frederick Fast Markison, Gabrielle Felipe Hadamio Gonzalez, June Separa, Leonard Prince, and Ulrika Hagman. I am so, so grateful for all of you. All right, let's dig into this week's show. So I had the opportunity to chat with a brilliant paleontologist, named Dr. Larissa Desantis. She's an associate professor in both the Department of Biological Sciences and the Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences at Vanderbilt University, and her lab specifically focuses on research that really does combine a bunch of different disciplines to help understand the ecological and evolutionary responses that both extinct animals and also living, extant animals have to climate change. So we're talking across time, across space. They look at modern evidence, they look at historic evidence, they look at fossil evidence, to try and help understand and inform those working in the fields of ecology and conservation biology about how these organisms respond to climate change. We have a fascinating chat all about gosh, everything from Sabretooth cats to Pizzley Bears. Yes, you heard me, Pizzley Bears. So if you want to know more, you've got to stick around. Here she is without any further ado. Dr. Larissa Desantis. Well, Larissa, thank you so much for being here today. Thanks so much for having me. I am super excited to talk all things paleo and grizzlies and Sabretooth cats and Pizzleys. What's a Pizzley? I'm so excited about this. Okay, so before we dive in deep, let's talk a little bit first about your background. So you're a paleo-intologist at Vanderbilt, but you study both extinct and extant species. Yes, I do. And so initially, my interest in living animals or extant species was really just to get at the fossil animals. So for example, if we want to reconstruct the diet of Sabretooth cats, we need to use various tools and techniques that we know work in the fossil record. So before we can even bring those tools back into the fossil record, we have to make sure that, they work with modern animals. So for example, some of our early work looked at dental microarray to see if we could see differences in the diets between Cheetah's lions and hyenas. Okay, tell me what that word means. Dental what? Dental microarray. So great. So yes, the dental microarray is the microscopic wear patterns on teeth. And so essentially, we do essentially like a little bit of paleo-dentistry. We will take a dental impression mold just like you do at the dental office. We'll then make a cast of that tooth. And then we look at that cast under the microscope with all its glory and can see microscopic wear patterns that have formed during the life of the animal. And we know what Cheetah's eat today. We know what hyenas eat today. So for example, we know Cheetahs typically avoid bone. They're eating largely flesh. We know hyenas are actively crunching on bone. They're scavenging. They're breaking open bones to give the marrow many times. And lions are sort of moderate in between these two. And before we can sort of assume that this method even works, we need to make sure that those microscopic wear patterns of Cheetah's lions and hyenas actually correspond to what we would expect to see. And fortunately, they do. So in the case of Cheetah's, we tend to see what's called, well, I guess you can also quit it sort of pits and scratches, but we've come a long way. We no longer sort of count pits or count scratches. We actually use a 3D method to actually make essentially like a topographic map of the surface. And then we analyze it in regards to different textural properties. So almost like a forensic scientist might be looking at a bite marks or something like that of a potential suspect. You're looking deep into like all of the different textures of the tea. We are. And actually the the confocal microscope that we use is also used for ballistic analysis. So looking at the microscopic patterns that are left when a gun fires onto a bullet. So exactly. And through these different sort of textual properties, and there's two main ones. So one is called anisotropy. And so just a fancy way of thinking of the directionality of the feature. So imagine lots of scratches in one direction. So if you have lots of scratches in one direction and you are an herbivore, you're probably eating tough foods that are result that sort of scratches are resulting from shearing. And if you're a carnivore, it likely indicates sort of lots of flesh. And let's look at the the other end member. There's another sort of textural property called complexity. And this is sort of a little more complicated. This is imagine you are in outer space and you're looking down at the earth. The earth looks very smooth. Okay, so the closer and closer you get to the earth, the more top topographic complexity you're going to see. You're going to start seeing the mountain ranges and the valleys and and the sort of the depth to the planet. Well, we know that relationship always exists. The closer you sort of assume in the more topographic complexity there is. But yeah, you're like improving your resolving power at that point. Exactly. And whether you're looking at the earth from outer space or you're looking at the bottom of the ocean floor from while you're snorkeling, the closer you get the more complex it gets, what we're actually measuring is sort of the slope of that relationship. And so that's our complexity measure. So things are really get get complex very quickly. We're going to have high complexity values. And this equates to sort of hard object feeding. So hyenas have really high complexity and she does tend to have less high complexity. And so by using these two different sort of metrics, we can actually characterize diet. And the really cool thing about it is it seems to work in all different groups of animals. So we can tell apart grazing horses from browsing bovids. We can tell apart koalas from things that are eating more fruit or more woody material. We can use it in primates. We can use it in humans. And we can also use it in bears and cats and other animals to figure out diet. So basically not only are you looking at sort of the direction of the grooves or the pits on the teeth similar to the way a geologist might look at a meteorite to know how it entered the earth's atmosphere. It's going to have like a like a directionality to it. But you're also looking at the difference between you know the more resolving power I have, am I getting more and more detailers that kind of just smoothing out. And that sort of takeaway is how you're able to really identify. And I've long wondered this honestly because you hear this all the time in paleo. A new species discovered by one tooth or we know exactly what this is because we have three teeth. And it's like, but you don't have any of the other bones. How could you possibly know what this what this animal is? But I guess the teeth really tell of an important in-depth story. Yeah, the teeth tell a lot. And so as far as knowing what species we're dealing with, that's based on tooth morphology. So the the gross shape and sort of size of the tooth. And in mammals in particular, there's a lot of information in teeth. And that's because sort of they have you know the mammals have evolved in many different ways, but diet has been a really key aspect of that. And so is tooth morphology. But if you handed me a dinosaur tooth. And let's say even for a moment I was a dinosaur expert, which I'm not, it's very difficult to actually distinguish species based on teeth alone in other groups of animals. So lizards or or different you know snakes and various things. It's very difficult. But in mammals because of sort of the evolutionary history, we can often get at you know what you know show me a tooth and I can tell you what it is. In many cases we can kind of get it down to family. Sometimes we can even get it down to species depending on the tooth, depending on what we can compare it to. So there's a lot of information there. And then what I mainly focus on. So I let other people focus on the morphology and sort of describing species. What I often do is I try to bring these animals to life. I try to understand their ecology. What were they doing when they were alive? What were they hunting or what were they eating? And you know diet is such an important part of what an animal does their lifestyle. So diet can influence you know where an animal lives on a landscape. It can influence sort of its movement. So you think about migration. It influences you know is it in a forest? Is it in a grassland? Is it up in the trees? Is it there's there's so many different aspects of diet and how that influences sort of habitat and lifestyle. It also can influence how an animal hunts, how it moves on that landscape. Is it sort of a pursuit predator? Is it chasing down things? Is it ambush predator? And it can also influence things like reproduction. So through the lens of diet I try to using tools like stable isotopes and dental microarr. I try to reconstruct what these animals are doing throughout their life when they were alive. Okay so we talked about the dental microarr. Which is so funny because I keep thinking microwave when I hear that word and I'm like wait what oh where like W-E-A-R not W-A-R-E. I'm like oh like the the pots you put in your micro. So yeah dental microarr. But you also mentioned stable isotopes isotopes. So let's talk a little bit about that because I'm remembering very clearly right now a podcast I did gosh maybe over a year ago with Dr. Sora Kim who used stable isotopes to study ancient sharks. And I can imagine that it's a somewhat similar process yeah. Yes absolutely. So just like the work that Sora does we also sort of drill teeth and can figure out what animals we're eating. And so in the case of herbivores we can distinguish whether animals were eating grass or whether they were eating brows in some cases. So this is largely because of different photosynthetic pathways. And so you have sort of so the way I like to describe it to some folks is I use kind of a car analogy. And so if you think of your standard automobile as your sort of standard photosynthetic pathway. You know it's it's it's useful it's you know it's making energy it's using energy. But if you think of sort of a hybrid right your hybrid car your electric car as a sort of innovation as a as a different type of photosynthetic pathway. It's really useful to I mean so aside from all the environmental benefits of having electric cars really useful if you're limited on water limited on gas or if gas is very expensive. And so similarly if you're limited on either nitrogen or water it's it's there's you know having this other form this other sort of photosynthetic pathway can be really useful. And what it essentially does is it sort of captures some of that CO2 and then sort of later kind of convert some of that CO2. And so it's it's very costly energetically. So it requires a lot of what we call ATP. But essentially it can save you if you're limited on water or if you're limited on CO2. And it's just like a all the time thing or like a you know animal or organism is in distress or I should say plant or whatever is in distress and you know utilizes this strategy sometimes. So that's a great question. So it's a all the time thing. So plants are either going to be C3 or C4 some plants or even what we call camp plants which is a little bit different. But essentially they're going to use one of these two different pathways. And one is much more costly than the other but like our our hybrid it costs more to get a hybrid car or electric car sometimes. But it's going to save us in the long run right. Right right. That being said if there's no benefit if gas is you know a dollar a gallon right there may not be a benefit of a cost savings rather of getting that sort of electric car if gas is only a dollar a gallon. And so essentially you know if you are sort of if you're photosynthesizing using sort of the C3 pathway that works best when you're not having to worry about we're not limited for CO2 we're not limited for nitrogen we're not limited for water. When you are when you're start for any of those things then often C4 is advantageous. So long story short we've had the advent of C4 plants since about five to seven million years ago and typically things like warm season grasses are C4 and typically things like trees and shrubs are C3. And so by using isotopes we can actually figure out okay was that animal eating C3 plants or was it eating C4 plants. And typically the C3 and the C4 will quake to grass or brows. Now that's not always the case and that's actually why I got into micro wear initially is I worked in Australia where you have C3 grass you have C4 grass you have C3 brows and you have C4 brows. Well that's a good thing. And so to get any sort of headway on diet you actually need both tools they're very complimentary to one another. So by using both tools we can actually discriminate you know was an animal eating the C3 grass or C4 grass was it eating C3 brows or C4 brows and and sort of really get a handle on diet. And in the case of carnivores we can use isotopes to figure out what type of prey they were eating. So for example you know when we're looking at things like lions or cougars we can see are they eating prey that it come from C4 ecosystems or from C3 ecosystems from open habitats or from close forests. And so that can provide us with a lot of resolution as to what the potential prey items are that they're actually eating are they eating grazers like horses and bison on the landscape or are they eating browsers like tapers and deer for example. And so why is this important to be able to look back at an organism you know using this stable isotope and using this dental micro wear technology. Why is it important to be able to look back and say I know now I now know something about their behavior not just about their morphology. So you know we can argue that you know understanding our evolutionary history is important just for the sake of of understanding our evolutionary history. That'll being said you know this is actually a question I I wrestled with for a little bit of of time when I was in college and embarking on graduate school. And at the time I was doing that there were two different fields field of conservation biology and there was a field of paleontology. And you know paleontology typically sort of was looking at you know what were animals doing in the past but not necessarily looking at it through a lens of a conservation lens. And conservation biology was was pretty much exclusively looking at you know how do we save species today. But since that time these fields have really converged and there's now a field called conservation paleobiology which as it sounds actually uses the fossil record to ask and answer questions that are of direct relevance to conservationists. So that's often what I'm aimed at doing as I'm trying to understand you know what were animals doing in the past. Why did a lot of animals go extinct? Was it climate change? human hunting? Was it a combination of these two events that caused their extinction? And also what was sort of the biology of a lot of these organisms that that lived in persisted on the landscapes for you know millions of years or thousands of years that can kind of inform us of what these landscapes were like and how these environments have changed over time. Yeah yeah so it's not just about their sort of physiology or their behavior but it really has to do with their interconnectedness with other organisms and with the planet as a whole sort of like their ecology you know how can we look at a single tooth for example and glean some information about how this animal or plant well I guess not plant because plants don't have teeth about how this animal lived on the planet and coexisted with other with other organisms during the time when it was alive. Yes absolutely and then ultimately what made it vulnerable to extinction? Why might it have gone extinct? And also what were the consequences of those extinctions on other animals that persisted after that extinction event? So you know kind of why are the things that are alive today? Why did they survive? Why did the things that when extinct go extinct and are there sort of lessons learned that we can extract from the fossil record that can help us better understand how to conserve species today? If you're looking for a new spacious SUV stop please don't pay more for less buy from Warnakia and save thousands interest rates as low as 0% or no payments for six months upside down or your tray get up to 4,000 over KBB from Warnakia. Test drive the Kia Sarentha with rugged good looks advanced technology and luxury. If you haven't already made the switch to Warnakia now's the best time. Get all the details at Warnakia.com. Can you sort of give us an example of like maybe an extinct species or you know pattern that you've studied that has illuminated a little bit or that has led you now to study a living species and understand that sort of interconnectivity or that relationship? Or vice versa you know something that you're studying now that's alive that in some ways relates to the sort of paleo aspect of your work? Yeah so that's a fantastic question. I was thinking there for a moment because there's there's so many examples. I'll give you one here first which is the Kwaka. So there's a little Kwaka's oh my god they're like they're like the most photogenic animal on the planet. They're so fun. They are. They are super cute. And what we so this is just a very sort of specific example but looking at Kwaka's one of the things is today Kwaka's lived primarily on islands. So there's a a handful of Kwaka's that live on the mainland of Australia in western Australia. But most of the Kwaka's numerically just live on these two islands. There's bald island and there's a place called Rotten Island. Rotten Island is where you're likely to actually encounter them and see them and photograph them. Like in the wild. Yeah I've only ever seen them in like nature kind of reserves in Australia. Of course places where they're sort of caring for Kwaka's but yeah I've never seen them just sort of in the wild. Well the way that they're able to live on these islands essentially we think is because foxes never made it to these islands. So you have an invasive species that was brought over foxes by Europeans and these foxes and in other things like cats and even other herbivores like rabbits have really wreaked havoc on the ecosystems in Australia and in particular you have foxes which can hunt and kill Kwaka's. And so where Kwaka's live in western Australia today where they co-acar with these foxes they only live in these really sort of dense environments. Right there's like a when we looked at their isotopes we found that their isotopes are really negative. They're they're it looks like there's a they're eating vegetation in the densest components of that ecosystem. But when they're on the islands they're actually eating from more open environments. And you know this may indicate that maybe they're doing something different on the mainland or the islands but what we ended up doing is we went sort of back in time we looked at fossils from you know around 20, 30 thousand years ago from mainland Australia the same region where we find them today. And we looked at those Kwaka's and what we actually find is that they're found in much more open ecosystems in the past. So this is really important because this tells us that if we can eradicate foxes in this particular area then we don't have to sort of manage for these these dense sort of shrubby areas. In fact they really do prefer sort of a mosaic ecosystem and can live in a variety of different environments. They just can't live or co-exist with foxes which are an invasive species and also an invasive predator to them. Oh wow. So so we have an actual like action oriented takeaway from this data we actually know how to engage in conservation efforts today because of this information. Yes exactly so that's a very specific example. And then there are other sort of more general examples where you know we're trying to look at you know what are the animals that that went extinct or how did these animals respond to changes in climate and are there things that we can learn. So is it the the generalist that fair better? Is it the specialist that fair better? What are the sort of commonalities? And so you know few things that we've learned from looking at various fossils whether it's you know in Australia or North America is that when it gets very dry and arid the things that can't sort of live in those ecosystems don't do as well. And and one large phenomenon that you often see is that browsers seem to be disappearing. So browsers are things that are eating mainly leaves and eating from forest ecosystems. And as you can imagine as it gets more arid as as the climate is changing that these browsers may have a hard time sort of living in these different ecosystems or you know various predators as things are opening up and drying out may have a difficulty hunting animals if they're unable to sort of ambush them from forest environment. So as these environments change we are seeing that that is having an impact on different species and essentially as an animal or as a species you can you know move so move North in the case of warming climates or move in some other some other way move adapt so do something different. Or you go extinct and so we're trying to sort of assess what happens you know by by looking at sort of instances of of warming in the past. That's fascinating. What an I'm like what incredible sort of like detective work do you ever feel like you are sort of like a a nerdy detective like a geeky science detective that's able to uncover some of this cool stuff that you'd never be able to know without all of this evidence and all of these clues sort of adding together in this way. Oh I do absolutely it's so fun to you know be at the museums and sample the teeth whether you're drilling them or taking molds and then you just kind of get addicted to the data like what's happening. So once you put under the microscope you have to see the scan you have to then analyze it you have to look at where it falls and you just you want to see how that process unfolds and you know sometimes we're right and sometimes we're really wrong and that teaches us you know you know nature works in in odd ways and it's you know sort of our job just to kind of try to to work through it and understand what's happening and learn from it. Yeah so you know that's that that sort of leads to an interesting question one that maybe is not not just you know I want to ask to satisfy my curiosity but in case anybody who's listening has is thinking to themselves like I don't I might want to be a paleontologist I have no idea paleontologist do all this stuff what is a sort of typical experience like for you because you mentioned being in the museum but I know you're also sometimes in the field and sometimes you're looking under the microscope so you're in the lab like who knew paleo wasn't just walking around with a pickaxe in your backpack but it's actually you know all these different aspects of investigation so what is sort of what does your workday look like? Yeah that's a great question so during the summers I'm often away either in the field or at museums but more of my work actually relies on specimens that people have already collected so I like to think that I'm bringing a second life to these specimens so people have already sort of gone out in the field collected them noted what kind of animal they are describes them you know noted the age of the locality and now I come in and I sort of look at these specimens and I often need a certain number so there needs to be you know enough phylicines or enough Tasmanian devils or enough you know whatever the animals you know saber-toothed cats and then I go in and I'll actually either sometimes all non-destructively sample them so sometimes you just photograph them sometimes you measure them you're measuring the jaws other times we're taking molds so I use lots of Q-tips I clean I clean the surface of these teeth with acetone I'll apply this dental impression material I'll take molds and then other times I feel like I'm a dentist so I'm drilling the teeth I'm actually collecting a little bit of there a mammal and then collecting it in little vials and then all of that material so whether it's you know little bits of a mammal or whether it's the molds from the teeth I bring those back to the lab to Vanderbilt and so during the academic year when we're teaching when students are here those days we're basically sort of analyzing all of the data that we've actually collected from the museum so we're you know we get to do a little arts and crafts we get to make casts and play with putty and and you know make an exact replica of these of these teeth and then we look at them under the microscope which we have here and we also do different sort of chemical preparations so we clean the teeth we clean that an amul we make sure that it's we've removed certain things like organics and whatnot and we prepare it for analysis on a mass spectrometer and so essentially all of those things we do are kind of in the lab throughout the the sort of work day or school day and lots of students are actually involved in that process and so you know many times with students will kind of start in the lab engaging in in that and then at some point we then bring them out to the museum and kind of show them where that process begins so yeah as a paleontologist you can go out in the field and find primary fossils you can look at museums and ask and answer questions based on specimens that already exist in the collections and you can also look at databases and and not travel anywhere and just kind of pull data from things like the paleo biology database or Neatoma database and ask and answer questions using data that's that's been accumulated so there's so many different ways and what I really like about it is it's very accessible to so many different people of different backgrounds and also if you have a disability then you know these are also things that that you can do you don't have to be in the field you can engage in paleontology in so many different ways shapes and forms yeah so you know I think historically at least way back when I was in college I remember you know being excited by the concept of paleontology but most of the universities that were near me in order to sort of go the paleo route back in the day it was very geology focused like they there weren't really many undergrad programs in paleo so people would usually study geology and then eventually switch over to paleo and I felt like it always had this sort of like overarching theme of like you better like rocks because you're going to be learning a lot about rocks and I was like but I want to do like anatomy and comparative anatomy and there have always been these like schools that studied zoology or anatomy in an effort to sort of like link up to paleo I'm wondering what your sort of path has been because I know a lot has changed since then and there are a lot of different roads that lead to an advanced degree in paleontology yes so my journey is is pretty unique in the sense that I did not grow up thinking I was going to be a paleontologist I will say I did grow up curious about science and nature and I I will say that taking classes at the Los Angeles Museum and natural history over the summer on you know whether it was robots or snakes or dinosaurs obviously contributed to my sort of fascination for science but I was so I guess to get a little bit more personal so when I was a child I had epilepsy and I had between 30 to 40 seizures a day and I was actually also the National Postard Child for the epilepsy society and so that experience sort of meeting with people in Congress and a former president sort of got me really engaged in the political process and so if you had asked you know the 10-year-old me what I wanted to be when I grew up it was a congresswoman so I went from you know dog walker to congresswoman and you know that was sort of my path and so I actually went to the University of Chicago my freshman year and was sort of dead set on you know going to law school becoming a politician trying to sort of make things better for folks and you know I advocated for the Americans with Disabilities Act which has had such a huge impact on people that was sort of my life trajectory and you know just the way things unfold I think you know being in college there's there's so many new classes and things you don't necessarily even know about until you get there and it was literally a random circumstance so I at University of Chicago you have to take a year of physics and a year of bio and a year of language and there's a this whole core curriculum and I was in my bio sequence and I had loved ecology and evolution that was my first quarter class that was great and I loved anatomy physiology and that was that was fantastic so then there's this third class it's immunology and nothing against immunology especially in our COVID world but it was it was taught by an instructor who I don't think can ever taught this course before had no assigned textbook and so if you couldn't follow him in class you just had no resource to to go to and I remember thinking am I gonna pass this class this is just this is so I didn't follow the first lecture I was not things were not looking positive and as I'm walking out of that class a friend of mine said oh there's this paleobiology class being taught you want to go check it out said well yeah sure that sounds fun so I sat in on the lecture and everything I loved about political theory I was finding an evolutionary theory and it was just completely captivating and I was I was instantly hooked and actually within a week I ended up volunteering in the lab to you know prepare dinosaur bones I was you know really fascinated by this new field of paleontology or new to me rather and was sort of not sure what I wanted to do and long story short I ended up transferring to UC Berkeley where I majored in resource management which is also sort of like environmental management and I was taking all the paleontology courses at the same time and I was really having to wrestle with do I want to selfishly study the ancient past because it fascinates me and I find it so cool and interesting or am I going to try to conserve and and try to study conservation biology or do land management and try to actually make an impact on these environments today and that was a really hard decision to make and I and I I actually tried really hard not to be a paleontologist so I kind of push paleo aside and said well there's not too many jobs in that field I'm going to go into environmental management so I did I went to Yale's Forestry School and was pursuing a degree in masters in environmental management in conservation biology but I really missed the paleo I missed the discovering of of ancient animals and ancient creatures and the mystery and and I just I missed it I really missed it personally and so I was also really fascinated and excited and passionate about education and so I probably had one of the coolest jobs ever and if you so I know you can't see me but if you need if you need a picture me you can picture Miss Frizzle right so I look I very much look like Miss Frizzle I've got her hair I've got you know I I've got her personality maybe in some way shape or form but essentially I took after I finished my masters I took a year and I drove a 38 foot when a Bego with dinosaur exhibits around New York City for the American Museum in Natural History and this is for the Mouveau Museum Program and that was just just such a cool job it was you know educating folks about dinosaurs bringing them to different communities we had lots of students who were you know unable to see or unable to hear who were able to interact and engage with the exhibits in different ways and so it was really just an amazing experience and I love the education but again I sort of missed the research and so finally I you know I've got these degrees from mainly sort of a biological standpoint resource management conservation biology and I decided I was going to go for it I was going to go for the PhD I was going to try to be a paleontologist but I was going to try to integrate all these different fields and so fortunately for me it was completely serendipitous I go to the Society of Palingtology Meeting and the potential advisor that I'm interested in working with Bruce McFadden actually had come up to me and had read an abstract I wrote about education in the Mouveau Museum and you know I was just I was I was instantly hooked as as to his research he was looking at sort of forced environments through time I had done a lot of forestry sort of linked together all these different areas and he was very supportive of me doing education out which is part of my graduate career and so ultimately yes absolutely and it's not everyone is supportive of that some folks are just sort of like research research research and you know he allowed me to I was in a program called Spice which was a program NSF used to have what are called GK12 programs or instead of T.A. in a university setting although I did do that in my graduate career we actually T.A. in a public school classroom so we brought lessons to you know at the seventh grade classroom in in Gainesville and and actually taught them about paleontology and fossils and also about physics and you know the whole curriculum of science during the academic year so yeah so I and then at University of Florida I was in a zoology department and so there we were you know I happened to study fossils but I those were just my organisms right I studied ancient life but I studied life and so I really had came to it from much more of a biological standpoint where I think the questions I ask are essentially biological but the tools and the things that I use are often geological and so you know kind of combining these tools and ironically when I was first hired at Vanderbilt I was hired as a biogeoscientist so you know kind of linking all those things together and I was actually in an earthnevarmental science department which used to be a geology department and now I'm actually have a joint position where I am primarily in a biological science department but I'm also secondarily in an earthnevarmental science department and so you know I think it's just it's so interdisciplinary and often it's the university's historical how it was set up so at Yale Paleo is mainly through geology at Berkeley it's mainly through biology or integrative biology and so but really it involves geo and bio so whether you have a passion for the rock side of it or if you have a passion for the the organisms themselves the anatomy the physiology or the ecology ultimately you can sort of link those tools together and bring these fields together really is interdisciplinary yeah so you know it's interesting because utilizing these different interdisciplinary tools that you develop throughout your undergrad throughout your graduate um training and of course just your sort of on the job training as you do as an academic you now are asking some pretty big and important questions about organisms that are actually alive today and how those organisms are being affected by these human induced changes and so I wanted to make sure you know it's so important that we don't run out of time to be able to talk about um about specifically some of the work that you've been publishing recently about polar bears and about and about grizzly bears which could be interesting but even before we get to grizzlies just the idea of what is happening to polar bears because of our carbon emissions because of our inducement of a of a changing climate yeah so while initially a lot of my work was focused on studying the modern to understand the past you know there was a point where we began sort of switching and a lot of our work recently is is really focused on the historic past so looking using these same tools and techniques to assess how diets of you know polar bears have changed over time and so that's essentially what we were looking at is you know polar bears are these hyper carnivorous animals they rely on hunting seals from sea ice and that sea ice is melting and with global warming with climate change you're you're seeing the melting of the sea ice which is impacting their ability to effectively hunt and one really interesting thing about polar bears if you compare polar bear to say a grizzly bear is that polar bears have an elongated skull and they have really large canines but they actually have reduced molars their molars are smaller than a grizzly and that just kind of demonstrates that they they really have changed their skull so that they can really kind of reach into these these ice holes and and hunt these seals because seals have to come up for air right they're mammals and when they come up for air the polar bears are well positioned to you know get their dinner and and hunt those seals now with the sea ice melting we're really sort of reducing the ability of these polar bears to effectively hunt prey and so they're they're now having to look for other food sources and and there are other folks who have studied sort of the the change in their diets in regards to now we see polar bears anymore seabird eggs or you know one thing that we can also observe is that they're often scavenging on more bohedral carcasses and they're they're trying to find you know meet their caloric demands anyway they can and so what our question sort of was is you know how has the diet of these polar bears changed over time and have they in other times of warming have they sort of changed their diet or they are they hyper specialized not only have you know did we look at polar bears over the last you know hundred plus years but we also looked at polar bears during a time called the medieval warm period when I did get pretty warm pretty quick and that was about a thousand years ago and what we ultimately found is that these polar bears sort of are hyper special as they really don't change they eat soft things they're really well adapted to you know eating you taking these seals hunting these seals and eating the blubber eating the flesh eating the soft parts right they're not crunching on bone they're not breaking open the bone ticket at the at the marrow and this there may actually be a bit of a biomechanical constraint here so because they have this elongated skull they actually lose power essentially in in being able to bite hard things with the elongation of the skull so if you have a shorter skull you can actually often have you know exude greater forces when you bite and so things like grizzlies can eat tubers and they can scavenge and they can eat pretty much whatever they want or whatever they come across the polar bears are sort of less well suited for that so we were sort of trying to assess do we see a shift in diet and what we ultimately saw is there's an inkling that there may be a shift in diet happening very recently but overall these these bears are hyper specialized and have sort of maintained this hyper specialization over time and so this is this is actually a concern because even in the sort of paleo record like the the most recent polar bears that are you know no longer with us still were sort of eating this way yes so even about a thousand years ago during the medieval warm period they were you know sort of eating soft things they were eating blubber they were eating flesh they were you know likely hunting the seals from the sea ice just the same as they're doing today right so they're not likely to switch gears anytime soon exactly exactly that is the main point so you know it it makes us concerned because what we do know about specialists and you know one of my favorite all-time specialists is a saber-toothed cat right so you have elongated teeth you're a big animal you are specialized on larger prey and those one extinct right and so we do know that specialists are more vulnerable to extinction or can be more vulnerable to extinction if the environment or the climate changes in a dramatic way which is what we're seeing today yeah and so you know we see all of these you know terrifying images of sickly and starving polar bear they've sort of become a poster child for the melting sea ice for the or land ice too but for the for the sort of treachery of climate change at the poles and you know I think a lot of times this kind of imagery is it's important I think it's obviously utilized in order to get people to act but how do you respond or how does that relate to this kind of work that you're doing like it are you having those same kinds of concerns that like polar bears may not make it yes so absolutely so the one the other reason why polar bears are so important to sort of exemplifying what's the consequences of climate change is the fact that polar bears live so far away from most of us okay yeah most of us have never seen a polar bear most of us have seen a polar bear in the wild yes and and so you know you can imagine sort of your local ecosystem if they build a strip mall across the street or if they build a housing development you can imagine how that might impact the local species right it might have an impact on their habitat it might fragment it you can you can envision those impacts but what's happening with the polar bear is essentially they're not dying out because of habitat fragmentation they're not dying out because of you know human hunting essentially they are declining because of climate change because we are emitting so much CO2 into the atmosphere that we are warming our world and you know overall it's contributing to the melting of the sea ice and so our impacts whether you're in Tennessee in California across the globe anywhere are having an impact in these polar regions and so that's also why they're they're so important and I am concerned because what we have learned time and time again from modern ecosystems from fossil ecosystems is that apex predators are really key to the stability and the functioning of ecosystems so for example this is this is why wolves were reintroduced to Yellowstone is you know you have all of these elk and deer and various things that are really over browsing some of these environments that are wreaking havoc on these environments and so the wolves actually created more of a stabilizing effect allow them to sort of predate and reduce the number of elk for example in that ecosystem and allow for a more sort of a healthier ecosystem or resilient ecosystem when you have a apex predator that lives in that ecosystem so ultimately I fear as having an Arctic without an apex predator or you know an apex predator like the polar bear and that is that is a concern and so when we think about these sort of natural pressures right that's really what we're talking about when we talk about the potential for natural selection is that there are these pressures these environmental pressures sadly sometimes they are human-induced very often they are just based on you know shifting natural shifting climate or natural changes to the environment but of course ever since we came on the scene most everything is due to you know this intense and sort of overbearing human impact but ultimately when we talk about sort of the the pressures that the natural selection pressures that are put on these different organisms what ends up happening they adapt or they die off right they're they're able to figure out a new strategy to to stay alive to eat to pass on you know traits to their young or or they die off and so of course there is a legitimate risk here that we will lose our gris sorry our polar bears because they no longer have a a place to live and to and to hunt is there a chance that they could adapt to given that you know sort of their the shape of their head is what it is they are they're already specifically sort of built to eat this kind of soft food could they change their dietary strategy could they you know what are some of the potential outcomes here yeah so this gets really interesting and also sort of release speculative pretty quick but also fascinating at the same time so one of the consequences of climate change is that polar bears are actually retreating further inland during different times of the year and actually grizzly bears are moving further north because of warming and so now grizzlies and polar bears are coming into contact more frequently than they did before and sometimes engaging in opportunistic meeting and this is actually producing a pizly and like for Leo this is actually happening yes yeah yeah so there are pizlies the first pizly was discovered in 2006 when a hunter actually shot a polar bear what he thought was a polar bear but it looked a little different and so when they looked at the the genetics of it they found that it was actually a hybrid it had a polar bear mother and a grizzly bear father no way okay wait before there's so many questions I have but before we dive fully into them so this hybridization happened naturally so this wasn't induced it wasn't you know done by in a zoo or by a unscrupulous breeder these were two organisms that stumbled upon each other and were like hey good looking and so a hybrid between a polar and a grizzly how genetically far apart are they are offspring viable do we know the answer to that question we actually do so okay they can produce viable offspring and in fact there have been other bears that have been tested that look like they are a product of a pizly mating with a grizzly and so so they can so this could be a whole lineage potentially so we do know that they're over time we have seen sort of this happened before at least evidence via genetics shows us that you know grizzlies and polar bears have come together in the past but they're also not that distantly related so they they sort of split about 500,000 years ago so they have a common ancestor and because of that is likely why they're able to produce viable offspring it's unlike you know sort of a a lot of different combinations that produce sterile offspring or don't produce anything at all but in fact these are producing sort of viable and fertile offspring. Cool okay so so we've seen a historical record of this happening we see even today a few spotty examples of this the of course the reasoning behind it is quite tragic but it also goes to show that sort of you know very Jurassic Park take away that life finds a way do you see this being sort of a random one-off thing that continues to happen or do you think this may be sadly the future of this species. So it's hard to know and it's hard to be too optimistic right now because normally hybrids are less well adapted than either paired species is to their environment so I mean this makes a lot of sense right a grizzly is going to be better than a pizly within its environment a polar bear is going to be better than a pizly with an its environment and so typically hybrids there isn't an advantage to being a hybrid right it's a disadvantage because you're less well suited to that particular environment than either of the parent species. Now that being said as our world is changing as the Arctic is melting you know if you we start to see an increase in these opportunistic mating events between grizzlies and polar bears at Bohead Whale carcasses again for very sad reasons there is a possibility that pizlies may confer benefits to a say polar bear in a warming Arctic right as see see ice is melting as these animals need to be able to be more opportunistic as they need to be able to potentially not have such a high caloric requirement as they you know need to be able to to eat you know different resources it may be a potential answer but again it's a big if and there's a lot we need to to learn about these animals but there there has been some really cool work that's been done actually in a zoo where they actually studied pizlies. Heavy rains will wear down shingles and other elements of a roof. High winds and rainfall after a storm's wake can involve lost shingles and moisture penetration in the under layman this water damage can penetrate the roof deck the water could eventually compromise the structural integrity of your home if it's time to have your roof looked at or fixed call T-Spark 850 766 1340 license number cgc 152 5336 ccc 133 1204 you know so often we think about life on earth as being somewhat static we we know it's not but because of our sort of time period that we exist in we're we're only looking at a cross section of time we know that speciation is a sort of gradual process we know that very often a new species evolves because of you know some sort of mutation that that confers an advantage to the organism you know makes it more have higher fitness blah blah blah blah but could a hybridization event like this be us observing speciation and process like is this often or ever identified as the as the start of a new species so hybridization usually results in sort of a bringing together of two different species right so you tend to it's not necessarily a mechanism for generating new species right frequently yeah but you do tend to see what's called intergression where some of the genes from one species sort of begin to make it into the gene pool of the other species right through the sort of mating events could this be a speciation event or is it more likely that you know I'm just thinking out loud you know when when a species very often we look at the fossil record and we think okay this species is identified as a new species because because there was some sort of like mutation or something that ultimately led it to have this these traits that conferred an advantage but is hybridization ever the sort of spark for a new species so I don't a hybridization is probably a less common cause I mean so we could have a whole debate on what is the species right and actually based on the based on the biological species concept a grizzly bear and a polar bear would not be two different species because definition of a biological species concept is things that when they reproduce that if two things can reproduce with each other that they are the same species right like dogs and wolves right right right right but then there's the morphological species concept which says these things are pretty darn distinct and so we would treat them as separate species and they are I mean a polar bear is very different from a grizzly bear in the way they they're niche their environments the way they hunt everything and so you know essentially they are two species but yes absolutely can we see sort of speciation in action I think there's a lot of cases of that and it mainly comes from sort of isolation so I think you know the dingo right is is is actually canus lupus it's a wolf but it lives in Australia and it's not it's not making its way back you know onto to other parts of the you know continental world aside from Australia and so essentially you're seeing sort of evolution in action right so a million years from now the dingo will probably be very distinct and it's considered its own species from the wolf for example and there are other things like that where you would expect isolation is is causing sort of evolution in action to sort of happen in many cases yeah we've got chimpanzees and bonobos for example where we we kind of can identify that these things are pretty dang different behaviorally they're different geogra- well not terribly different geographically but still distinct geographically but for years they were called just like pig me chimpanzees because it's like well it's like the same thing they're just diminutive but yeah it's like where is that dividing line just because something can mate doesn't necessarily mean that it's the same I don't know it's it's always fascinated me this idea and you know this this kind of goes to a larger debate as you referenced I recently had Lulu Miller on the show talking about her book why why fish don't exist and and a big part of what we discussed was this idea of taxonomy and categorization and and that the lines are always much more blurry than we want to think and that you know all of these different ways that we categorize are constructs they're human-induced it's it's you know it's like based on the evidence that we have to say this fits in that bucket and that fits in that bucket but sometimes things fit in two buckets yep absolutely yep that must be sometimes frustrating and sometimes very freeing as a paleontologist as as an ecologist as a biologist to to grapple with these things because they're so important for kind of developing theories and for public publishing and and just being able to speak about these ideas but at the same time I guess holding on to these concepts lightly because they really are so plastic yeah it's interesting so I try to use tools that are called phylogenetically independent so you know what plants you eat or you know what prey you're eating via isotopes or via microware whether you are called species a bc or d doesn't really matter we're trying to sort of reconstruct the ecology and sometimes that taxonomy or what animals call does change so a really sort of recent and classic example is canis diaris so the dire wolf so dire wolves are real for any of the the game of thrown fans and it was referred to as canis diaris it was thought that it was related to you know closely related to coyotes and wolves and essentially you have canis latrans and canis lupus which are coyotes and wolves and so it was named canis diaris because there were a lot of similarities morphologically but through some recent genetic analyses they've been able to reassign it to anasion diaris which is a different genus and so you know does that change how we interpret its ecology not really actually it is sort of you know we're still interpreting the ecology based on the isotopes based on the micro we still think that they were you know hunting from you know these sort of open environments and taking down large prey and eating things that were grazing but we now call them something different we don't call them canis diars we still call them the dire wolf but we call them anasion diaris and so that reflects their evolution history so often these things you know it's very nice to kind of you know other folks are working on the taxonomy side of things and we're working on the ecology side of things and sometimes when we make those sort of little course corrections in taxonomy things become clearer and sometimes they become weirder and you're like oh wow that's weird so this evolved multiple times and that thing isn't closely related and you know there's all sorts of cool examples like there's a marsupial saber tooth that I won't say saber tooth caxes not a cat's a marsupial but there's a marsupial saber tooth there's also you know what we call the marsupial lion there are these very weird carnivorous things that have come out of you know marsupials you also have you know panda bears right so in herbivorous bear that's evolved from a carnivorous group of animals that's sort of weird but yeah there's all sorts of neat examples I love that I love that there's almost always an exception to the rule and that you know that concept of holding things lightly it really does apply across disciplines because as certain as you are about something there's almost always something that sort of flies in the face of that and of course as I as I said before like I know it's as pithy as it is life does or will attempt to find a way and sometimes it gets real creative in its process of doing so like for example for example maybe there will be a future with a continued kind of growing population of pisley bears who knows who knows I guess um time will tell so we've covered so many different topics over the course of this conversation I've already kept you so much longer than I wanted to but I I got to know like what what does a pisley look like is it does it look more like a grizzly more like a polar what what features does it have of each or are they you know all over yeah so if you can just imagine what it would look like for polar bear and a grizzly to mate and sort of the outcome of that that's exactly what a pisley is so it's sort of a intermediate to all forms and so it's coutilleration of its hairs a little bit darker than a polar bear lighter than a grizzly um it has less of a sort of a humped shape back than a grizzly does more elongated skull uh that a grizzly so a little bit more similar to a polar bear but really kind of smack dab in the middle it really does look sort of intermediate in most forms whether you're talking about its hair or whether you're talking about it's even behavior so um some of them uh so for example there is a study done in germany where they actually had a um two pisley cubs that were born out of a a grizzly bear and a polar bear and what they did is they immediately removed them from that zoo and they sent them to another zoo and then they observed them so this is you know removing the teaching element that the mother would normally teach to her offspring and in that zoo they then observed them and so you know they they looked a different you know how they looked but they also looked at how they behaved and so you know when they would lay down they actually lay down much more similar to a polar bear um when they would swim they were sort of intermediate so they were better swimmers than grizzlies and not as good as polar bears and so you know it was pretty intermediate in form and in in shape and also in size um so yeah sort of what you would imagine i can imagine that you still would not want to come face to face with one of these bad boys in the wild it's like they would still be horrifying to encounter um especially if they were protecting their young or hungry or any other um any other situation in which you would not be well matched that would be a david and galaiic situation i think yeah absolutely i enjoy studying these animals from the safety of museum collections yes that being said it would be pretty amazing to actually see one in the wild i still have not seen a polar bear in the wild um although i do hear of stories in certain certain regions where you know kids are trick or treating and they have to keep an eye out for polar bears and things like that so that's a whole other uh you know thing to worry about yep yeah from a safe distance i say from a safe distance all right so lorissa i was hoping that before we uh bit ado and enjoy our Thanksgiving holidays that we um because of course we're recording this time traveling a bit before it comes out um that i could ask you the same two questions that i ask all of the guests on the show and the really big picture questions are so are you ready to dive into them yeah absolutely all right so obviously we've been talking a lot about climate change that may actually be um it's a it's a very common answer to to these questions and and that is okay um there's a good reason that it's a common answer but but um so so whether your mind goes to that place or some other place i want you to sort of think about whatever context is relevant to you right now um whether it be through your work through your personal life something very small and um individualistic or something very large and you know global or even cosmic and and tell us number one what is the thing that's keeping you up the most at night the thing you're worried about concerned about you may be sort of bordering on on disillusioned or cynical or just you know the thing that's really really concerning you and then on the flip side of that so that we do end on a more positive note where are you finding your optimism these days what are you looking forward to what are you hopeful for yeah those are those are huge questions so i will say you know it's for a long time um it is very frustrating to sort of uh so often what I study is the megafaunal extinction and i'm studying why these animals went extinct and what the consequences of these extinctions were and what it sort of come down to is climate change or human hunting and we are now living in a world in which humans are having both impacts right so when we were talking about climate change 10,000 years ago we weren't talking about human cost climate change we were talking about glacial interglacial cycling and sort of natural climate change today we're actually talking about human induced climate change uh in addition to human induced hunting habitat fragmentation changes in the landscape in many different ways shapes and forms including fire and and you know habitat modification we are changing the environment in really remarkable ways and are definitely considered ecosystem engineers but i see i think with that we really have a responsibility to future generations and you know that includes thinking about climate change that also includes thinking about pollutants and and chemicals and contamination i'm i'm worried about you know the climate change and eradication in certain regions i grew up in california i do a lot of work in australia fire is a big plays a huge role in these ecosystems and as things become drier and you have more pronounced fires that can really lead to lots of changes um to those environments and some of them not so great for us and so it's important that we conserve not just for the sake of conserving other species but even from a very self-centric sort of um perspective for the survival of our own species it's important that we have clean water to drink and clean air to breathe and that we have you know a diversity of animals and resilient ecosystems for our own survival so whether you know it's a selfish perspective or whether it's a compassionate perspective um you know climate change and the impacts humans are having writ large on the environment is is a huge i mean i'm seeing the impacts from my studies on what climate change natural climate change in the past and also human impacts with far fewer humans on the landscape what that how that wreaked havoc on communities and how that caused extinction of numerous large animals and so you know seeing this all kind of play out today is is concerning absolutely and so where do you find your optimism and your hope you know where where are you able to focus sort of a genuine and authentic um positive outlook so it's it's funny um because you wouldn't think that uh saber tooth cats would be the place that i would find some sort of um uh solace or escape um but it looks like even saber tooth cats were pretty compassionate and i really think that we need to um you know as uh as a species we need to really care for each other um and you know for example in studying saber tooth cats one of the things we found was that um there are different individuals that will actually have a broken saber and that bone sort of fills in and remodels in that area and these these saber tooth cats are able to to survive for some period of time um without having you know this hunting apparatus well what that means is that other other cats in the landscape are likely caring for them and and there's amazing footage of a a female taking down care remember if it was a buffalo or a wildebeest but it was a large a guillet and opening up it's sort of belly so that this other lioness with a broken jaw can can feed from that and so i think that even in the most dire of circumstances if we come together as a species there are things that we can do to help each other and i think we need to not forget to be compassionate um the other thing that keeps me going is i work at a university and so there are lots of of young people that i'm working with and seeing their passion and their energy and their enthusiasm and their desire to to make the world a better place that keeps me going that is our future absolutely doctor alurissa de santis thank you so much for taking the time today for teaching us all about um paleontology all about the interesting mechanisms that you use to study both extinct and extant species and of course all about the pizly bear thanks so much for having me this is a lot of fun absolutely and for everyone listening thank you for coming back a week after week i'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk about it