 If you're looking for a new spacious SUV, stop. Please don't pay more for less. Buy from Warnakia and save thousands. Interest rates as low as 0%. Or no payments for six months. Upside down on your tray, get up to 4,000 over KBB from Warnakia. Test drive the Kia's Sarentha with rugged good looks, advanced technology and luxury. If you haven't already made the switch to Warnakia, now's the best time. Get all the details at Warnakia.com. Oh, make that switch, make that switch to Warnakia. Strike gold this March with the luck of the drive event at Warner Hyundai. Hyundai offers more style, comfort, safety, and tech. And you're in luck because this event offers even more savings. Test drive the 2025 Hyundai Palisade, a perfect fit for any family with its seven available trim levels and three rows full of comfort and convenience. New Hyundai's come with owner assurance with America's best warranty, a 10 year 100,000 mile powertrain limited warranty. Nationwide, feeling lucky, visit Warner Hyundai.com. Hello, everyone, and welcome to Talking Nurtie. Today is Monday, September 6, 2021. And I'm the host of the show, Cara Santa Maria. How was September already? Wow, we are all losing time, aren't we? Well, if you're back in school, congratulations. And I hope you have a wonderful school year. If your kiddos are back in school, congratulations to them. They are surviving. They're doing it. And I think most days right now, so long as we can say that, we're in a pretty dang good place. All right, I've got a great show for you this week. But before we dive in, I do want to thank those of you who make Talk Nurtie possible each and every week. Remember, Talk Nurtie is, and always will be 100% free to download. And that is because I rely on the support of listeners just like you. A lot of people can't afford to pay for all of their media consumption. But of course, the people who create this media have to get paid. And one of the ways we get paid is by reading advertisements, which is great, but it's usually not enough, especially on podcast, where everything is really done by yourself. You're your own producer, you're your own. Well, I used to be my own editor. Now I've actually, I pay somebody to edit my show. I also pay an assistant to help me because I'm juggling so many things. And of course, gotta be able to pay them. And one of the biggest ways that we do that is via Patreon. So for those of you who pledge your support in every episode, I just want to give you a shout out and thank you from the bottom of my heart. This week's top supporters include Daniel Lang, Mary Neva, and Rob Schreck at the highest level of support. Thank you all so, so much. Then we've got Brian, by the way, they are the coolest people in the solar system, according to my Patreon labels. The coolest people on earth include Brian Holden, Christopher Pitt, David J. Eastsmith, Dutus Infinitas, June Separa, Ulrika Hagman. And I also want to thank some friends of talk nerdy who include Robert Christ, Charles Blale, Bill Hamilton, Carlitech, Greg Koolie, Gabrielle Filippo, Haramido Gonzalez, Ken Patrick, Stewart, Scott Doug. I'm scrolling until I see a woman. Anika, thank you Anika. Who else we got besides Bruce? And oh, there's a Camille and a Katarina. Thank you all so, so much. All right, so I'm excited about this week's episode. It's a little bit different. I explained to you why right at the very top. So I'm not going to dive deep, except to let you know that my guest this week is Eliza Van Court. She is a cookhouse fellow at Cornell University and advisory board member of the Performing Arts for Social Change and a diversity crew partner. She's also the founder of the actors' workshop of Ithaca and has dedicated herself to empowering women of all experiences and backgrounds to claim space, which of course makes sense. As her new book is called A Woman's Guide to Claiming Space, Stan Tall, Raise Your Voice, Be Heard. All right, so without any further ado, here she is, Eliza Van Court. Well, Eliza, thank you so much for joining me today. Thank you for having me. I am really, truly so excited to be here. Yeah, this is going to be a really fun chat. It's a little out of the ordinary, a little bit of a left turn for our show. But I want to explain first why I'm so excited, why when I received your book from your publisher, I immediately reached out and was like, yes, yes, yes, let's please have a conversation. So this is a science show. Usually I have scientists, science writers, although I have been doing a lot more social justice because that's sort of my area of concentration within my PhD. I'm working on a PhD in clinical psych, but I'm existentially oriented. And I am my concentration, if that makes sense, like it's like a major for a PhD, is social justice and diversity. And so obviously all of those areas are very interesting. I think that's why I was first taken by your story, but as I got deeper and deeper into it, I realized that this conversation is one that, I want to engage in personally, whether on air or off, but be I do think is an important conversation to be had for us and also for the listening audience. So that will unfold as we go, but you're not a scientist. Like that's not why I'm having you on the show. Your background is not in science. I have no background in science. I have one claim to fame with science, but it has nothing to do with my innate scientific abilities. If you'd like, I can share it with you. Yes, please claim to fame. I'd love to hear it. I claim to fame that only people in the science community think is awesome and people outside have no idea what I'm talking about. But my, I think it's my great, great, great, great grandfather is Vanderwals, of the Vanderwals forces are thunder balls as we say in our family. Oh, no way. Yep. Yeah. Yeah, this is like a fundamental force in physics. This is like a weak force that's like the reason that certain molecules were, or atoms like small, small things stick together. Like this is a very important thing. This makes the world go round. When I was in my two months, I told, I always tell the people at the end of the talk and I said, you know, my great, great grandfather knew Einstein and they said, uh, Einstein knew him. So cool. Oh my God. And now I found super cool. Oh, yeah, you did. Oh, that's amazing. It's funny because sometimes we're lucky enough to know our grandparents. Some very few people know our great, grandparents and like nobody, obviously it's impossible to know. You're great, great, great grandparents because math. Right. But how cool? So he was Dutch, right? Yes. So my background, my mother's a tie and my father is a Sephardic Jew and Dutch. And it was actually a huge scandal with the time that my grandmother, who was really Dutch royalty as of under walls, decided to go with a Sephardic Jew as her choice of the man to marry. And they ended up fleeing the Holocaust and a lot of people said to her, why are you doing this? You're in one of the most powerful families in Holland. You shouldn't uproot your life for this. And she said, well, I'm in love. What else am I going to do? And she left and went to America and gave up a lot. So it's a really interesting story. Yeah. And now here you are. I know. I know. It's wild. It's really wild. It's wild. And of course, your story is, I don't know. I think it's funny when you read publicity kind of coverage. There's always people may not know this. But when you receive a book from a publisher and there's a chance that somebody's going to be on your show or you're going to be doing any sort of press, they put a little leaflet in the book that describes the story. It gives you the quick and dirty, right? So that you know right away, oh, this makes sense for us or at the top line notes that I need to know. And I'm always like, oh, god. I know that the people, the authors or the personalities or the actors, whoever being interviewed, don't see this right away. Because the way they write about people is always like caricatured. You know what I mean? And so as I'm reading this, I'm thinking, they're like, oh, a story that a Hollywood producer would want for a little bit of, you know, it's like, her life was insane. And it's like, oh, Jesus Christ. Like, her life was her life. But it is true that you've like a, been through it. And B, you've had some real brushes. I would say that I think are interesting to a scientifically informed audience, but also heartbreaking, devastating, ultimately uplifting and optimistic. So even before we get to the whole point of your book and like the work that you do now, which I want to spend most of the time on, maybe you can tell us a little bit about your background. And specifically, you know, your childhood, some of the issues that you were facing and then this like fateful day, several years ago, when you were writing your bike. Yeah, yeah. You know, it's funny. I used to give my talks on communication and my daughter, and a lot of times people would come up to me and say, you know, it looks like it would be so easy for you to do this. You just look like you've never really suffered or had anything hard happen. And so I can't do this. And my daughter said, well, mom, it's true. You do come off like that and you have to share your story. And I know you don't want to necessarily use it as a way to get the word out, but she says, that's not what you're doing. You're really helping people understand anyone can learn those skills. My daughter's brilliant. I'm just going to say it. I'm just going to say it. I'm just going to have my daughter. She's a 21 and just so much wiser than me, even in the high school as a teenager. So in many ways, so I start telling my story and I do think it's important because I think that it's important for people to understand that you can learn to claim space no matter, you know, what happens to you if you have the right support. So basically, when I was a little girl, I had a really happy childhood until I was four and a half by all accounts. My mother was an absolutely wonderful mother. And then when I was four and a half, she became paranoid schizophrenic. And it was severe. And she ended up kidnapping me three times. There was a national APP out on me, all points bulletin. And one of the times we went across the country, truck stop to truck stop to truck stop hitchhiking. Was she unmedicated at this time? Oh, yeah. She was a full breakdown on what would happen as she would go off her meds. And then that would be it. If she skipped one day or two days, she started to say, oh, my meds are bad for me. So she had to take them every day or else you would slide really fast. And so what happened to me on that trip, and that was when I was four and a half, five and a half, and then six, I think, were the times six and a half. Oh, wow, that was so young. Yeah. And what happened to me really made me understand why I started to conflate invisibility with safety. I thought if I could just be invisible, I would survive. And of course, as I grew up, I realized that being invisible is not safe. It is quite dangerous. But I ended up going into having a winding road. I was a political science major in college. I lived in a kind of a state of semi-fear, but I really tried to overcome that. And I had a lot of PTSD from what had happened. And had you done work at that, let's say, by the time you were in college? Okay, all right. So you were pretty self-aware about that. So much therapy. And I also had women in my life, like my big sister and the big sister, big brother program. And there's so much research that shows that one person can change her life. And this woman saw me every day from the time I was six until I went into high school. When I needed, when I said I wanted to see her a little bit less, but she was at my wedding. She was just, she was there when I got a divorce. She was the first person, well, I'll tell you about that in a minute, about my accident, but she was the first person to meet me at the hospital. So anyway, I had a lot of support. And one person, I always say my story is not about how one person can have triumph. It's about the impact you could make on one person's life. And so I ended up, I was doing okay. I started in political science. Then I went to law school for a year. Then I decided, I really don't want to do the adversarial system. So I ended up going to take a leave of absence. I did a program in acting for two years and then became an acting teacher. I taught other people how to kind of step into their power, but I wasn't doing it myself. And then in 2014, I think it was, I was riding my bike and somebody was texting and driving. And they plowed into me. I got thrown on the hood of their car, hit one side of my head, got thrown in the middle of an intersection, hit the other side of my head unconscious, had a bilateral brain injury and a subdural hematoma. And Alice, my big sister actually met me in the hospital. She was the first one to get there before my parents. I don't know how she did it. And I woke up with severely compromised memories. So I would have my whole day, everything would be fine. I would go to sleep. I'd wake up half my day would be gone. And I really realized at that moment, when people say live in the moment, I have a very different perspective on that. I don't think living in the moment, it should be our goal, because the moment is gone. And life is really a collection of memories. And if you can't remember anything, you're not really living. You can't grow, you can't learn. So for me, it's really about creating memories that you're proud of or that you learn from. Or they bring you joy. And because that's really what our life is, the moment is gone. It's all about what we learned from our memories. So anyway, so I ended up also realizing pretty soon in that I thought I was fine. I thought I was getting a lot better. I had little weird quirks, which I'm sure scientists would love to hear about. Like I went to sleep. I mean, I hit my head and before I hit my head, I hated raw tomatoes. I found them repulsive. I woke up and I craved them. And I still do. So really weird, quirky things like that. Yeah. But one day a friend came to my house and I said to her, why is everyone acting so strangely? And she said, Eliza, they're not. They're responding to you. You are your whole, all of your communication is just really shot. Your vocabulary is gone. You're speaking slowly. And then she said, you sound a little like a stone third grader. Oh, weird. OK. So I had never known what that was, but I knew that was bad. And so you weren't actually aware of it? I wasn't aware. Oh, interesting. And it was really scary because I remember thinking my whole life, my deepest fear was that I would end up like my mother. I would end up not knowing that I had lost it. And because that's what makes you crazy, right? Crazy is. I think these things, and I think they're real. When we're depressed, we think I am depressed, right? We know we're depressed. When we're delusional, we don't know we're delusional. And it's most people's biggest fear. I see it a lot with end-of-life patients, this idea of losing identity, losing a sense of self is the central kind of thing. Absolutely. Yeah. Absolutely. And so I had to rebuild my communication, break by break. And it was a really interesting enlightening process that birthed my book and my work, really. So it was a fascinating process and a difficult process. But I will say that it was the thing that changed my life for the better, even though it was absolutely terrible. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. And so do you have any lasting difficulties? Yeah. I have weird lasting difficulties. For example, I used to be able to drink one glass of wine and have great memory. Now you think I was blackout drunk. I'm not acting drunk. I don't feel drunk. But my memory, for whatever reason, just doesn't want to work as well if I have one glass of wine, which is just weird. There are other things. So when I am sitting here with you and I'm fully focused on a conversation, I had an unusually high IQ in the area of being able to remember a conversation. I could remember everything that was said. And I still can. If you distract me, it goes down from the top of the IQ chart to about 10%. Yeah. So now I've learned that I have to, if I really want to remember something, I have to sit down and stop doing anything else. And that's quite, that's a normal thing for a head injury, which is with distraction, memory goes down in a really dramatic way. Absolutely. And it's funny because it's almost like, it's almost like the normal brain taken to an extreme, right? Or the neurotypical brain taken to an extreme, because the truth is all of us, if we're distracted, we suffer, right? Our memories suffer, our attention suffers. And most people think that they are way better at multitasking than they actually are. For you, it's so severe that you can feel the consequences, whereas most people are unaware of those consequences. But the truth is, yeah, if we want to really remember something we have to be present, if we're not present in the moment, if we're not actually observing, if we're looking at our phone, if we're thinking about or preoccupied about the past or about the future, or about any other anxiety inducing kind of worrying things. Yeah, we're not going to, as you mentioned, that being in the moment, we're not going to create those memories and in as meaningful away. Yeah, and I've had to do a lot of compensatory strategies that, I learned later, what I was doing prior was unusual. So for example, in my acting school, I at times would have upwards of 45 students, because we have these very small classes. And I would, everyone would be on a payment plan, because actors are not usually having a lot of money. I kept in my head everyone's name, which class they were in, and what their payment plan was in my head. Oh wow. I had a very unusual memory, and I didn't realize that I thought everybody was like that. Afterwards, one of my instructors said to me, I think part of the problem here is you're having to do what the rest of us have always had to do, and you haven't had to slowly learn how to do that throughout your life, right? And you're having to do it all at once, because you had this just iron track of a memory, and now you're kind of like the rest of us. Yeah. And it was hard for me because I've ADHD. So it was great to be able to keep everything in my head, because I hate taking the time to write stuff down. And you're right. Most people, most of us have to, because yeah, otherwise we lose whole, like very important day, I will just skip one of the most important things I'm supposed to do during the day if it's not committed to paper. Right. I used to have my whole schedule, I could have eight things in a day, all day long, all week, and I would know exactly what was on it, and now I'm dependent on my calendar. Right. And that's just a very different experience for me. And when we did all this IQ testing afterwards, it was weird, because all of these areas, I came in at normal, but I guess it was just, I was had a couple really serious gifts when it came to memory before. Oh, for sure. I'm sure that's why, and that's obviously very predictive of good outcomes after severe brain injury, is if you had a higher pre-morbid functioning, that deficit is not gonna hit you as hard, because it might just take you to the normal range, as opposed to taking you to a heavily deficient range, although during your acute care in the hospital, like we're not talking about after that first healing time, during your acute care in the hospital, not only was your memory profoundly dysfunctional, you couldn't, like you had those severe communication difficulties as well. How did learning how to talk, or learning how to talk fluidly, learning how to communicate again? I mean, that must have really given you some kind of insight, some perspective. I, you hear about this, it happens all the time, I see it in hospital, but when I start to, like truly empathize and think about what it would be like, for me if I lost my ability to communicate, it's very hard for me to wrap my head around it. Yeah, and it wasn't that I couldn't communicate, it was that I, it's just to be blunt, I sounded dumb, like really, like I sounded like someone who hadn't developed my vocabulary left yet and I was stoned and then third grade, and so were you also like a little bit slurry and like speaking more slowly? I was slow. Mm-hmm, okay. And I'm at fast talker and I was very, very slow. And I also would fatigue easily. I mean, what was really, there are some, some after effects that I still have. So for example, if I'm tired, if I don't get any sleep, I will stammer. I have never stammered in my life. And when I'm giving my communication talks, I now just use that. I say, when you're talking, when you make a mistake, don't draw attention to it. We all make mistakes. I stammer when I'm tired now, you know? Yeah. Yeah. But I wasn't actually in the hospital for an extended amount of time. They don't really leave you in the hospital unless you have a subdural and they didn't discover my subdural until later. When a friend was over and I started slurring my speech and repeating the same sentence over and over and over and then they rushed me to the hospital. Oh, wow. Okay. So yeah, at that point, you were basically, yeah, you were having a stroke. And so did you spend any time in an acute rehab facility or anything like that? No, I did. Oh, wow. It was interesting. They did what they do. Well, it was different. The way they treated concussion back then, it really wasn't taken quite as seriously. They just kept me, washed me, made sure everything was okay. The bleed didn't start until after I left. So they did all this testing. They said I was fine. And they sent me home. And then I couldn't, I didn't even remember the first week. I walked downstairs and thought, I can't believe someone has already made us a meal. Like someone said, it was our neighbor Tina brought us over a meal and I thought, how is that organized in three hours? And it turns out I had been awake for a week and it was gone. Yes. It was gone. So it was a very wild experience in that sense, just knowing. But the interesting thing for me, I'm very oppositional. I don't like to follow rules. I'm very poor at following rules. And they told me that they wanted me in a room and this was different. What they saying you should do now and what they said then is radically different. So they said they wanted me to stay in a room for two weeks in a dark room with no stimulation. I'll add the yellow wallpaper. And you know, you can't look at a screen, you can't read a book. And it's not that hard not to do that because it hurts your head. So I was lying in a dark room, but I can't do that. So after the first week, I was talking to my friend Katie and I still do remember this conversation. It's funny how you have these snippets. And she said, well, why don't you start writing down your day? That way the next day, you won't have forgotten everything. So if you learn something, write down what you learned before you go to sleep so you don't forget it. So I started to write and some people think I got, I forget what it's called, hypomania or something, graphomania. It's when you just had this urge to write. So I started writing and I really started writing me before I was the day with my eyes closed. And so I would write all my thoughts about what I was thinking about because it's so much time to think I would send them to my best friend Katie. She would edit them. One of my students would come over and read them to me the next day and then I would start writing. And I would do it until I tired, then I would stop, then I would do it some more, then I would stop. And now the research shows that's exactly what you're supposed to do. You're supposed to actually do activities until you tire after the first two to three days and then go then stop and then do it again and then stop. And because the only thing I was doing in terms of what would now be considered rehab was writing some of the brain specialists that I've gone to are convinced that that is why writing became such a focus for me after my accident because my brain said, oh, that's the most important task we have to heal. Interesting, interesting. And it really did, didn't it? It was like, that's when the writing became a big part of your life. Prior to that, you weren't, you wouldn't have considered yourself a writer. No, no, I mean, I wrote one act plays for my school. I collaborated with my students on one act plays, telling their stories, but no way would I've considered myself a writer until after the accident. If you're looking for a new spacious SUV, stop. Please don't pay more for less. Buy from Wernakia and save thousands. Interest rates as low as 0%. Or no payments for six months. Upside down on your tray, get up to 4,000 over KBB from Wernakia. Test drive the Kia's Samantha with rugged good looks, advanced technology and luxury. If you haven't already made the switch to Wernakia, now's the best time. Get all the details at Wernakia.com. Oh, make that switch, make that switch to Wernakia. No matter what you drive, or where you take it for service, ask for B Pro auto parts. Your quality tested, warranty backed, and made for most makes and models. Ask for B Pro. B Pro auto parts. So obviously you had been teaching acting. What about the public communication? What about the equity and inclusion and diversity? The sort of the shift in your career, do that come as a function of the accident and sort of a re-prioritization of what you wanted to do in your life, or was it sort of always there under the radar? Well, I always, I mean, I went to school for political science. I worked with on political campaigns. I always cared about those issues, but frankly, I didn't have a sense of anything when it came to anti-racism. In fact, I was one of those quote liberal people who thought they had it all together and therefore was not doing anything right. Right, like, oh, that doesn't apply to me. So I don't have to work of myself. Yeah, yeah. I am so enlightened. And of course, that sets you up to do dumb stuff. So that part of me, I think, when I was recovering, I spent, I'm an extrovert. I love people, I love to talk, and I couldn't. I would get tired. So I had to watch for the first time in my life, really just shut up and watch. And what was so fascinating is I would look at the micro, like these micro behaviors that people would have that I would watch in my class that I'd become very good at. And I saw how certain people would do the same behaviors and the reception was so radically different. And it was just glaringly obvious that it depended on how much power and privilege you had, how you were received doing the same behaviors. And so I started to get really fascinated with how the intersection of physicality and voice and the socio-political. And because I had that political science background, and I taught acting for years and was really good at identifying the minutiae of human behavior, which is what the Myesner technique is all about, it just kind of came together. And people for years had said, hey, will you help me with my speech, will you help me with this? And suddenly I started thinking, wow, I'm doing this very differently depending on who this person is, because I intuitively knew in the past they'd be received differently. And this sort of brought it all into a much more conscious place. And it really became my passion. And so tell me now what it is that you actually do for a living. Like how are you making your living and how have you sort of organized this into your life's work? And I know it's probably going to be a little bit, it's a weird question to ask in the middle of a global pandemic because everybody's just being scrappy and doing what they can. But ultimately, sort of how do you see that organization in your life? Yeah, well, my life is being on the speaker's circuit, which really took a hit obviously for several months in the pandemic. But now is finally kind of coming back. I was mostly in academia, giving talks and workshops, and then academia shut down all the outside contractors because it was just shrinking everything. So I had to do a pretty hard pivot to corporate. And I just started doing it again. And it's fun. I mean, it can be rough. I just did a three days one was a talk and then two workshops. And it was for people in Australia, India, China, and Japan, this company, Lenovo. And I was jet lagged while in New York, which was just a weirdest experience because my work day started at 11 PM. But I get really, you know, it's just a strange. But I give three talks and workshops. The first one is on global communication. So just really how to use the macro of public speaking in order to identify the micro of communication and give people concrete steps and skills they can use to optimize their communication. So they're more persuasive, they're better leaders, et cetera. The other one is I have a focus just on women. And then the one that I really is just so close to my heart also is I have a talk addressing whiteness directly as a white woman and how you can become not a performative ally, but real critical ally ship. And that was something I developed for the Office of Rhinarity Education at MIT years ago. And it's just been kind of developing over the years as I customized for each organization. So I love that. Yeah, and I love it. I just absolutely, you know, I cannot believe I get to do what I love and change people's lives in these workshops where I get, I still get emails from people I've worked with five years ago saying I just want you to know everything changed after your workshop. And I just, to me, that's just, you know, I was joke, isn't it great they don't have to be hidden ahead with the car? Yeah. That's why I got. No, it's true. And I mean, I think it's rare now that I'm working on my PhD, I see patients as part of my practicum training. So you have a certain number of hours you have to get before you're able to, you know, start your internship and then you have a certain number of hours you get before you're able to become doctor. And then you still have to get more hours before you can get licensed. And I collect hours in a very large cancer center here in Los Angeles and a lot of my patients are in cancer survivorship. Some of them are in active treatment. And, you know, a smaller number, but a really important number to me are in end of life scenarios. And one of the things that I do not take for granted, I very much have sort of completely shifted my perspective is that I'm not dealing with the end of my life yet. I mean, we all are, but not yet, right? None of us really knows. But I am lucky enough to learn from my patients who are dying. All of these lessons that unfortunately, first, I mean, for some of them, it took dying for them to learn. For some of them, they have this really great insight and these great perspectives even before the case. And for some of them, they're in sheer denial and like never accept it until the day that they die. But I'm very lucky that being exposed to them on a regular basis and really listening to them, I get to walk away with those sort of takeaways without having to be in that position. And you are offering because you went through the shit. And it gave you this, what we call an existential psychology, we call it a boundary experience. Like something that drastically shifts your perspective out of the normal every day, kind of capitalist consumer, keeping up with the Joneses, you know, superficial into the mortal, the existential, the profound. When you go through a boundary experience, you cannot help but come out the other side different. You're just a different person. Absolutely. You get to share that. Like I get to feel based on your ability to communicate what you gained from that and hopefully take that really to heart. So that, I mean, sadly, I hate to say it, but like I didn't have to go through that. Yeah. Oh yeah. I mean, I always joke when I do my talks and my workshops. Yeah, I'm going to share this with you. And luckily, you don't have to be hit in the head with a car to learn it. Yeah. Well, hopefully, and the thing, the frustrating thing is there's always going to be a certain percentage of the audience who still doesn't learn it. Like who probably would have to be hit in the head in order to learn something like that? When it comes to race, that is true. I really, it's really fascinating actually when I'm doing my talks and I'm going to a certain part of the talk which tends to really go after whiteness in a very direct way. There's always a 65 year old man in the back of the room who falls asleep. Yeah. Okay. They can't do it. They just check out. So now right before I get to that point, I always say, and this is the part of the talk that can be very intense for some people. And often there's someone who starts to fall asleep. Know that if you're doing that, you're just checking out for a reason. And there's always this one guy in the back who like sits up more straight into the room. Oh, man. That's what you're in. It's fascinating. Oh, yes, seriously. And there's always that person too. I remember doing a panel about women in STEM and specifically about, I think it was at a skeptic conference. So it was less, I mean, it was about STEM and we focused on science, technology, engineering, math. But it was also about sort of like holding space, kind of making space for women and skepticism, that skepticism is sort of a microcosm of the greater problem, but it's a very white man, you know, space. And I remember we were talking about resiliency and it was so insane. Like this guy raised his hand and he was like, well, should we be teet, yeah, exactly. It's like, should we be doing a better job in school, teaching women how to be more resilient? And I was like, ooh, I was like, there's so much to unpack here. And so, and it's just the tone deafness and basically, I mean, what it comes down to right is that when you live with privilege and privilege doesn't mean your life is great. Privilege doesn't mean your life has been easy. It means that you specifically don't suffer the same difficulties as other people suffer, simply do to the makeup of their reproductive organs, to the visual distinction of their skin color, you know, et cetera, et cetera. Privilege simply means that you're not taken down a peg, you're not discriminated against, you're not shit upon simply for those reasons and then of course, all the things that come from that. And so when you live with privilege, it's, you simply don't experience those things so you're completely and most of the time, blissfully unaware that they exist. Absolutely. I mean, I always say privilege is the thing you don't have to think about. Right. That is what it is. And it's when I am talking to white men, I have a lot of empathy for them because I realized when I was doing this work, that white men are the only category if they are straight of people who have to do a thought experiment and imagine what it would be like for someone to hold something against them that they cannot change. Right. Everybody else has a touch point where they say, yeah, you know, it's hard for me to imagine being terrified of the police every time a cop drives up behind me, but I do know what it's like to walk down the street on a dark alley and it's hard to describe that to my male friends. So I believe there are things that I don't understand that others experience. Yeah. I don't even need to literally go into their imagination and imagine what that might be like. And so how hard could it possibly be for them to really get into a space of empathy? And what I've found is most of the time, white men who are in that space have someone close to them and they have watched them suffer. Yeah. And that is when everything shifts. And I know for me, my journey on race, my real journey on race came from watching people I love suffer. And I just didn't get it before that. And the sad thing is we hear that in the rhetoric, we very often have to say that could be your mother, that could be your sister, that could be your daughter. As if it weren't your mother sister daughter, it didn't apply to you. Right. And that's the really sad, but I guess it's a way to find common ground. Yeah. And I think it's important. I think storytelling is how we learn. I mean, I remember this one client that I was working with. And they said to me, well, here's the thing, because I do some executive coaching. And they said, I just feel like whenever I meet a black person, they just don't trust me. It takes so much more work for them to trust me. And it's not fair. I'm a good person. And I said, OK. Do you have daughters? And the guy said, yeah. And I said, if your daughter was walking down the street and a gigantic, huge man was walking toward her in a dark alley at night, would you fault her for crossing the street? Right, for just not trusting him. Yeah. And he said, well, of course not. And I said, the percentage, the likelihood of that man jumping into her to an alley with her and into a bush and attacking her is tiny compared to her going to a frapparty. For a place. You know, I mean, the more dangerous place for young women is college. And so the percentage is small. Why are you OK with that? Well, it could happen. And I said, OK. So now imagine that you are someone who pretty much 90% of the time, someone is going to slightly microaggress you all the time and not understand your experience, 90% of the time. Why would you expect them to be open all the time to that? Wouldn't you expect them to cross the street and wait for you to prove yourself? Like, it's not black people's job to trust us. It's our job to gain trust. And I think that is something that white people really need to understand is that we have done nothing to really get that trust as a universal for all people. So of course, our job is to understand that black people would be understandably wary of white people and to try to earn that trust. Because that's the way it's going to have to be until society shifts quite radically. Absolutely. The default position psychologically, you're right, has been that white people by and large have an expectation that our privilege tells us basically that we are normative, that we are, it's this ethnocentric monoculturalism, we are the typification of what is. And that we're trustworthy and we're safe and we're wholesome and it's batshit. It's an absolutely batshit to just rest on that. I don't even want to call it a loral, because it's not because it's also a complete rewrite of history. Right. We historically have been the aggressor, the oppressor, the person who holds the power. And yes, sometimes we're benign, but more often probably, you know, it's like that benign racism, benign sexism where it's like, if it serves me, I will be kind to you, but ultimately don't cross me because then you don't want to see what I'm capable of. I think that that's probably the distrust that is deep in the hearts of many people of color in this country, and very much deep in the hearts of many women in this country, it's sort of like towards men, right? This idea that like, oh, I'm going to assume a certain amount of chivalry, unless I challenge him, and then I better be really, really wary of the consequences. Yes, it is our job to, in communication, to take care of men. Right. That is just the fact. That is why, for example, you will often hear a man say a sentence and then pause when they're not pleased. They will say that, you know, they'll say, you know, this is not something that I'm happy about. And then they pause. Women for two reasons won't do that. One is that we are likely to be interrupted. And the second reason is that it's our job to keep the ping pong going. We are supposed to not let that kind of pregnant discomfort sit in the air. We are supposed to be the caretakers in communication. So when we do that, we are automatically put in what I, my book I talk about, the crazy feminist bitch category. And so there are so many behaviors that women just cannot do because, and so unless we're kind of following this, I'm going to take care of you. I'm going to be a little bit small. I'm going to build you up. We, the same behaviors that a man would have, we are going to get pushed back for. Absolutely. And that's sort of what I wanted to spend the rest of the time that we have together really focusing on is, of course, your new book, a woman's guide to claiming space. Stand tall, raise your voice, be heard. This really is about sort of the way that communication has always occurred because of these gender roles and because of the kind of power dynamic. And the things that we've been, I don't want to say, doing wrong, but the ways that we've been, as you mentioned at the very beginning, trying to feel safe, which may ultimately sort of backfire and ways that we can reclaim our space. And so, like, sort of more news you can use, like real tips. And maybe I'll start with a more personal question to get the ball rolling. So I work in a lot of different capacities. Like I said, I'm working on my PhD, but I also do a live daily television show. I work on several podcasts. This is my podcast. This podcast was actually born out of a very difficult gas lighty, sexist situation back when I was doing a live daily television show with a horrific executive producer. Probably the worst TV experience of my life really breaking me down daily, like making me think that the staff didn't like me, making me think that I wasn't capable, that I wasn't good enough. And it took a very long time for me to kind of regain confidence. And during that time, I was lucky enough to be on a podcast and it was recommended, hey, why don't you start your own podcast? You can be your own producer. You don't have an EP, you're your EP. You say whatever the fuck you want. And that's why I'm very unapologetic. Yeah, exactly. When I get feedback like, ooh, Kara talks too much or ooh, Kara doesn't do exo, I'm like, whatever, it's my show. I don't care. And so there's that. But the other, I work on another show called The Skeptic's Guide to the Universe, which is a huge podcast. I mean, we have massive following. I did not start it. I've been with them for six years. They've been around for like 15, like one of the earliest podcasts. And it's a skeptic show. And you can make your own decisions about what you think the makeup of the listenership is. But I can tell you that regularly, we deal with very sexist emails. Emails that start with things like tell the girl, she talks too much. Oh, yeah. I'm just so oppositional. That makes me want to go on a show and just talk the whole time. And my response is always like, what makes you think the girl doesn't have access to this email chat? You know, it's like, what are you talking about? Or, you know, all the kind of classic, oh, her vocal fry makes her sounds stupid. You know, all the little micro, you know, whatever. But one of the things, and that's all a long way for me to kind of take you to this place, where sometimes somebody will say something ultra sexist, right? Like they'll be talking about my vocal fry. And Steve, the host of the show, God bless, and my love him to death. He's a neurologist at Yale. He's very well respected. The other four guys on the show are all, you know, middle class, middle age white men from Connecticut. And they're amazing and they're brilliant. But, you know, they all come from a very particular place. And so there's not a lot of diversity of perspective, let's say, put it that way. So I'm sort of the offbeat person. He will very often approach it like this is a learning experience. He'll link them to articles about how, you know, talking about a woman's vocal fry sexist. He'll kind of try and educate, educate, educate. And he's like, we've just got to remember that these people might not be exposed. Well, and I'm like, that is very easy for you to say. Yes. But I am in this position where I'm fucking tired of managing male fragile egos. Yeah. I'm just tired of it. What do you do? I mean, I want to know how, how do you as somebody who like has, has sort of like really developed this protocol, this system? How do you handle it when yes, you could quote, teach a man. But what you'd rather do is say, this is not my problem to have to fix for you. Yeah. Well, I got to say a couple, I just have to jump in that tell the girl, you know, what I love about that is there's an assumption there that the quote girl doesn't know what she's doing. Oh, for sure. And there's an assumption that I'm somehow not even in the room. Right? Like that they're sending something to info at the skeptics guy dot org and that I wouldn't be, I wouldn't have access that only the men would be reading and that then they would tell the girl as if I'm not even a equal player. Well, not only that, but it assumes that you don't know how much you're talking for sure. Yeah. And Steve all the time. Steve has done analyses. It's really funny. He's like, I talk the most. He's like as the host of the show, as the widest of white men, I talk the most and nobody. He was like, every time somebody complains about something Cara does, I actually look at the data and I do it more. Yeah. Oh, yeah. I mean, you know, one of the, this happens almost, I'd say 50% of the time I do a talk. There's always a white guy who stands up in the audience, Q and A and says, well, I just have to say I'm the only man in the department and I am the chair, but I still can't run the head of the department, whatever. I can't get a word in edge wise. And what do I do when everyone's talking more than me? And invariably, I go to the bathroom after the Q and A and for his, off women follow me, clicking their, you know, I go, I start washing my hands and one of the women says, do you have a minute because I have to ask a question I couldn't ask in Q and A. And I said, sure, and she goes, that guy so full of shit. We can barely talk. When we talk a little, he feels like he's not getting his fair share. This is ridiculous. And it's so interesting. And I think it goes back to the fact that when little girls are growing up and little boys are growing up, when girls interrupt, they're told not to. And when boys interrupt, they're not told not to at that same rate. And so literally, girls learn to shut up and boys learn to interrupt. And so it's not like men are bad. Literally our training from the time we are little is about who gets to speak and who is silent. Oh, for sure. You know, it's just. And what are our roles, right? Men's roles are to take up space and women's roles are to sort of keep the peace. Absolutely. That's reinforced from the time where babies like, like if you're especially in a mixed household where they're little boys and little girls. Boys, they're taught emotional regulation in a different way. It like their taught don't cry, but it's okay to be angry. Whereas girls are taught it's okay to cry, but you can't be angry. And also it's, we've got to be the peacemakers. Absolutely. Absolutely. I mean, I have four kids. I have my nephew, Eric, my son, Jonah, my son, Lucien, and my daughter Ella. And boy, do I look back on some of the training I did earlier on before I started to be aware of this stuff and just cringe. Yeah. You know, and I kind of undid a lot of it, but you just don't realize that you're asking the girl to help you do the dishes more. You're going to realize all of that stuff. But in terms of the question with, you know, taking care of people, I mean, the first thing is I really believe that focused anger is important. And I think it's okay for women to be angry. There's a great book or you may have heard of it, Rage becomes her. And it's just fantastic. And I think women's rage has been so pathologized. And I think that's because as long as you pathologize it, we can't actually tell people when we need to step a boundary and say, this is not okay. You know, this is not okay. And to say, you know, tell the girl blah, blah, blah. There's a big part of me that wants to say, you know, we are working with a woman who we implicitly trust. And we need to tell her anything because we support her work. Yeah. And that's it. And just being a real ally and it's hard to do that. And you don't want to lose people. But in terms of how do you handle that, you know, my book has a whole section section four is all about how to handle that kind of stuff and direct interventions. But I am a nerd. I am a total sci-fi nerd. And so I have two approaches to it. One is I call using the force, which is basically these are not the droids you're looking for. Yeah. Which is a way to flip everything around and stop the behavior without addressing it directly. Oh. So that you don't need to have a sudden conversation because if you do do that, then you're going to get into something I call victim situating where you address the behavior and suddenly it becomes about the way you addressed it. And they have the conversation. And also it doesn't always feel safe. Like we're not always in a position where we can take that role, you know, because it might actually end in us. Being terminated from our job, it might end in us in physical violence. Like we're just not always in a position to be able to do that. Absolutely. It is an extreme privilege to be able to do that. Yeah. Or you have a wonderful ally at your side. Right. Or you have really collectively talked to the women in the office and the other targeted groups and decided together that everybody's going to back each other up. Um, and that that does work. Uh, but the other thing is what I call mortal combat. Which is just directly addressing the behavior. And that is when you have to be absolutely prepared for the immediate hijack when the person says, you're being mean and hysterical and crazy and why are you overreacting so much? And you have to be absolutely ready in the way that I tell people to do it is simply to say in those situations, the issue is not whether I'm being hysterical and overreacting. The issue is, I just told you that you've repeatedly interrupted me in meetings and I'm hoping that you'll stop doing that. I'd like to talk about that. You know, and just the issue is not the issue is. And then if they keep pressing say, look, I'm happy to talk to you about my delivery after. But first, I really want to address this interruption thing. Usually what happens at that point is a person escalates and then you can say, it's interesting to me that you're saying that I was being loud and overreactive when right now your voice is raised. Right. You know, and so you can sort of have all of these tactics ready to go. I think most of the time unless the micro aggression or if it's becoming a macro aggression is rising to something where you just cannot handle it anymore and you have to directly address it. It's so exhausting that sometimes using the Jedi mind trick is just easier. Just shut it down so you can just keep doing your job. And I know sometimes people will say, well, that's just, you know, giving in and blah, blah, blah. And I'm like, well, you know, you have to do your job. And there's a lot of research out there that shows that targeted groups spend a lot of energy navigating privilege. And we, and it really detracts from their job. So if you can learn how to shut that stuff down quickly and easily, sometimes that's what you have to do. Oh, for sure. You have to choose your battles. You have to know which hills you're willing to die on because ultimately you might fucking die and you only have so many lives. Exactly. But another example that I would bring up for me personally. So I remember being at a conference once and we were doing like a book signing or something. So there was like a row of people coming by. And you know, you sign their name. Thank you so much. Maybe take a picture. And then you know, a little bit of banter. And then we've got to move on. And there was a man, a young, you know, man. It was an international conference. So I do think there was some like, I don't think there were language barriers. But I think there might have been some cultural differences. Definitely still from like a white English, or sorry, yeah, like a predominantly white Western English speaking country. And this guy was like, it really disappointed me to see that you spoke on this one panel because at that conference they had, you know, Speaker X and Speaker X has this long history. And why didn't you decide to not do it and take a stand and make a statement. And it's really like disappointing to me, blah, blah, blah. And I was like, OK, the amount of privilege. Yeah. So many like so many like this idea that if I, if I chose not to engage every time there was a problematic man involved, I would never work. Yeah. And I'm not the person who, A, has any power control in that situation. You think if I don't show up, they're not just going to replace me. Right. So it's not, I'm not the big voice here. I'm not the big ticket. That's the problem. Why aren't the people who have all the power and say not stepping down? Like I'm just trying to make ends meet and to make a paycheck. It's just it blows my mind this inability to articulate where the power dynamic is. Oh, I know. I'm tempted to go back in time and just say to the man, would you tell a woman walking down the street that I'm disappointed you walk down that street? Because there's somebody who usually whistles. I know, right? You know, right. You tell her that you really should wear up. You should cover yourself up. And then if you walk down that street and he whistles, you know, that's really on you. It's your fault. Like not enough for me as my, as my daughter would say, Nasson. Yeah, you're so right. That is the parallel structure there. Yeah. Absolutely. And we always, and I actually really struggled with that when I wrote section four of my book, because there was a part of me that felt like I was teaching women how to cover up and mitigate all of these things rather than tell the people to stop whistling. But it was a woman-centric book. And that is why in the chapter on mansplaining, I just, my editor was like, are you sure you want to do this? And I said, yeah. And that chapter starts with men. This chapter is for you because we have nothing to do with mansplaining as it is on his face. Man, explaining. And it's written for men. Exactly. Yeah. Like, yeah. But I think we do a lot of that. And also it's interesting, you know, there's so many things that I was, now that I know how to do, I've done so much research on this. But I'd also like to say to the guy, I'm wondering why you're talking to me about this and not the people who organized it. Exactly. Or not the keynote speaker. Yeah. Who is a man? Right. You know, like, you know, just the people who have any amount of power in the situation. Right. Exactly. Yeah. And the irony of him, like throwing his privilege around to talk about how you didn't stand up to that. Is so funny. And that was the frustrating part because this is a very liberal progressive ally. You know what I mean? This is a person. It's not some tone-deft. Like the whole point was he was saying there's too much sexism. These, you know, these problematic people are still holding space. Why aren't you speaking up? Yeah. And it's like, bro. Right. It's like, it's your so toned-deft, even though we're on the same team here. And that's the part that gets her. And then the truth is, this is what happens. I remember being at another conference, long story short. There was a costume competition. The guys and I from the skeptics guy dressed up as Gilligan's Island. It was very cute. We ended up winning first place. It was awkward because, you know, we were like the keynotes. And it's like, we can't take this money. So we just put it in the bar. And, you know, like, they've got everybody drinks. But the second place winners, this was in Vegas by the way, conference in Vegas. The skeptics conference. Wow. Yes. Second place winners were a couple that were dressed as a Pimp and a Ho. Wow. Yeah. And so I, in my panel about women and STEM and about sexism, railed. I was like, there are problematic things happening at this very conference. Can we talk about human trafficking? Can we talk about, like, yes, part of the problem is that these people chose to buy these costumes. But a larger problem is that the organizers of this conference have then elevated them. And a larger problem still is that you could buy a Pimp and Ho costume off the rack. Right. You know, like, these are all big societal issues. But we have to talk about the fact that we can't be part of that machine. And guess which conference I've never been invited back. Yeah. Well, there are real consequences when we do speak up. And I had a position of privilege and power because I was holding space on this panel. And I was like, fuck, if I don't say something now, this may never be addressed. Yeah. It is very, very difficult. And the part that you described about that guy is something that I have now deemed. And it's really, really, just it's everywhere in academia and college towns is top shelf racism or top shelf sexism. And top shelf racism or sexism is the kind that you get off the top shelf. It's really sophisticated. It's so well delivered. It goes down so smooth. You barely know you're drinking it until you're sick. Yeah. And then you're like, wow, I just drink a lot. And it is just, you know, it's not like you're crappy. I'll call you take a sip and you go, whoa, that's that is some strong crappy vodka. I'm going to not do more of that. Yeah, that's the guy on the street who's like whistling at you. That's the guy who's whistling at you. But what this is is just these people who actually know all the language. They know how to say anti-racism. They understand all the things. They know all the things. And so when they do it, it just goes down so smooth that you just don't even know it until you're sick. And I think that is the number one thing that happens in these kind of situations is it's so hard to know how to combat that because the delivery is so sophisticated. And the people have so many different pieces holding up all of their racism and sexism and justifying it in a very intellectual way that you are up against a big thing. So for example, when I was in LA, I was doing a panel in LA and I was going on a walk and I am someone who is directionally challenged. So I kept walking back and forth in front of this one place. And it was a guy who was there was a guy who was homeless on the ground and every time I went by he would say something really obnoxious to me. And finally, I just made this cost benefit analysis. And I just the next time he did it, I looked around, there are plenty of people. I walked over to him and I said, I don't know if you realize this, but every time I walk by you, I feel really unsafe. And he said, I'm sorry. And this other guy who was with him had been dealing drugs right next to him just run away. And the guy said, I got three daughters. I want them to be, go on them to grow up to be big strong women in virgins, which I thought was funny. I was like, we're not going to even go on that. We're not going to get it. We're not ready for that. And he's like, I want them to be good women. And you know, I got tats and I don't want to be that man. And I said, and he's like, and I didn't mean to. And I said, I really believe that you didn't mean to make me feel that way. But it didn't really matter what you meant to do. The impact is that I felt really upset and unsafe every time I walk by you. And he said, he looked at me, got really quiet. And he got tears in his eyes. And he said, I'm sorry. And I thought, wow, this is so much easier to deal with than I've ever seen. I feel like I'm going to be able to deal with than a professor from Harvard. Right. Oh, for sure. This is so much easier because this is not top shelf sexism. And it's very easily addressed. Yeah. And also this person, there's an intersectional issue here. This person has suffered and understands a lack of equity. And so if you can tap into that, I think that usually that's where the comment. But it's really hard when somebody's lived their whole life with privilege. It's done. Some of the anti racist or anti sexist work intellectually, but none of it emotionally. Yeah. That's exactly right. And I think for me, you know, my journey on race was so profound and so painful. Dr. Neon, who I talk about in my book, calls it discovering letters. So, you know, because she works with young people and one of her big jobs is preparing them to go into the school system and deal with the whole system of special education and how racist that is. So, and she has all these white kids who go through this massive race discovery. And she says it's like when you're in a car and you're a parent and your kid is like, you know, the first you drive around, they see all these letters everywhere. They don't know their letters are surrounded by them. And then one day they're like, that's an S. That's a T. Oh, P, P, P. Money, P, P. And suddenly they realized all these things they had been looking at right in front of them have meaning. And then, you know, and that's when the white person goes up to the black friend and says, did you know there's racism? It's like everywhere. And the black friends like, yes, I've been writing and reading for some kind. And, but it's this process where you actually go through it and you experiencing something similar to a death. Because you realize that the world you thought you were living in is not the real world. It's kind of a fantasy world. And to me, I equated to being in the matrix. You know, the matrix is lovely. You get on the Ebbachines or the Ebbachines is dirty and the food sucks, but it's real. And I think that so much of anti-racist work and our own personal journey is learning how to really go through that process of, you know, I am going to believe other people's experiences. I'm going to really listen and I'm not going to try to tell other people what to do. Because I'm going to assume in that conference that there's a reason you didn't say that. And at worst, if I'm your friend, I might say, I'm wondering why you do that. Could you explain it to me? Because I'm sure I'm missing something here. Yeah. Yeah. No, for sure. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. I'm not saying that I'm missing something here. The fact that there was a story about Actually Rostrid was a point where I was not saying that there was a story about Everyone that was which watered right then. Every single waterfall everWhy this hurts me because I wanted this place to take, a single waterfall into place This place to take. Of course, sometimes people would say that I'm missing something here. If I had meaning, I would have liked to experience has men of color have actually contacted me and said, I actually related to this book in many ways because some of this is universal to anyone who's ever been targeted. So it's certainly, yeah, I think it's a book that if you want to learn more about women, this is the book to read. Yeah, absolutely. All right, great, great. So, okay, Eliza, at the end of the show, I ask everybody the same two questions. They're really big picture questions. I have guests on the show from All Walks of Life who also do all sorts of different work, usually within stammer journalism, but I'm always curious how their own personal kind of experiences sort of contribute to the answers to these questions. So they're really big picture. I want you to think in whatever context is relevant to you. So this could be very personal. It could have to do with your work. It could be global. It could be cosmic. Number one, what is the thing that has been keeping you up the most at night? The thing your legit concern about, maybe pessimistic about, maybe even kind of cynical about when you think about the future. And number two, when you think about the future, where do you find genuine optimism and hope? What are you legitimately and authentically looking forward to? I think that the pessimism definitely is climate change. I think that we can live in a plague and get through that. It'll be tragic. I think that sexism and racism, or that goes to the next point. I think a lot of these things are getting a little better every day, but climate change, it's very frustrating. I Robert Frank, if you know of his work, he wrote a lock in winner-take-all society. He's a neighbor of mine, and he was talking to me, he just wrote a new book, and he was talking about how we have the technology to stop this, and we're just choosing not to. Yeah, we just don't have the political will. We don't have the will. And it's so frustrating and so tragic when we have multi-vigilian errors. And they're going into space, and yet we're not putting in the money to make the world better for all of us, every creature on this earth. I think what gives me hope is the next generation. There is, when I look at my children, and I see the way they look at the world, they are so much more progressive and aware, and the men are so much less sexist. The white kids are so much less racist, in that they are very aware of their own racism. And they have queer friends, they have trans friends, nobody even thinks about it. It is, my daughter has said, we just are waiting for you guys to be too old to be able to get to the voting booth. Exactly. Yeah. God. Then I do have hope for them, but I will say on the other hand, it does keep me up at night, because they're all very cynical. And a lot of them are already saying, they don't want to have kids, because of climate change and where the world is going. So who knows? But I do, if we can just step aside soon enough and let them take over, hopefully we will have a world that we can turn this ship around before we seek a nice bird. But as someone said recently, there's less likelihood we'll sink on a nice bird, because they're all melting. God. So sad. Oh, gosh. Well, Gallowas, you were. Yeah. Yeah. Always a good way to flip the script. Well, Eliza, I had so much fun with you today. I learned so much. I'm really inspired by your story. I hope that everyone goes out and picks up the book, a woman's guide to claiming space. Stand tall, raise your voice, be heard by Eliza VanCourt. Thank you so much for being here with us today. Thank you so much for having me. I truly appreciated it. It was a blast. And everyone listening, thank you for coming back week after week. I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk and be ready. If you're looking for a new spacious SUV, stop. Please don't pay more for less. Buy from Warnakia in Save Thousands. Interest rates as low as 0%. Or no payments for six months. Upside down on your tray, get up to 4,000 over KBB from Warnakia. Test drive the Kia's Samantha with rugged good looks, advanced technology, and luxury. If you haven't already made the switch to Warnakia, now's the best time. Get all the details at Warnakia.com. Oh, make that switch. Make that switch to Warnakia. This episode is brought to you by Ollion's travel insurance. Landed in Kyoto, but your bag went to Paris? We could help with our benefits for lost or delayed baggage. Learn more at Ollion's travel insurance.com.