Hello everyone and welcome to talk nerdy today is Monday January 29th and I'm your host Cara Santa Maria I'm really looking forward to this week's episode. I know I say that every week, but I mean it every week if I weren't looking forward to it I probably wouldn't be doing these interviews But before we dive in I want to think those of you who may talk nerdy possible this week remember Talk nerdy is and will always be a hundred percent free to download and that is because of the support from My listeners just like you those of you who go above and beyond to make sure that we can continue this show So this week I want to thank my top patrons on www.patrion.com slash talk nerdy They include Phil T. Bear Pedro M Rosario Barbosa Jeffrey Perez Charles Payett Jonathan Wright Christian Jeffrey the honorable husband Jeff Gabriela Felipe Hode Mugonzales Brian Holden and Jeffrey Suol. Thank you guys so much from the bottom of my heart and if you want to hear your name at the top of the show Again, just go to patreon.com slash talk nerdy and Pledge your support anything above $25 will give you a weekly shout out All right guys this week is a great one I got to sit down with a good friend and somebody who I really admire We worked together on a previous project, but now she's in the big leagues Her name's Kelly Loudenberg. She is an incredible director producer all around filmmaker She's also an incredible journalist and one of her most recent projects You may have even come across it on Netflix is called the confession tapes It's a documentary series that investigates cases where people who were convicted of murder claim that their confessions were coerced It's I think an important one. It's uh, I don't know just like a deep meaningful topic It really matters when it comes to social justice and even though it's not ostensibly A topic that we would usually talk about on a science show I do think that there are some important themes that come up about junk science in the courtroom Things that we know now about forensic evidence that maybe it doesn't hold quite as much weight Certain aspects of it as it should Anyway, there's a lot to dig into If you've seen the show you're gonna love this if you haven't it's definitely gonna make you want to see the show So without any further ado here she is Kelly Loudenberg So Kelly, thank you so much for joining me today. Thank you for having me Cara. It's been a while. I know how long has it been? I don't know two years. Can it be that long? I think it's been longer. No really It might have been three years Maybe three years. Oh my gosh. Okay, so we just um we just caught up So we're not gonna subject you guys to all of the catching up that we did at the restaurant before we got together But I'm really excited to talk to you a because I'm excited to catch up with you and and hear about all the cool work You've been doing but be because I want to talk to you about your newest project on Netflix It's a weird thing about living in LA But it's not just about living in LA because I've worked with you before But it's always a weird thing when you see something really great and you're like that was amazing And then you're like I know the person who made that Yeah, that's that's happened to me a few times with friends of mine Well, it happened on this series so so Kelly and I worked previously on a short series for vice and GE And you are amazing you're an amazing woman director because you also hire a full woman Like crew is the first time in my life. I've ever worked where it was female talent female DP, which is the camera person female becam and female AP and director Yeah, it was all women except for the The sound network exact oh yeah, the network exact and sometimes there'd be a sound guy for sound guys sometimes But we tried to get some women in there. Yeah, we did a lot lots of times when you travel Sound is local like we're we're traveling a lot so you travel with the core crew Which is so that was all by design obviously that was your choice right have you done it since then or do you yeah? And I did I tried to do it again with the show really yeah We were a female lead crew and usually the only guy was the sound person. Yeah, but I only had one DP she Took care of two cameras, but we also had an AC that helped when that was really great And that was another woman that would travel with us and then My producer was a woman and me it was a pretty small crew it was smaller than when we went wow traveling together So so for people who don't know an AC is assistant camera. Yeah, yeah So they help them like build the camera and like go get lights and all the things they need yeah, swap out lenses Exactly. Yeah, and the two different AC Female ACs that we worked with were extremely talented. So they could also shoot. Yeah Yeah, they would they would sometimes work on the other camera I actually just did a shoot today, which I can't talk about what it is yet But they hired an AC Because it was easier to get an AC hired through the network than a BCAM. Oh really? BCAM Yeah, I think that's kind of the way to go. I mean for me I prefer my DP feel supported and and she has people that she likes to work with and they kind of nerd out on the camera and And they have a shorthand right they work with each other well and DP of course is the director of photography Right, so that's the person who makes everything look real pretty exactly and you I mean historically you're a director But of course you have to also produce right when you're making a documentary right like you have to wear a lot of hats Right this documentary is Huge on Netflix. Okay. I've already introduced it at this point I always time travel on the show. It's very confusing. So I've already told everybody the documentary But the confession tapes it's like it's huge. It's like always in your recommended It's trending like on the front page all the time. I mentioned it to people and they're like oh, I totally watch that and I'm like holy shit That's my friend Kelly's oh, that's amazing. Yeah, it's funny because I don't get to hear that perspective I don't really we didn't have any PR marketing at all for the show So I kind of felt like I was in some weird void where my friends watched it and You know the funny thing was it took some time It took some time for people to find it and because it wasn't Advertised people just had to find it through word of mouth or social media or friends or the algorithm Yeah, it's probably my algorithm. It probably is yeah, I mean the Netflix puts a lot of weight in the algorithm So I'm sure that it did a lot of heavy lifting Yeah, so if anybody else on Netflix is watching a lot of like true crime or they're watching a lot of documentaries on a regular I just watch that what you do yeah a lot of social justice and social commentary documentaries So of course it fits right into my wheelhouse and that's what you do like that's what you love to do right Yeah, it has a social message but for me, I was interested in psychology and This idea of our memory being you know a malleable Thing that it's easy to go in and manipulate as someone's versions of events or whatever somebody's narrative So I was interested in in it for a lot of that for those reasons But then when I really began to learn how System like the problem was then I really felt like it was a story that hadn't been told as comprehensively as I could I could tell it you know there has been some really amazing reporting and great documentaries But they're just one-offs, you know Yeah, and I thought if I could just do something kind of bigger it might it might send a message Absolutely So I guess for people who haven't seen it yet It's always hard for me because I never know how much to say and how much to leave it leave out so that they can discover it later But confession tapes is literally that it's a docu-series But they're like standalone right individual stories about people who Were wrongfully convicted or maybe they weren't we don't know but either way what we do know is that those confessions were coerced They were either manufactured or they were reduced through kind of means that shouldn't I don't think be legal sometimes aren't legal The very first episode it's it's a Canadian story and so it's a very different situation than what would be okay Within our justice system here in the United States, but every episode after that I mean it happened here in the US right and that it's mostly using the read technique Which is a very popular I never called it by name But I think anyone that works within our criminal justice system recognizes that technique and it's being kind of phased out of a lot of police departments now across the United States because they they realize that it's it's problematic and it leads to false confessions But it basically starts with an assumption of guilt and it can use some pretty dirty tactics like lying about evidence and lying about witnesses and A lot of psychological tricks that can get someone to confess so that was primarily the issue The sort of my main issue I had with them with how these interrogations were conducted It was with the read technique itself with the technique that's like endorsed by so many police departments and that I I think Should be retired these techniques. Is there a definition behind it or it or does the re-technique encompass all of these different kind of coerced of strategies It's a methodology. It's a textbook It's and I read the whole textbook when I was preparing for the show because you can by reading the textbook You can recognize where the techniques are used when you want to the interrogations But in fact, I watched a lot of tapes that didn't make it in the show and so I started to notice patterns And I touched a lot of false confession experts so I was and I was reading academic papers So I was beginning to see to kind of almost become like an expert myself into recognize false confessions and it was the read technique again and again That was creating the situation for that to happen. So And yeah, the textbook is it's pretty I mean it spells it out for you. So it's it's pretty brazen actually if you ask me Did they just not realize when it was written or did they not care that the end result of using coercive techniques is going to be a coerced confession Or was there just always this idea because I think that's the quote you see more times than not Throughout the docu series is people saying something along lines of well if you didn't do it, why would you confess? Right, did they just think no matter what you do nobody's gonna confess to a crime? They didn't commit I think they genuinely had that belief I think they thought that innocent people don't confess to a crime. They would commit They didn't think they would do it and they didn't think that it happens and It's my sense because I don't think I would and you don't think you would but now we know under the right circumstances We absolutely would right and I sort of started out with that premise like I guess the premise of like empathy and like okay If this happened to me, you know, if I was in this the room with this guy If I just lost my daughter or if I had just drank a case of beer or you know all of these things um or even if I Was completely, you know sober and just sitting there for 14 hours and in a tiny room Food How would my story start to change? How might I become tricked and it's not that hard so yeah something that really fascinated me was was the number of times and I think you see this Time and time again, but the number of times where people would actually verbalize things like I don't remember doing it Right, and I don't think I did it But you say my DNA was there so I must have done it right So then they start rewriting their own memory to try and come up with some sort of plausible way that they did it Without knowing right it's so like maybe it was a dream or maybe I was just so drunk or maybe I was just being reactive and and I and my mind has blocked it out because you're telling me you have evidence And and it's like this trust and authority that people who don't have the education about for example lie detector veteran owned and operated the bearded Viking meat crew is reinventing the ancient art of meat making with a modern twist They are award-winning needs are handcrafted with high-quality ingredients offering a rich variety of flavors that range from bold and fruity to smooth and traditional Whether you're serving their classic OG or enjoying creative blends like Chok Cherry Vanilla or jalapeno raspberry There's something for every palette with a commitment to quality and flavor the bearded Viking meat company focuses on creating good times for a great Meetup to bring family and friends together So visit beardedviking.com today to explore their collection and get ready for your next meetup It's a new year and it might be time for you to have a new financial partner First Commerce Credit Union's free power checking accounts offers powerful perks for every stage of life Whether you're busy mom was always on the go you're beginning your financial journey as a young person or perhaps Building up your nest egg for retirement a power checking account can help you get there Visit first commerce CU dot org or call 850 4880035 ensure it by NCUA A test right if they don't know there's a reason lie detector tests are not admissible in court Yeah, they're more detect lies they detect like physiological representations of anxiety Yes, and that's it and that's it very easily manipulated and also Just easily mistaken. I mean that's the thing I found a lot too Was it even though the lie detector is not admissible? It was it was used to get the confession which is admissible and so and a lot of those cases and even ones we didn't include The context is come take a lie detector test if you're innocent Well, like you know, we'll clear you it'll clear you can go home and this will be done They always say that right. We want to exclude you. We want to exclude you. We just need to get this done And you know, maybe the cops aren't lying. Maybe they maybe the results look like they failed even though I'm not even sure what that would look like. I don't know that you necessarily can fail one of those tests pretty subjective Yeah, it's very subjective so but it just starts to confuse people and they don't think that technology or science lies So once that's there in front of them then they really get confused, you know Absolutely. I mean not to be like on a soap box about the kind of stuff I talk about on the show a lot But that's I think just more evidence pointing to why it's so important That we be scientifically literate because you end up with one or two or you end up with a lot of different outcomes But when you really don't understand that science is a process and what science is just attempt to explain the world that it's not just these Books that were passed down from on high. It's not you know, this like really reified dogmatic information If you don't understand it and you actually think it is those things You're either going to blindly trust scientific authorities not even realizing that within the scientific community people disagree Or you're going to blindly distrust them and be like a conspiratorial thinker, but both of those things are bad You know, but when you understand that science is science. It's a process It's flawed, but it's the kind of best thing that we have and let's look at multiple lines of evidence and blah blah blah You'll start to get a good picture, but I mean That's the saddest part for me is seeing these people who are like Well, I failed the test and the test measured lies. I must have been lying right and a lot of times these Police officers introduce themselves as scientists or doctors So you not I mean you not only have like the authority of a police officer But you have someone saying they're a scientist or you know, and that happened and a couple of those wow So I think it is the belief in authority cops don't lie Scientists isn't gonna lie. They're not going to lie to me So like what interest do they have and manipulating me this way? And so and I think that maybe the police officers, you know to give them the benefit of the doubt like maybe they just have a case of tunnel vision and They you know believe they got the right person. I don't know if it's malicious, but it becomes malicious by You know, willfully ignoring Other evidence or other leads so and it's also such it's it's kind of the definition of junk science or bad science is Making your mind up before you collect the data right instead of collecting the data in kind of an an agnostic way You know trying not to make any assumptions and then at the end looking at how the data pan pan out right when they're in those situations It's like they just make everything fit that the narrative that they get into in that confession I mean for me like well, that's what tunnel vision or confirmation bias is it's like without looking at the whole You know you you get a piece of it and everything has to somehow Connect back to that or everything has to support that and it ends up that you Re-spin the story here. You sort of rewrite it and it's not the true version And so for me I wanted to go back and look at these like stories which were really kind of cemented and in time and just sort of In public record but also in the media and it there were just stories that there was no question that it happened this way You know and and where the original document that came about was that interrogation So I wanted to take that archival document and rewind it So each episode has to use a tape each episode uses the tape is like a springboard to kind of weave out other narratives And so we were trying to even taking the movie Thin Blue Line has a big reference or roshamon We were trying to kind of look back and say well Is something else happened what could have happened and how might it have happened and What wasn't followed up on or whatever so that was sort of the conceptual idea and Those tapes are harder to find than you might think I was gonna ask about that because you seem to have this incredible Access to this like raw footage. It's it's the actual tape of the interrogation room and you must have watched I mean it's like 14 hours a lot of just to get the confection Like you must have been trying to watch as much of that as you could like so So much time and so much energy and probably emotional energy spent doing that. Yeah, how do you even get these kinds of things? Well the thing that's tricky and there are other shows now There's like a show on discovery called the interrogation room. I don't want to promote that but like there they're basically looking at interrogation tapes and I think interrogation tapes where Something went really wrong Or maybe harder to find oh yeah those are conveniently lost. Yeah, or or buried It's like well, how do you parse out like who's really a criminal and who's not and so for me It was just so much research. It was layers and layers of research and there it was a year of research before I ever approached Netflix So there's a lot of like lonely Me working with another researcher which thank goodness I had some amazing, you know friends that could help but a lot of it was just like Talking to people following up on leads and then talking to Steve Drizzan who works at the center on wrongful convictions And it's one of Brendan Dassy's attorneys and making a murder and he became like a really big mentor of mine and Is an expert on false confessions and gave me a bunch of cases to start with of the game He had full cases and he and he said you know get to work on these and yeah And so I'd started looking through those and some of those people got exonerated in the process So we didn't feature them in the show Yeah, because one One part of the show that's hard. I think for some people is that you know a lot of Modern American TV everything gets tied up in a nice little bow and there's a happy ending and and you know That's not real life and this show is much more reflective of real life right and so glad you say that Like for me Was a really important part of it. It was that there are probably you know hundreds of people sitting in prison Who confessed where there's no record and they claim their confession is false They don't have DNA. They don't have any evidence to go back to and the innocence project is never gonna pick up their case So they have no hope and this could be from confessions or from junk science or from eyewitness misidentification from so many things that went wrong So just knowing this year number of possibly innocent people who won't ever have a ending because You know we read in the news these stories so and so is exonerated after 25 years or so and so's out after you know they found the DNA That doesn't happen that often and then only happens after so much hard work from lawyers And the sad thing is even that is not really a happy ending because I mean it's not yeah It's the it's the best possible ending But they're usually not compensated many times they can't adjust to the outside world It's like they've been changed tragic. Yeah, it's really tragic Yes, so those aren't happy endings either But the fact that they even had a lawyer is optimistic and I think like some of the cases that I took they didn't have you know active Representation or they've gone through all the appeals. No, they've gone through all their appeals or whatever I mean, they thankfully everyone had a good support group because we had to have people to interview But even there were some cases that I really believed in but that there was Not a lot of people to talk to about it or no No media coverage or no no record of it so like Maybe there's an audio tape and maybe you know I strongly believe that this person has been wrongfully convicted But like what am I going to add it with exactly? You know you're a documentarian. You're a non-podcaster Yes, some of it's good for podcasts Actually that is tough though I mean it's it well one thing that really surprises me speaking of all of the kind of media that you have to comb through and Peace together because that's another thing that I think you do brilliantly as a documentarian is you don't rely heavily on VO or on title cards You use them really minimum title cards use minimally and there's no VO in the story. So it's actually the Speech of the individual interviews that you have to painstakingly thread together to tell a story Which is not an eat that's not the easy way that's the hard way to do it and you take that road And I think it makes for a much more compelling story because it's always in the words of the people who were involved But beyond that I think that one thing that kind of never ceases to amaze me is when these coercive let's say police officers or detectives or whoever the people who were involved who I think like you said benefit of the doubt principal of charity Maybe didn't realize that what they were doing west coercion How many of them were willing to go on camera even decades later and be like yeah, I didn't do anything wrong in the show Yeah, like you interviewed multiple cops Yeah multiple Interrogators who are like Totally blind to the fact that they did anything wrong. Yeah, it's amazing And also how did you keep your cool during those interviews? Oh Yeah with some Pepp talks I guess yeah, it was hard that was hard and I wanted to get there side of the story because I and I tried to make the the show As objective as possible a very balanced. Yeah, and I really Was being honest when I approached them and saying like look I really do want to know like how did you see it? What was your investigation like like how did you collect this information and what you know? I really wanted to find out from them the details of the case So I was being completely authentic in getting those interviews and I didn't want to exploit anybody And in fact there were a lot of cops that had agreed to interview and then dropped out That's what I would expect that I would expect more people to be like I don't want to go on camera about this But you had so many cops and so many prosecutors who you're right and also who are intelligent people like these aren't Yokels these are really bright people who did make good arguments and you know if you only saw their side of the story You would be like yeah, I get it, but then you see the tapes right So I mean it just shows you that That's the thing that kind of blew my mind about the concept in general. It's that Here I was like looking at the case. I didn't live in this town. I didn't go to the trial I don't know these people I come to it 25 years later and then look at it and I look at it through the archival media Through case documents and through News media and so I'm piecing together my own version of what happened and Maybe they are right. Maybe there's something to what they're saying. So I mean they're intelligent people So I wanted to like hear their side of it because I was seeing it one way and they see it another But like why did they see it that way when I when I see it so differently? But it is like the you know, roshamon, you know with different Just different versions of what happened and it is is there an objective truth and I think the more you look into it The more you wonder if there is or not maybe multiple things happened I don't know if it's getting into other theories, but it's just some of it was just so dense and convoluted and hard to parse out You know, and they were just so stuck in believing that it happened Step into the world of power Loyalty and luck. I'm gonna make him an offer With you with family Conolis and spins mean everything now you want to get mixed up in the family business introducing the godfather at chumpacacino.com Test your luck in the shadowy world of the godfather slot someday I will call upon you to do a service for me play the godfather now at chumpacacino.com Welcome to the family No, just necessary VGW group void for prohibited by law 21 plus terms and conditions apply If you're looking to take your gardening skills to the next level then this is the podcast for you It's called the beat and it's a five day a week Expert show on how to grow a greener thumb hosted by yours truly Kevin Asperger to the founder of epic gardening On the show you'll find industry and science experts But also passionate ornamental houseplant and food gardeners that will help you understand Where you're going wrong in the garden and how to get a bigger harvest There's a reason we are the most downloaded gardening podcast of all time so to grow a greener thumb subscribe to the beat In this one way And which and that always is a red flag for me. I think just as a skit. You know I'm skeptical about everything and so of course I think that's why some of this true crime stuff really interests me because When nobody knows what happened except for the victim who's no longer with us and The perpetrator whoever that perpetrator might be whether it's the person who's on trial or not The only they know the truth so we have to use Tools basically to peets together as close to what the truth is as possible We're never going to really know We're just going to get as close as we can Like you said like what it is there an objective truth if two people experience that objective truth differently Right, but there is a big difference between Did this person actually commit a crime or not? You know like did this person light a house on fire? Did this person raise up a gun and shoot somebody with it or did they not? I think that's partially why it's such a compelling story as a viewer Yeah, to be able to sit there and try your own detective try and figure it out And kind of say oh well I do understand where that guys crying from I see why he would do it that way But then this other guy is that really a fair thing But again, I have to come back to this idea that like it is really counterintuitive That somebody would Admit to a crime that they didn't commit. It's a really hard thing for us as viewers And I think it's probably a really hard thing for jurors To fathom or police officers. Yeah, maybe that was just it. I mean, maybe they like that just sealed that was just like okay I mean, maybe you just have to rethink that whole idea in general. Yeah, I mean it is like a really it's like a suicide It's like a self-harm thing counterintuitive like why would you Want to do something that hurts yourself? What's the point of that? Because in the moment it doesn't seem like it does right because they create this like Incredibly, it's funny because you talked about empathy at the very beginning of the conversation and your attempt as a documentary and to approach these things with empathy And then you see the tapes and you get this weird sense of like Famed empathy Like the cops are trying to make the person think they're empathizing with them So that they'll feel safe and open up to them, but it's all an act right. It's all a ploy. It's really Really disgusting. It is like the things. They'll say kind of I Feel you know, you must have just been so tired and your wife. I mean, I've wanted to beat my wife too before who hasn't wanted to beat There what you know, it's this gross thing where they just try to to maintain this really intense sense of sort of Connection some rather yeah, yeah, it's minimizing I think in the readbook it's like called maximization and minimization, but I They'll just try to kind of downplay the crime Well, if you if you did kill her it was in the heat of the moment and it was reactionary or what it what it Where it's protecting yourself. What's that? Yeah, yeah, yeah like I'm defensive. Yeah, yeah, we're like um like I know you didn't really mean it right and so But did you do it or and then the whole the other one is minimization where it's like It's okay if you hit your wife like we all do that Or if you did that in the heat of the moment you're not a bad person You're not about person for doing that. You're not about person for hating your mom or you're not about person for wanting to You know blow the house up or whatever. I mean, it's just it's just for them like giving them a moral out Yeah, and um that's what they do a lot which coming from a police officer you're a little confused by Why would you tell me that it's okay if I do these things like we Don't think less of me for doing these things. I so humanizes the police officer right makes them less threatening right So then it's even safer now for me to talk to him man to man right and tell him about these demons inside me It's so sad and then of course a lot of these people not always sometimes these people have really well-educated because again It could happen to you. It could happen to me. It could happen to anybody listening to this podcast But often these are maybe low-income people individuals who don't have good representation individuals who Have had experience with with the criminal justice system before they're living in places where it's not uncommon To be arrested, right? It's not you know, it's like we've we've been talking about that kind of off Off camera we're off camera right now off microphone just about The really bad problems we have with inequality in our social justice or our criminal justice system and our social justice system You know that like there's an expectation too as good as you maybe if you're a young black man from the inner city Like you're probably gonna go to prison. Yeah, yeah, it's just true good chance of going to prison in your life Even if you never did anything wrong which makes me not believe so much and free will Yeah, that point. It's like what kind of conditions are we creating that are Yeah, it's almost it's a prescribed outcome. Yeah And it's hard right because Well the deck is just stacked so high to put it. Yeah, it's stacked so high. It's like It's hard to blame people It's just really fucked up the whole thing and the character assassination like that something that I notice a lot is really like a big injustice Not only let's say you have an example like one of the examples in your stories of somebody who has a course to confession Where there's actually probably somebody else who committed this crime that nobody's looking into so now we've got a actual violent criminal Who's just out there able to commit more crimes? That's neither here nor there But this person who potentially did not commit this crime Who has been coerced broken down over the course of 18 hours, you know And and made to feel all of these things that the book tells them to do and then they finally say I guess I must have done it you told me you have DNA even though they don't or you told me I passed I failed the lie detector even if I didn't So I must have done it because these things don't lie And then you see the trial so this is just the interrogation But then you go to trial and in trial there's no evidence All you have is a confession It's the only thing you have pointing to this person except maybe they failed there breathalyzer test that night or maybe they have a past conviction of petty theft which is in no way related to this conviction of a violent you know murder and rape But for some reason or maybe they're out of a job exactly Yeah, just anything like oh, he was desperate because he's poor right and then people go oh yeah, he worked at Walmart Yeah, he must be a criminal. Yeah, so he did not graduate high school or so fucked up It's like they just assassinate their character so much that people think of them as lesser than right only lesser Thames commit violent crimes right I mean it happened to to Karen Bose who in the third or fourth episode the mother Who was is like the age of my mom and I just when I looked at her case I thought wow like the way the courts and the media took down this mom like She liked to drink she was in AA she wasn't like a raging alcoholic. She was sober at the time But in the trial they brought in her AA sponsor who kind of Violated confidentiality rules at AA and said that she'd said things about her daughter and they also tried to bring In the trial and affair, but it was printed all over the media wasn't allowed in the trial But everybody knew she's had a fair they all four years ago five years ago for and I think her husband had an affair too But it was really like used to make her look like a bipolar deranged mother who just gone off the rails and Even though that was true. Yeah, even though like at least In this case the judge had the wherewithal to say like we that's inadmissible because it's I mean It's still fucked her because of course we have trial by trial and media. I mean that's the worst It is the war but at least I mean that there's a reason that a good judge would say that's not admissible because it has nothing to do with this case The fact that she hadn't a fair has nothing to do with whether or not she killed her daughter Well, they spin it out as like part of her character exactly It shows like the lie It should be willing to live or just There's also things that happen to the people can't control like there was another story in the media around that time of a mother Who'd burned her kids alive and that was in the tiny town where she was near and and it Negatively impacted her because then people were on this sort of rage against moms Evil mothers or whatever I remember that there was like a hysteria Probably when I was a maybe like an adolescent When they were like a lot of drown like moms drowning their kids and I remember was always in the news So can you imagine if you were if you were accused of that even though you didn't do it like how Hard it would be for you to fight against that because there's already a witch hunt right There's just a lot of unfortunate timing in some of these cases like in the Larry Delayl case the guy who drove his kids into the river and Detroit And the Detroit River There was a lot of reporting about people losing their minds and driving into the water and or driving off a cliff or driving There were a lot of like sort of deaths by automobile at that time and No one was really asking questions about the car mechanics if that might be a problem and So I don't I don't know where it all landed with some of that But I know for a fact there were a lot of problems with that car And yeah, the fact that make a model car. Yeah, and the fact that they actually did some tests and it did malfunction Within some of those tests is enough evidence to say it could have malfunctioned It could have it's reason to in my mind. That's what reasonable doubt is it could have malfunctioned Yes, it could have and the thing is that case is the first case I started with and that one is the one that just I think that one's the hardest one for people Those involves kids and because he is culpable because he was driving the car. Yeah, but It just wasn't ever investigated properly It was just and that's a hard one You know we talk about these these situations where somebody Potentially committed a crime is that the right person did somebody else actually commit the crime But then there's the stories where it's like was there even a crime committed or was it just a tragic accident That happens a lot with fire cases that happen with this car case I think this is a pretty good documentary called the staircase Which is kind of asks that question like did she fall or was she pushed But if she fell then there's no crime right and sometimes too There's these political things that are happening in the background The prosecutor is trying to become the judge or the judge is up for reelection Yeah, you know and and all those things can feed into how they hard they are on that one case versus the other case it's just and that's all very real. Yeah It scares I mean it it's funny because I find such comfort and science Even though it's not always the most comforting and even though sometimes I have to remind myself that it's not as clean as I would like it to be But the criminal justice system in our country it tries to be objective and it tries to be as fair as it can be But it has so many problems as a long way to go and I've learned It's not really willing to correct itself in the face of evidence of needing to make a change I had this thought because you and I were talking about death and dying Before at dinner and maybe it has something to do with this sort of American idea that like you have to die for a purpose or what I don't know Like this uncomfortability with death in that tragic accidents don't just happen and that's not the way the universe works Right it can't be a tragedy. We need to blame someone. Yeah, there's there's a need for blame a lot And I wonder if it's just because we're so uncomfort Hello, it is Ryan and we could all use an extra bright spot in our day Couldn't we just to make up for things like sitting in traffic doing the dishes counting your steps You know all the mundane stuff that is why I'm such a big fan of Chamba Casino Chamba Casino has all your favorite social Casino style games that you can play for free anytime anywhere With daily bonuses. So sign up now at chamba casino.com. That's chamba casino.com If you're looking to take your gardening skills to the next level then this is the podcast for you It's called the beat and it's a five-day-a-week Expert show on how to grow a greener thumb hosted by yours truly Kevin Asperger to the founder of epic gardening On the show you'll find industry and science experts But also passionate ornamental houseplant and food gardeners that will help you understand Where you're going wrong in the garden and how to get a bigger harvest There's a reason we are the most downloaded gardening podcast of all time So to grow a greener thumb subscribe to the beat for bowl with Death that we can't just accept that sometimes people just die. Yeah, and it happens in a really Unfortunate Briekish ways. I think you're right. I think that's a really good insight It's it's very difficult for people to handle those kinds of uncomfortable thoughts And they will figure out any way to give them so it's kind of like that moral out Yeah, you know, it's like your own personal moral out. Well that guy did it. He's responsible He made there be evil in the world and if we put him away for life There'll be a little less evil in the world It's like no the world's kind of dangerous and horrible That's just sort of what what nature is and I think that in general it's hard to accept people being unlucky But I think there's a lot of Unlucky people and and I think in the case of Larry for instance like the fact that he was there the night before and the fact that he You know this happened on the same road and whenever there's so much that fact that he was driving a car His dad committed suicide in and he's probably the most unlucky person I've ever ever met So I wondered how much of that was just like shitty circumstances and I think that that's another thing that like again like from that kind of skeptical world views people don't like Admitting that sometimes things are just a coincidence. Yeah, it's like they're like but that's too That's just too much there must be something tying that that together there must be a thread there There must be a reason it's like no sometimes things just happen and it's just a fucking horrible coincidence I agree People do not that is not a comfortable place for people to sit well Okay, I'm taking up a lot of your time and I know that you have some place that you have to be so um I want to Move it along to the way that I generally close the the podcast but first let's make sure we get a really big plug in For the documentary I bet you a lot of people listening have already watched it because I wouldn't be surprised if they have similar Netflix algorithms to me But if they haven't yet guys really do check out the confession tapes It's um is it a six-parter? I can't remember it seven parts and I wanted to add to that Netflix never releases their data Uh-huh, but I don't know you probably didn't see the article because this goes back to the beginning of our conversation where I didn't really know How well the show was doing yeah, yeah, and right before the end of the year I've been suddenly getting emails from people and just oh my god congrats Kelly And like why when did it first come out in September 8? Okay, okay, so not that long ago, but Congrats like oh great job and it was like they released some of their data in the top 10 Most binge watch shows of 2017 it was in the top 10 that's amazing. Yeah, so I told you not to brag but like I was like oh Yeah, it must be so hard when it's not like regular TV and there's no Nielsen rating and you just know you have no concept as I'm not on social media But the thing I noticed was a good sign was when Lawyers in the show wrote me emails and said people recognize me when I'm walking down the street or like I'm at the grocery store and someone's like I saw you in the confession tapes and I thought that's really cool That is cool and it's weird too because that never happens to you because you're behind the camera never gonna happen to me Yeah, but you do your voices featured there are a handful of times that I always love that when you're interviewing somebody And they say something and you're like yeah, what do you really think like you hear your voice? It's kind of quiet right because you're not mic'd yeah, and you're like yeah, but maybe he didn't do it and they're like Yeah, we debated about whether or not to keep those moments in I guess you could call it breaking the fourth wall I love it. I'm so glad you did Yeah, get myself in there just Just for a tiny tiny second. That is so funny But yeah, I know that a lot of people are watching it I think that there's a hunger For this kind of understanding of how the world works And I think that as much as it's difficult it's a responsible and emotionally honest thing to do to face Some of these issues that don't always have a happy ending And so I think that there's a curiosity in us to to learn about other people especially people who have had a less fortunate kind of situation than we have I think it helps us understand ourselves a little bit better So for me it was it was a no brainer and I wouldn't be surprised if a lot of people is listening have already seen it But if you haven't yet guys definitely go onto Netflix just search confession tapes. It's really easy to find um and and check it out Kelly I always end my show by asking people the same two questions I'm really interested in your answers. Hope it's not like pop culture. No, god. No It but there's like really big picture like philosophy bullshit. Okay. Okay. What is it? I'm ready. Okay So um when you think about the future in whatever context is like relevant to you In your mind right now today whatever you can answer about your own personal future You can answer about the future of humanity, you know, whatever a or on one side of the coin What is the thing that most kind of concerns you what keeps you up the most at night? What are you like bummed out about and really worried about when you think about the future But then on the flip side of that what are you actually Happy and optimistic and and really positive about Hmm Well, can I start with the flip? Sure. I use flip them so that we don't all want to kill ourselves at the end of the show Well, maybe that shows a little bit of my character Because I mean what the good news or it's not the bad good. Well, yeah, I want to end on the depressing note Maybe that's like do that's what the show was. It was just all like oh my god Well, that's how I that's how I felt and I wanted people to be outraged so for sure Well, okay, so I'll start with Do you then you You be you in a book and then another book called the self-help book You be you girl. Yeah, you be you how to get control of your life um Wait, so it was why it's what I the sort of thing I'm excited about for the future and the thing that I'm most worried about Yeah, right. Yeah, super concerned. Super concerned about. Yeah Well, I guess this idea of fake news is really concerning And I think I see it in a bigger and just much bigger picture in terms of we have to have something to believe in Like we have to have some like Arometer for truth and And it's not just like a political thing about Trump and him always yelling fake news It's more just like I even feel like with all the sexual allegation charges that are coming out are just constantly eroding since of Self as a culture and of this reality that we built and it's It's like an identity crisis and I or not even it's bigger than that It just feels like I'm just worried When there's been so much placed in science that isn't true isn't valid isn't tested When there's so much place in media that isn't maybe isn't completely accurate or is just constantly being challenged And then you have it in culture and in our sense of like self and how we function every day and just who we are You know what we care about so I think It's having a hard time like gaining a sense of like a ground, you know and absolutely feeling like there's something to hold on to that's like honest and good and and real and real yeah like what's real what's ethical right what matters what matters Yeah, and it's not just like who you say you are who you vote for it's like who what you really are and What you stand for and just I just feel like there's a bit of a crisis with that and it even extends into science Which is the most troubling part for me because science is not supposed to feel shaky. I know right like science is Self-correcting and science is sometimes wrong, but there are we put so much of our Trust in in the institution that sometimes we will Trust the wrong people or we will trust the wrong Exercise it like things that are called science are actually not very scientific right and then people are let really astray Right, yeah, and so I feel like that's that worries me especially when I choose in an in a criminal court Yeah, so I guess like specifically. I'm worried about that. I'm worried about all the people who Maybe we're prosecuted on faulty science. That's like a smaller worry. I guess like the bigger worry is how that ripples how These This stories put out I have ripple through the rest of society on just every level Yeah, that's sort of a I mean like tract it happening in the courtroom is like a microcosm right exactly what It's a bigger crisis I think and it's just like the reckoning that we have to have with that It's which is what's gonna be hard? It's kind of the the reckoning we had when Trump was elected and the reckoning we had The sexual allegations. I mean, we're just constantly like trying to find that The middle like the just the ground. I guess. I don't know how let's put it, but And then I guess like opt positive like I mean, you're like what opt to miss? To miss it. Notice this word Well, I guess I'm happy to be alive because it's like such a short thing anyway Yeah, and it's like kind of crazy to be alive and to be doing this kind of work even and I think I mean I'm just so inspired by um some of the incarcerated people that I've met and like their perseverance and their strength of mind and just The intellect. I'm constantly Just amazed how powerful the mind is and how it can just it can like fight a lot of evil and it can It can make comebacks and after much after much time after much despair, you know, it's resilient So I don't know and then all the great lawyers that I'm I've just Have met so many good people that just don't give up so it's comforting. It's really comforting. It's inspiring. It's made me Even question like well, how can I be most impactful like Is making this work the best use of my energy? Maybe there's something else that I could do I'm not like talking about like volunteering once a week or raising money or anything. I don't know I just have felt lately that I want to like put my money where my mouth is and like few more I don't know That's one additional bonus of educating ourselves and opening our eyes to these kinds of issues and being able to watch documentaries Like the one you made is that it reminds us that we have skin in the game too and it keeps us from being complacent You know, because it's really easy to live your like sanitized life and pretend like that nothing Injustice doesn't exist right and then when you're faced with it head on you're like shit Like yeah, like I've been sort of living a little bit of lie and I need to like be mindful of the fact that like I have it pretty fucking good. Yeah, and I'm comfortable to the extent if we are that I can maybe help people that are less comfortable Yeah, I mean even if it's just being a good juror When you're I mean there's so many ways that That we can like affect the way the system works. Yeah, you know, it seems so much bigger than us But I've seen I've seen like people Do things that are really like tangible and like really or just sort of tactile good things I don't know. I think there's a lot of hope. There's a lot of optimism But it just requires a lot of energy to go after it Yeah, for sure Especially in the era of Trump. Well Kelly. Thank you so much. This was so much fun to catch up with you I always enjoy your company so much, but I learned a lot and yeah, I'm inspired now I'm glad to laugh from you. I've missed you me too And guys everyone listening. Thank you so much for coming back a week after week I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk nerdy You It is Ryan here and I have a question for you. What do you do when you win? Like are you a fist bumper? A woohoo. A hand clap for a high-fiver if you want to hone in on those winning moves Check out chamba casino choose from hundreds of social casino style games for your chance to redeem serious cash prizes There are new game releases weekly plus free daily bonuses. So don't wait start having the most fun ever at chamba casino.com 21 plus terms and conditions apply if you're looking to take your gardening skills to the next level Then this is the podcast for you. It's called the beat and it's a five-day a week expert show on how to grow a greener thumb hosted by yours truly Kevin Asperger to the founder of epic gardening On the show you'll find industry and science experts But also passionate ornamental houseplant and food gardeners that will help you understand Where you're going wrong in the garden and how to get a bigger harvest There's a reason we are the most downloaded gardening podcast of all time so to grow greener thumb subscribe to the beat
