 If you're looking for a new spacious SUV, stop. Please don't pay more for less. Buy from Warnakia and save thousands. Interest rates as low as 0%. Or no payments for six months. Upside down on your tray, get up to 4,000 over KBB from Warnakia. Test drive the Kia's Sarentha with rugged good looks, advanced technology and luxury. If you haven't already made the switch to Warnakia, now's the best time. Get all the details at Warnakia.com. Make that switch, make that switch to Warnakia. Heavy rains will wear down shingles and other elements of a roof. High winds and rainfall after a storm's weight can involve lost shingles and moisture penetration in the underlayment. This water damage can penetrate the roof deck. The water could eventually compromise the structural integrity of your home. If it's time to have your roof looked at or fixed, call T-Spark Enterprises 850-766-1340. License number CGC1525336. CCC133-1204. Hello, everyone. And welcome to Talk Nerdy. Today is Monday, November 1, 2021. And I'm the host of the show, Cara Santa Maria. We've got a great episode for you this week, but before we dive into it, I do want to thank those of you who continue to make Talk Nerdy possible. Remember, Talk Nerdy isn't will always be 100% free to download. And that is because of the listener support that people just like you offer. The way that we do that is through Patreon. So if you want to join the Patreon community, all you've got to do is go to patreon.com slash a Talk Nerdy and pledge your support. I've also been talking to some listeners who have recommended an ad-free model, which I agree. It's probably the biggest perk of being a patron of the show. And it's something that I'm trying to figure out how to offer. So I'm working with my assistant on developing the RSS feed using my hosting platform to be able to do an ad-free version and determining at what level the ad-free version would come in on Patreon. So watch this space because maybe even as early as next week, we will have something offered for you at a certain Patreon level or above. And I'm trying to figure out just what that is. If you have any recommendations, let me know. Hopefully they get to me on time. Maybe at the $5 or more level per episode makes sense. Maybe that's probably a good way to recoup. I'm not sure. But really, that's the income model of the show. It's individuals just like you who pledge your support because you offset the cost to individuals who can't afford to pay. You know, that's what patrons of the arts do. And also, you know, selling ad space, which, hello, we live in a consumerist world of marketing and harbleness. But that is how it works. And luckily I get to work with some really cool advertisers. I'm especially fond of the one that I'm going to tell you about later in the show, Nature. But let's get into the meat of the show this week. So I have the opportunity to sit down with Dr. Catherine Page Hardin. She actually goes by page. She's a professor of clinical psychology at the University of Texas at Austin. She's the director of the developmental behavior genetics lab and co-director of the Texas twin project. We talk about her new book, which is called The Genetic Lottery, Why DNA Matters for Social Equality. So we're going to be taking some preconceived notions flipping them on their head, talking about genetics in a whole new way from a social justice perspective. It's a really good one. Stick around. I know what you're going to like it. So without any further ado, here she is, Dr. Catherine Page Hardin. Page, thank you so much for joining me today. Thank you for having me. Absolutely. So I'm really excited to talk about your new book, The Genetic Lottery, Why DNA Matters for Social Equality. And I can imagine that even titling this book might have felt a little bit fraught, because it's such a loaded topic. It's a topic that obviously, for very good reason, there is a lot of not just intellectual argument about but emotional argument about. And of course, your ultimate thesis here is one of equity and one of social justice, which in some ways flies in the face of a lot of historical social psych or genetic psychology, doesn't it? Yes, it does. I mean, you're totally right about the title. The first part of it, The Genetic Lottery, was the working title all along, but the subtitle, How to Conveys such a complex method, our message, and something that would fit on the cover of a book, where something that we went round and round about, because there is this association that genetics is somehow antithetical to social justice concerns. And so how to bring up the topic of equality and sort of explode people's priors from the very beginning, but also invite them to stay with me for this argument, was our challenge, even just coming up with the title and the marketing of the book. I can imagine that even sort of working in the position that you do, right? So you're a psychologist at UT and a behavioral geneticist. So you sort of work at the intersection between, the genetics, the biology of heritability, and then the psychology of sort of, who are we, what makes us us, what is identity, and all of these things. I can imagine that even just working in that field, there must be a fair amount of explanation, a fair amount of, maybe not push back. And I bring that up because I recently had on the show, actually, it might have been over a year now. People remember when we had Dr. Shane Campbell statin on the show, he was talking quite a bit about being a, he's an ecologist and a geneticist, studying testless elephants in Mozambique and lizards across the globe and looking at genetics. But as a black man, he was saying, do you understand how hard it is that some of the positions in my field, some of the endowed chairs, some of the buildings are still named for eugenicists? And this is like the world I operate in. Like it is. And it's not just buildings, it's statistical tools that you use every day. You hear about F statistics and they're named after Fisher, even the concept of variance, which is so fundamental to the statistical study of difference in any field. You can't really do statistics without thinking about correlations or variances and all of that was invented by people who were inventing these statistical tools as eugenic tools. And so how you can reclaim that science for more liberatory ends is the necessary challenge that we have to address. Yeah, you know, it's interesting because you're right. Like when I think about the sort of classic, like the spearmen's and the, like you mentioned in the fissures and like these individuals who like developed all of these really sophisticated and useful, you know, statistical tools, but what was to what end, what was their focus? I often, when having these conversations with people, because my background's also psychology, but not, you know, not behavioral genetics, I often have the conversation about intelligence testing and sort of all of the architects of intelligence testing because the vast majority of them were also eugenicists and they were specifically trying to develop a tool to kind of quote prove the superiority of the white race at the time. And to me, that's a very obvious version of this kind of dark era of psychology and biology, but you're right, even just the, the, what we think of as mathematical, almost like quote, pure or somehow like less socially fraught, like even those tools were developed by these people. Yeah, it's really kind of inescapable in a lot of ways. I wrote an essay earlier this year and it was titled, what do we do with the science of terrible men? And I got the title is a riff off of an essay by Emily Nussbaum, who was the TV critic for the New Yorker. And she wrote a book called I Like to Watch, which is a book of television criticism and it's really fun to read, but she has an essay in there about, you know, being a viewer and a professional critic in the time of the Me Too era. You know, what do you do with the art of Louis C.K. or Woody Allen or Roman Polanski? When you can't pretend as your job that it doesn't exist, but using it uncritically or talking about it as if the artist didn't do reprehensible things, it's also a satisfactory. And I really like the essay because it, you know, it avoids any pad answers. It's grappling with the complexity of that. And I thought, well, this is the same conversation we are having or we need to be having in science about we're gonna take what we can that's useful from you, but we're not gonna do it in a way that, you know, tacitly props up your legacy, given the kind of moral legacy that you have. And just kind of grappling with that. You know, I don't, again, I don't have a pad answer to it. I just think it's a conversation that we need to be having. Gosh, and I have to say like to be 100% honest, I wish that this were a conversation that we're being had more often, but unfortunately, I don't think it is. I mean, I think, you know, you always see around the Nobel times, all of the articles about how all the Nobel's go to men and these are all the women who were overshadowed and whose work, you know, actually fundamentally set the stage or the groundwork for, you know, doctors so and so's worked to later become the Nobel, but I don't think that we very often are having a conversation about like you said, sort of like it's very overt with like a Woody Allen. Like what do we do with his art? And especially given that like his movies are about like, they're like, big Malian movies about like rape and having, you know, like related to young women. And three piece sexual power dynamics, yeah. Totally. Like, it's pretty overt, you know? And so you're right. I think that there's been sort of like an obvious grappling with that in the media, but I worry that a lot of scientists are like, well, it tools the tool and it has nothing to do with the person ultimately we just, yeah, of course, if we were to really dissect anybody from the past there, there's problematic, but these are important things and let's just move on. Like I feel like that is sort of the, I don't know the perspective that I often hear. Yeah, I think that's true that it's, you know, it's easy to say, well, there's something we can do about the fact that there were horrible people or they did the horrible things and, you know, we're not gonna stop running correlation coefficient. So let's just move on. You know, I teach intro psych and increasingly, I feel the responsibility to frame things for undergrads who are coming to this material for the first time with the history now is like an afterthought, but how can we bake it in more into? When we talk about correlation, let's also talk about why these tools were invented and that's obviously a work in progress and I can always do better with that. But I wonder if, you know, that's really the way forward is training the next generation, the next cohort of scientists such that they don't, they don't discover this, you know, like the fifth year of their PhD, like, oh my gosh, I never knew this, but it was kind of steeped into their education in this very foundational way from the beginning. I agree because then it means that they're gonna be thinking critically about every research decision they make. They're gonna be thinking critically as their, you know, collecting data as they're analyzing it, as they're publishing it about how to contextualize things because the truth of the matter is the way that we teach psychology right now, whether it's at the undergraduate level or at the graduate level is that we offer this course called history and systems, which is like the one-hour credit that like everyone sits through. Yeah, and then we try to contextualize everything historical there and they're amazing professors who teach it and they really, you know, hopefully you have a good professor who grapples with some of these issues within that course, but ultimately we don't learn about it in stats and, you know, we definitely don't learn about it as we're, you know, anytime a concept comes up, we're not grappling with that concept's historical contextualization, we're taking it at face value. And I think that's the problem, right? Like you said, if the first time somebody learns about a correlation coefficient or the first time somebody learns about some concept within their field and it's contextualized like, oh, and by the way, this is the bro that developed this. Let me tell you a little bit about it. You could talk about it. Yeah, yeah. Or then you might start to think about it more. Yeah, I was gonna say, or the first time you learn about genes, it's not in the context of Mendel's P plants, right? I think there's a movement to think about, how much of our genetic determinism, you know, this idea that genes determine things is set up by the frame by which we teach high school biology, that people encounter genes and they encounter Mendel's P's and they encounter, you know, maybe PKU, which is a single gene disorder. And they're not introduced to the idea of lots of genes with little effects that are probabilistic and depend on the environment until much later if at all. Versus if we started with our high school biology curriculum on, well, these are the genes you might have heard of with ancestry and this is why they're not race. Like if that was the beginning point and not the ending point, how much of our kind of intuitions in the public writ large around genetics would be different. So I'm just excited to see where that goes if people start to change them of this high school biology curriculum. Yeah, I agree, I agree. Because I do think that lots of kids come out of this like freshman biology lab and again, like you were saying before you taught us or you teach actively teach psych 101, I taught psych 101 in the past, but I definitely way more often taught biop1 laboratories and I was that person teaching that, you know, that genetics lab where it was like, okay, this is simple dominance and this is what happens when you take a red flower and a white flower and you cross them and you make a pink flower and then how of course is somebody gonna then think about and they see like a baby born to, you know, let's say like individuals of different colors and then the baby looks blended and they probably can't imagine a punnest wear in their head a racial punnest wear, you know what I mean? And it must be, and how could they not? Like this is exactly how we're teaching it. So let's take a second before we dive in and really grapple with this sort of central thesis to define a few terms like genes, like DNA, like heritability and like even when you mentioned ancestry and some of the things that we're talking about with ancestry. So DNA, first and foremost, because I think that's gonna be something we throw around a lot. How do you think in terms of the listenership, the conversation that we're about to be having, how do you wanna sort of contextualize that specific definition? Yeah, so you know, DNA is this molecule that exists in all of your cells and it's made up of four DNA letters, GC, TNA, and you can kind of think of it as a, you know, all metaphors for DNA are kind of wrong, but one metaphor is to sort of think of it as a set of recipes for proteins. Let's ultimately what genes code for. So they give instructions for your cells to make proteins or they give instructions for the instructions. And so there's, you know, I think the first thing that's important to note is that there's a whole complicated cellular machinery and developmental process by which DNA gets turned into things. And genetics doesn't really capture that. So we're looking at, you know, do I differ from you in my DNA sequence in some way? You know, how that's expressed in my brain versus my body, how that genetic difference is turned on or turned off by my environment or at certain points in my life. I'm not really capturing any of that information when I'm measuring DNA. I'm really just measuring the sequence of nucleotides, these DNA letters that exist in your cell. And most humans are, you know, very similar and most of our DNA is the same across all humans. You know, the exact number differs on your estimate but the most commonly cited is 99.9% the same. But when we look at that, 0.1% that's left over, we're looking at what are called variants and variants are differences, you know, to what extent do you, does your DNA sequence look different than mine? And so behavioral genetics, which is my field of study, is connecting those DNA differences between us to differences between us in some aspect of our behavior or some aspect of our psychology. And that is a process that is scientifically difficult for reasons that, you know, your listeners can probably already into it. You know, unlike the plant geneticists, we don't get to do super controlled experiments we're looking at free range humans and how they differ genetically and how they differ in their lives. But also I think a topic of enduring fascination. How is the, you know, the DNA hand that worked out, how does that shape things that we think of as pretty core to our identity as people, our personalities, our interests, our temperaments, our behaviors and then how does those play out in people's lives and in the societies we actually live in? Yeah, so when we, you know, when we throw around terms like genetic or heritable, you know, what specifically are we referring to or we referring to whether or not somebody has that particular combination of DNA, like what, I guess maybe we should take even a step back from there. So we talked about DNA as these letters, these sort of like probabilistic coding letters. What is a gene? Yeah, so that's an interesting question. It seems like something that you'll have a simple answer. But in fact, people have debated the definition of a gene. So one definition of gene of a gene is that it is a stretch of DNA that codes for a protein. So it has some function. So I, you know, my cell needs to make this enzyme, that enzyme, you know, is made up of, the building blocks of proteins, which are amino acids. And so there's a string of DNA that together kind of completely builds this protein. So it's DNA within a boundary that's like meaningful. Yes, exactly. That's meaningful from some functional purpose. And, you know, even just, you know, what we're often looking at are what are called SNPs, single nucleotide polymorphisms, which are single DNA letter differences between people. And even that process of mapping SNPs to genes, okay, you found a SNP is associated, which gene is it in? And what does that gene do? Is often remarkably unknown. So the, you know, we might have sequenced the human genome and that we can read what the letters are, but that's still far from knowing what all of the regions do and how they work together to do it. So there's a lot of kind of genetic dark matter in there where we know it's there. People have moved away from talking about it, you know, it has junk DNA. It seems to have some purpose. But the, you know, the function of stretches of DNA are really unclear for a lot of our genomes. If you're looking for a new spacious SUV, stop. Please don't pay more for less. Buy from Wernakia in Save Thousands. Interest rates as low as 0%. For no payments for six months, upside down or your tray, get up to 4,000 over KBB from Wernakia. Test drive the Kia's Serentha with rugged good looks, advanced technology and luxury. If you haven't already made the switch to Wernakia, now's the best time. Get all the details at Wernakia.com. Oh, make that switch, make that switch to Wernakia. We've got the DNA, which are these like individual letters, these, you know, kind of very basic, like you said, recipes for recipes or instructions for instructions. We've got the genes, which are more, I guess, can be thought of as like, low sigh as like a region. Like a gene is actually something we can point to that has a beginning and an end. So it's a stream of these DNA letters that if we were to like, remove it, it would still potentially be able to do something. Like it codes for something as a whole. And then we've got, when we take that word gene and we turn it into genetic, I think that's where things get complicated. Because when we talk about things being genetic in nature, we're not just referring to the gene. Yeah, so I think people use genetic in a lot of different ways. You know, we'll talk about a lot of words like this, I think, genetic or heritable or eugenic. So sometimes when people that say something is genetic, they mean that it's genetically determined and that it's best understood at the level of what's going on with your DNA. So for instance, if we think about like a chromosomal abnormality, if we think about Down syndrome, right? So we think of Downs as a genetic disorder because it is caused by having three copies of the 21st chromosome. It is only caused by that. If you have three copies, you have Downs, you know, it's determined by that. And there's really no way to understand the phenomenon without making reference to something that's happening in your DNA. Where we get into trouble is where we try, when we try to apply that use of the word genetic to something that doesn't work like Downs, you know, something like personality, you know, as personality quote unquote genetic. And that's where I think something can be genetically caused in the sense that differences in your DNA can make it more or less likely for you to have differences in your personality. But that doesn't mean it's necessarily best understood at the level of your DNA, or that it's even determined by your DNA. So, you know, I talk about this in my book, and we actually have a whole chapter on what it means for something to be caused by genes. We get in a lot of trouble when we take our kind of intuitions about what it means for something to be quote genetic. And then we apply them to these more complicated social and behavioral phenotypes, like personality or intelligence, which we can't understand without reference to a social context, which aren't understood, you know, purely as a genetic phenomenon, but are related to your DNA. And it's that things can be related to DNA without being narrowly genetic, but that is a really hard intuition for people to grapple with often. You know, I'm almost in my head right now seeing, like, a Venn diagram of sort of like your genes, of your environment, of the social structure, or the culture within you, what you live. But when I see this sort of Venn diagram, it's like so heavily overlapped that it's almost the same circle, and there's only like these tiny slivers on the outside that are purely any one thing. And I think that's really like one of the things that I often think about, because I work, you know, I'm working on my PhD right now, actually in clinical psychology. And I work with cancer patients, so we're going to cancer center, doing therapy with people with cancer. And I think when we think about cancer, which is one of these very kind of classic things where it's your own body cells that are kind of betraying you and where there are so many genetic markers, but at the same time, there are so many environmental inducers, there are viruses that cause cancer, there are, we know about smoking can cause cancer and environmental toxins can change the probability. And so I think about something like a bracket gene, because I feel like most people are kind of aware of this idea that there's a bracket gene, which can mean if somebody cares, is bracket positive, they have a higher risk, or their probability is different than somebody who's bracket negative, but it doesn't mean you're gonna get breast cancer. It means you have some of the ingredients for the ingredients for breast cancer, and you might get breast cancer, and you might need to be more concerned about getting breast cancer than somebody who's bracket negative, but people who are bracket negative get breast cancer all the time, and people who are bracket positive don't get breast cancer. And that's something as simple as a coding region and some environmental factors, and that doesn't even bring the social, the complexity of the social side of it, really even into the equation. It's, when we talk about things like you said, like intelligence personality, I don't know, achievement, athletic ability, things like that, I mean, there's so much more complicated, even then a bracket gene, which is already so freaking complicated. Yeah, yeah, I have so many thoughts on response to that. The first thing I was, my PhD is original clinical psych2, and that was one of my practicum in graduate schools, working at the UVA Cancer Center with therapy with cancer patients, and that is such difficult work and important work, so props to you for doing it. It was a really life changing experience for me. I was very young and I was like 23 and had no idea what I was doing as a therapist. And then all of a sudden, it was really hard to be around people with metastatic disease, some of whom who are dying, yeah, that would be really tough. Yeah, but really transformative. And you know, the other thing is just thinking about like, even simple things like bracket increases your risk of breast cancer, but doesn't determine it. You run up quickly against the fact that humans can sometimes be get at probabilistic reasoning or thinking in terms of gray and uncertainty. Am I sometimes? I'm so self-evident. I'm not. Yeah. So, you know, and we've experienced this around the pandemic too about like, you know, how does vaccination change your risk of serious illness versus getting it at all, or how does this masking work or not? You know, we as humans were just, we're such bad-based in-reasoners and we're so bad at thinking about these rates and, and just grappling with uncertainty, I think it's something that humans don't like to do. And then they're not even taught from the very beginning about genetics as being this kind of realm of uncertainty and confidence intervals and in probabilities. And so it is easy for people to fall in the frame of like, I have the, you know, I have the bracket gene or I don't, I am gonna get cancer, I'm not. And that again is with one, you know, just one, with something that's, you know, monogenic thing, like, right, because this is, you know, one mutation of one gene. The other thing, you know, one of the earliest large genomic studies of lung cancer, one of the genes that you get identified as being associated with the risk of lung cancer is, as variant in your nicotinic receptor in your brain. And why is that, right? It's because you find nicotine more rewarding and then you smoke more. And I think that's an example of like, we can never cleanly separate genes in the environment because some of our genes operate through exposing us to the environment, right? Like I like cigarettes and then I smoke them more and then I'm exposed to this carcinogenic exposure. So, you know, it's not so interesting. It's not so interesting. It's not so interesting. It's that, you know, some of our environments are praying on our genetic vulnerabilities and some of our genes are operating through a seeking out certain environments. You know, there's a great people I love that says like when G equals E, which is like so many of the genes that we look at are actually getting at the social and, you know, social and environmental exposures that are then relevant for health. So I agree with you that that then diagram, you know, we are teaching examples. We teach them because they're really clean, but they're really clean because they're the exception that proves the rule, right? That, you know, most of the time, the gene and the genome and the environment and society and health and disease are smooshed together and these really complicated messy ways. Yeah, and I think that we often, you know, we hear these pithy sort of phrases thrown around like nature versus nurture. Like how much of this is nature and how much is it? And we always talk about it in terms of some sort of like weird equation. Like if this percent nature and that percent nurture and together they make 100%. But I think what that conversation removes and simplifies and even I'm gonna simplify it is this idea of like, how much of this is genetically coded? How much of this is like, you know, quote, environmentally induced. And when I say environmentally, I literally mean like in the environment, like like exposure to toxins, nutrition, you know, like comorbidities, like other disease states, infections and how much of it is sort of social. And I think that's the conversation that's often missing. Weirdly like as psychologists, I think that that's like, well duh, but I feel like in other fields of medicine and sort of like other kind of health conversations, this idea of culture of the family unit, of poverty, of you know, religion or faith of, gosh, there's like a million of race. Basically this, as we know, which is a social construct, it's not a genetic truism, it's just a social construct, but it has real ramifications that these kind of social dynamics actually feed in in a such a meaningful way. And I think maybe the reason that that's not grappled with as much in basic like biomedical research is because it's a very complicated and complicating things is something that scientists don't like. They want to, you know, get rid of all the variables. And then B, I think it makes us have to really think long and hard about ourselves in a way that we don't like to do. Yes, I mean, I think you're right about that. I think psychology, you know, we use this phrase, the biopsychosocial model really is, you know, a truism that of course everything is this intersection between the biological and the psychological and the social, which includes socially stratified exposures to environments. The challenge then is how do you go beyond lip service to that to actually doing the science that integrates these things? And that's hard to do. You know, one of the reasons I wrote this book is because I feel like people who are more oriented towards studying the social, or studying the environmental really can shy away from integrating genetic tools into their research because they fear, you know, perhaps with good reason that it's going to just distract from the attention to the social. Whereas what I'm trying to call attention to is the ways in which we can use the biological technology to help us illustrate what's going on with the social and environmental. Like if it really is almost always an interaction between these things, it hurts our study of the social to ignore the biological and it hurts our study of the biological to ignore the social. We always need both. And not just paying lip service to both, but really thinking about how to integrate variables across these levels of analysis and our research designs. Yeah. And so, you know, when we think about sort of the central thesis of your book, like you said the working title was always, or the title was actually always the working title. So maybe let's now take that sort of stride into this conversation about the quote genetic lottery, about the idea. And I think about this quite a lot in my own personal life because I have a loved one who has a lot of congenital neurodevelopmental issues. And I think about how much harder things were for her than they were for me. And I use that phrase a lot, the genetic lottery, because we had a very similar upbringing, we had a similar social environment. And in some way, I mean, we're not twins, but in some ways it's similar to the twin studies that you look at, where I know that I have privilege simply because I'm neurotypical. And I know that she struggles in a way, simply because she's neurodivergent and like pretty significantly. So, and I think a long and hard quite often about just about how people sometimes don't realize it because it's a sort of hidden disability. And they think that these are character flaws or they look at it like, well, you know, you just work harder or you're more goal oriented or you have these skills. And like one of the biggest grappling I've often had within my family are conversations about like, well, if she would just, and it's like, maybe she is, maybe she's trying as hard as she can. And this is her limitation. And I think that that sort of is that personal experience, I think for me personally encapsulates one of the major sort of these statements of this book, right? Yes, I'm so glad that you use the word privilege in there. I think that there are these conversations that we, you know, are increasingly had, you know, particularly amongst sort of, you know, in certain circles in America around the nature of privilege and how function works, right? And we think we can think about white privilege or we can think about class privilege or we can think about the privilege that's afforded to you if you're cisgender or if you're heterosexual. And with our conversations about privilege, you know, what are we seeing there? We're seeing that there's certain characteristics that people happen to have and they might have it by virtue of parentage and descent, right? Like I'm white by virtue of my parentage. They might have it by virtue of, you know, some sort of biology, you know, some people really identify with their sexual orientation as a biological or anything about them or it might be some sort of chosen aspect of their identity. And then we're saying, okay, there's differences in identities and we have structured society in such a way that some identities are privileged and they have an easier time going through life than other identities. And that frame is the frame that I want to take to our conversation around other genetically influenced differences. So we can see sort of like the privilege frame being expanded and in many ways around some of our mental health conditions, right? Like some of, you know, the neurodiversity community around ADHD and autism spectrum disorders or around physical disabilities such as deafness, you know, we can see this expansion of the privilege discourse. Like in what way do we just privilege the hearing in the way that we set up media or the way that classes are set up? How do we need to accommodate those differences? But we've had a really hard time adopting that discourse of privilege, which, you know, really centers the responsibility of society to accommodate difference and celebrate difference rather than, you know, sort of inferiorizing individual people. We've had a lot of trouble adapting that discourse to thinking about genetic spirit large. And so that is exactly the frame that I want people to walk away from my book thinking about. There's a chapter at that end of my book that's called Difference with That Hierarchy, which is really thinking about what if we took the frame of privilege and interrogated, you know, happening to have the sort of cognitive skills that are really prized and, you know, informal education or in STEM education right now. Like, is that a way, is that a way that we can think about how certain psychological functionalings are, sort of disproportionately valued in the way that we've set up our economy? And if we interrogate that as a source of privilege, sort of like what follows from that in terms of societal recommendations. I've learned through experience just talking about this book that that can be, you know, that's a really different way of thinking about genetics for a lot of people. It's really interesting to go from. Not surprised. You know, we, so, you know, a predominant frame in sort of pushing back against eugenics has been really to identify, like, emphasize genetic seamness. But if you think about other sort of liberation movements in America, they're not saying there is no difference here. They're saying there is difference here, but we shouldn't privilege one form of human functioning over another. And so let's take that frame into thinking about psychological difference. And I think sometimes the logical fallacy that I see over and over, especially in, I'm thinking to a conversation, I work on another podcast called The Skeptic Sky to the Universe. And we have these email forums and we hit so many emails a day. And every so often an email like captures something and so some of us will engage with a listener. And sometimes it becomes this long back and forth and sort of an intellectual exercise. And right now there's a very long back and forth of being observed between the host of the show and a fan, a listener, about transgender individuals. And the logical fallacy that I'm seeing over and over in the listener is this sort of like appeal to nature fallacy, this idea, and I think this speaks even greater to what you were just talking about. This idea that we have a social hierarchy and a social structure that rewards certain people and calls them typical or calls them normative or normal. And then actually punishes people who don't fit within that quote normal because our structure itself is built around the normalcy. So it's like, I mean, just think about physical disability. It's like a perfect example. The difference between somebody who walks on their legs and somebody who uses a wheelchair. And you build a city that only has stairs. Like all of a sudden you are privileging people who walk on their two legs and you are excluding all the people in wheelchairs. And we learned this a long time ago. This is why we have the ADA. Like this is why here in America, for my non-American listeners, the America's Americans with Disabilities Act. And you know, it requires that there's access for people. You can't just have like public buildings with only stairs. And it's such an easy concept to understand that way. But the truth is all of our social systems are organized based on decisions that were made by people in power, not based on some sort of like quote natural order that would have just self-organized that way, even if we had done it all over again each time. It's like, of course not. What if the king or the queen had been somebody in a wheelchair? You know what I mean? It's like, it would have been a totally different kingdom at that point. Yes, it's so true. And I'm so glad that you brought up the ADA because I think it is, it's a piece of legislation that I'm continually fascinated by because of its conception of what is equality. So if you read the text of the ADA, it's that people are, they have equal access to an enjoyment of places of public accommodation. So what you're not, you're not trying to equalize mode of transportation, right? You're not saying we want to make it so that everyone has equal walking or running ability. We're saying that, and we're not saying that equality is a short simply by treating everyone exactly the same, right? Like you can't put a pair, you know, a set of stairs and it'd be like, well, everyone has to go up the same stairs so like this is equality of opportunity. You can't be blind to difference, right? Like you can't, you have to think about, well, given difference, what do people need? And what do people need so that they can participate as equals in relationship with each other? There's this kind of this notorious story, which I actually don't know if it's true, but about, so let's, you know, it might be just apocryphal, but like mother Teresa trying to renovate a building in New York, that was going to be, you know, a home for men who were, I think, you know, who were poor, we're covering, and anyways, they didn't want to put an elevator in the building and they were like, well, we can't just carry people up and down the stairs when they need to be carried. And the city of New York was like, no, you can't. Like that is not providing conditions that are reflective of people's dignity or conducive to them participating as equals. What is as an elevator that accommodates that difference? So that is the frame that I want to think about in terms of like cognitive skill or non-cognitive skill, which is what, you know, economists call it, and our economy as a structure, right? Which is not necessarily how do we equalize everyone in terms of our psychological functioning, but what would an economy look like? That is the ADA equivalent of an economy around psychological difference. That's, I think, a really interesting question to consider. And when you, so going back to this kind of conversation about the genetic lottery, is that particularly or specifically what you are referring to this idea that like society over, you know, hundreds and thousands of years depending on where you live and what you're, you know, what the kind of that geographic area's historical roots are has developed systems and those systems favored certain people and they denigrated or even a shoot other people. And it was all based on decisions that were made by people in power. And ultimately, now we're netted out at a place where certain people based on their experiences in the world have a easier go at it and other people have more hardship simply by virtue of the structure. Basically, it's like walking into a playground. Does that playground only have things you can grab with your hands? Does it only have things you can do with your feet? Does it only have things that are verbally reactive? Does it only, you know, and if you're not built that way, either that playground's for you or it's not. So society is this giant playground and different people are entering into it genetically and environmentally and socially. But, you know, with this combination of these things, having won the genetic lottery or having lost it. Yeah, I mean, no choice in that. Yeah, so the genetic lottery, you know, it works as a metaphor on a couple of different levels. And, you know, one is it's a play on what John Rawls, a political philosopher called the natural lottery, which is just like, you know, people have different talents and abilities and interests and functions, those physical and psychological. And a lot of that stuff is, you know, it's the lottery of birth and that lottery of birth could be you happen to be born into a family that had the resources to inculcate certain things or you happen to be born with a certain set of genetic variance that gave you an easier time developing skills that are socially favored. So there's this kind of, you know, kind of philosophical tradition that then ask people to consider, well, if you know, if we really take seriously the role that lock plays in our lives in developing these kind of skills and functionalings, you know, how much does that undermine this narrative of like, I earned my success? I deserve it, right? Which I think is a really kind of persistent drumbeat and sort of American meritocracy. Yeah, I was gonna say especially in America, yeah. Yeah. And then there's also the ways in which the genetic lottery works just as a metaphor for the randomness of reproduction, right? So, you know, I think when people think about genetics, they think about similarities between parents and children. And what they often forget is that half of the genetic variance in a population exists within families. It exists between parents and children between brothers and sisters. And so there's this, there's this lottery of Mendelian randomization. There's this lottery of which genetic variance your kids happen to inherit. And scientifically that lottery, that randomness of genetic inheritance is one of our best allies in terms of trying to disentangle this complicated mass of genes versus environments. In a world where everything is correlated with everything else, the introduction of randomness as a natural experiment is a scientist can be a scientist's best friend. So it's called the genetic lottery because I want to call attention to both the moral arbitrariness of a lottery, right? Like, no one thinks that they're like a more morally deserving person because they happen to have a winning lottery ticket. The structural arbitrariness of a lottery, we can decide to pay lottery winners $5 or $500 million, right? Like what the payout for a lottery is as a decision that someone made. And then also the scientific possibilities afforded by the randomness of a lottery is another thing that I think is a really important point pragmatically in terms of how do we move forward scientifically. If you're looking for a new spacious SUV, stop. Please don't pay more for less. Buy from Warnakia and save thousands. Interest rates as low as 0%. Or no payments for six months. Upside down on your tray, get up to 4,000 over KBB from Warnakia. Test drive the Kia's surrender with rugged good looks, advanced technology and luxury. If you haven't already made the switch to Warnakia, now's the best time. Get all the details at Warnakia.com. Make that switch, make that switch to Warnakia. Strike gold this March with the luck of the drive event at Warnak Hyundai. Hyundai offers more style, comfort, safety and tech, and you're in luck because this event offers even more savings. Test drive the 2025 Hyundai Palisade, a perfect fit for any family with its seven available trim levels and three rows full of comfort and convenience. New Hyundai's come with owner assurance with America's best warranty, a 10-year 100,000 mile-power train limited warranty. Nationwide, feeling lucky, visit Warnak Hyundai.com. Press play on Encore, Ezelia and binge watch gorgeous blooms all season long. Encore, Ezelia's Rebloom in Spring, Summer and Fall. Ready to add the number one best-selling Reblooming Ezelia to your watch list, order direct to your door at EncoreEzelia.com. Well, and you know what's funny too, is I'm thinking about this like lottery metaphor and I'm like going deep on it. And one of the things I think we, like everybody kind of knows in the back of their head, they go, oh, whenever they think about it, they roll their eyes a little, is that like when a lottery winner wins a, you know, $500 million, their take home is actually more like 200 million because like so much of it goes back in the form of tax. If we did that, if we were a little bit more like, you know, you're on the lucky side of things and like, you're luck means and we sort of do in a way. Like people who have more earning potential, people who have higher wage jobs, people who are sort of like luckier to be able to do, you know, have a greater income potential, which has to do with all these things we were talking about. Neurotypicality, you know, working in a corporate environment, having been raised in a environment that was conducive to all of the training that's necessary, having all the opportunities that were available, blah, blah, blah. That like ultimately we should, I mean, I know that there are horrible loopholes and we actually end up like having these backward incentives and that's a whole other economics conversation. But the system is sort of meant to be built that those people pay more. You, they give back in order to sort of offset the fact that there are people in this society, this fully functioning, integrative kind of intersubjective interpersonal society that can't quote, contribute. I mean, that's such an American view, right? Like, contribute to society, like they don't have as much earning potential and they can't contribute to the GDP the same way. I mean, I think everything about the pandemic has shown that our sense of whose contributions are valuable versus how we value those contributions than our current economic set up is kind of, you know, nonsensical, right? I mean, we are experiencing massive supply chain problems. We're experiencing as an economy difficulties in keeping retail and restaurants open because of labor shortages because people are like, I don't want to do this anymore. I'm not being appropriately compensated for it. I don't have worker protections. I don't have time off. You know, we call people essential workers because we feel like if we applaud them, we can get out of valuing their labor. I feel like we're seeing the beginnings of the end to that, which I really, really celebrate. So, you know, there's, you know, going back to the privileged conversation, going back to the, there's choices. There's not just choices about how do we redistribute earnings, you know, after the fact. There's how are the rules of the game set up to begin with? How is the playground structured to begin with, this playground of our economy? There's a UCLA professor who's in the law school Joseph Fishkin, whose book, book and work I just recently discovered. And he, his phrase is all about the anti-bottle neck principle, which is basically, are there bottle necks on an economy? I think college graduation is one of them, where we really, you know, narrowly gate access to certain goods, to certain things. And how can that be transformed to a more pluralistic opportunity structure? Where even if you can't succeed in this way that has traditionally been privileged as a more narrativeical way, there is another path towards, you know, building a life of material security and dignity. And that, to me, I think, is a really exciting framework to think about. You know, articulating and moving forward was that actually look like in practice for our economy? And so that sort of raises for me this like really big question, this big concept to grapple with. So, you know, one of the terms that we've sort of thrown around a little bit, but haven't really dived into yet, and it's probably because it's sort of anathema. It's sort of like one of these things that it's like a known entity that's bad. But I'm not sure that a lot, I mean, whatever I'm talking around it a lot, but this concept of eugenics and this idea, and one of the things that I often bring up is there's this, I remember seeing a talk once, and God, I feel so bad because I do not know who the talk was by or where I even was when I saw the talk. But it was this really striking image that they used as the intro to their talk, which was a picture. Everybody remembers libraries, right? And like, if you remember, if you've ever visited an academic library and you've gone to the periodical section that all of the journals, you know, a year's worth or whatever, maybe five years worth of the journals get bound together in a book and they all have these very like boring, like hard covers, and it'll just say the name of the journal, the volume number, and the date. And it literally was the progression of the annals of eugenics to the annals of genetics. Like, this is the same, yeah, it's like the same journal changed its name once it was no longer fashionable, but it was the same journal with the same editors and the same publishers. And one of the things that I didn't know, I have to admit my ignorance here until I saw this brilliant three-part documentary series that was put on, I think by PBS, maybe it was a front line documentary series, maybe it was an American experience documentary series about eugenics, was that this eugenics movement, which really in many ways originated in America and we sort of fed the German Nazi movement. Like a lot of what Hitler was doing was going, those Americans have some good ideas, that at the beginning, there was almost like it was never viewed as a bad thing. Like the early on, the genetics movement was viewed as a way to have like a happier, healthier society. It really was views as like a family planning movement, it was a movement around making sure that people had equality of opportunity and education and trying to understand, how can we have happier, healthier babies that are fit for this society? And how can we make sure that people have really good opportunities? And it's sort of ultimately morphed through the use of a lot of these concepts that we were talking about into this really dark and disgusting way to put people into discrete groups and say you people fit our social view of what privileges, you people are drags on society so you shouldn't procreate and you should. And then it became an even darker final solution kind of thing where it was like we're just going to exterminate you all together. So it's not about procreation or our dark history in America, right? Like not just genocide, which of course we have the trail of tears and we have all these examples of American genocide, but also of just discussing like sterilization behind closed doors in mental institutions and prisons and you know in low income communities and you know Tuskegee syphilis trials and all of these things that we can we can talk about. But that it's at its core, its roots were this very saccharine kind of we all want a happier healthier society. Yeah and not necessarily a super politically polarized one. No like everyone was pro-Ugenics early on. Yeah, it wasn't just the right, it wasn't just the south, it was, amongst people who thought of themselves as progresses and so you know on the one hand, you know if we think about the UK we had people like Carl Pearson who was you know like opposed to the expansion of universal education and exposed to child labor laws but also was a feminist and you know there were people who considered themselves socialists and also eugenicists and it you know it is a period of time in which we're used, you know if we're used to thinking of genetics and eugenics as the right wing which of course obviously is because of both the Nazi Germany and Bracelet and the Soviet backlash against genetics and then we project that backwards you know into the earliest part of the 20th century. It doesn't fit that narrative at all, it's very very confusing and you know and even the word eugenics you know is picking a sperm donor eugenic? What if you pick a sperm donor on height? Because you just means like good right like when we think of what's a what's a good example of this? Oh like depression thymia so that's a clinical term we use in psychology. Disthymia is like a it's like bad or un or negative like like mood and then euthymia is like a good mood it's like a positive mood it's like you're you're fine and so eugenics was like good genes let's promote good genes. Yeah and I think you know if you think about modern reproductive medicine you know I've had friends who've gone through IVF because of infertility and it does standard practice to choose among your IVF embryos on the basis of you know basic genetic screening or even just morphological features right like which embryo literally looks the best under a microscope which I you know I know how much people realize that and so we have you know if we're thinking of eugenics as just as just but if we're thinking of eugenics primarily in terms of changing the gene pool or changing something about the frequency of certain genetic variance. I think you run into a problem where a lot of things that people are very kind of comfortable with are part of ordinary practice you know not choosing a sexual partner at random or choosing an egg donor or choosing amongst IVF embryos so that they don't have a Mendelian disorder could be considered eugenic but we don't think of them as we don't often we don't think of them as deeply problematic. Do you think that just comes down not just but we both just but not just do you think that comes down to the idea of like according to whom it's one thing when the state or when individuals empower get to make those decisions for individual citizens it's another thing when I as a woman get to choose if I get pregnant and then I find out that there's a severe genetic abnormality that I can choose to have an elective abortion and say you know I don't want and this is an empowering thing that I promote you know I from a moral perspective 100% all in promote this choice for women that I don't want to to carry the burden throughout life of raising this child it's not a child yet it's still a part of my body and I'm choosing electively to remove that from me because that's not a position I want to put myself in but the minute that like my boss tells me what I have to do or that this state tells me what I have yeah yeah then that's a completely different conversation yeah so I think that's a big part of it which is you know whose autonomy is being exercised there whose autonomy is being abridged so in the book I I define eugenics in a very particular way and I borrow the definition of a philosopher Elizabeth Anderson who links it together with racism with sexism with classism and you know her definition is basically there's a right the idea that there is a natural order that it is just a necessary to base society on this natural order that there's superior and inferior persons and that we can justify some people having fewer freedoms or resources are welfare on the basis of bending lower in that natural order it's a fallacy this idea that it's natural right that the order is quote better and this goes back to for anybody listening the conversations that we had on the show previously with Angela Saini who wrote you know at links about this both in terms of race and in terms of gender it goes back to conversations I had with Lulu Miller who wrote a beautiful book why fish don't exist about taxonomy and eugenics and the idea of natural categories that you know that's interesting yeah that we often think that categories are natural but really these are all constructs and the person constructing them has a hell of a lot more like they say a lot more about the person constructing them then they do about the actual quote natural order of things and that I think that's the crocs isn't it this this fallacy that there's somehow a natural and that goes back to the conversation I was having before about the listener arguing with the host of our show about what does it mean for somebody to be trans and is there and they just keep perseverating on this idea that like biological sex not gender they're going back to this concept of sex is a natural thing and that there's a it's a natural binary and it's like no no no you're you're missing the the the fundamental point because they're saying this is a social issue not a biological issue it's like it's both it's this idea that there can be natural difference there can be difference that it that occurs in the natural world and that is different from a naturalized hierarchy because hierarchies are you know at the end of the day about power right and so you know there's nothing about the existence of natural difference that justifies or makes necessary and a naturalized order and hierarchy of power so what I really like about that definition of eugenics is I think it captures the you know the atrocities that we associate with the eugenics movement when we think about well what was what's wrong with what happened to carry back um in buck the bell right who was forcibly sterilized on the premise that she and her children were feeble minded oh gosh we had I had the woman who wrote the book at the unfit aress on the show all about this specific story yeah yeah right yeah yeah it's saying you know there's natural differences and something that I'm calling fat feeble minded and that's but what's more that makes you an inferior person and you don't get the right of self-determination around your family or your fertility um so people push have pushed back against the definition of eugenics um you know and someone on Twitter was like you know according to page you know capitalism is eugenic but embryos selection isn't um which you know I kind of like last a little bit at that but also I do think it's useful to think about what are the things what are the practices in our current society that are robbing people this right of self-determination of of their ability to form a family of their control over their own future on the basis of their alleged inferiority and I don't think it's the process of IVF embryos selection right now I think it is the kind of perniciousness of our capitalist system that are doing it and so I you know it's a definition that seems to be for it at first but then when you apply it to you know what does that mean are the dangers of eugenics today in 2021 I think there can be different from what people immediately associate with eugenics I think so too I think that you know most people's association is heavily the Holocaust and that's sort of always their frame and so to try and conceptualize it in an American conception because they've completely like this isn't taught in our history books for most high school students especially and even some college students don't know anything about the eugenics movement in America um and so trying to conceptualize it within American frame is almost like putting a fish out of water for a lot of people they're like what would it look like and it's like no we had it like and we still do have it we had it and it looks like us you know it looks like our bridging women's re-bred up to freedom and that's what it looks like for a long time the state where you live right and the state where I was born and raised like a like Texas yeah and like there's a thing right like I I was struggling with that myself I'm you know I live in L.A. I've lived in L.A. now for like over 10 years but I was born and raised in Texas I would group in Plano Texas I went to the University of North Texas for both my undergrad and my masters I lived there until I was 25 years old and my family entire family still lives in Texas and I'm looking at internship sites right now and I'm mostly applying to L.A. internship sites and the only cycle oncology internship site I could find was MD Anderson but I'm not going there oh wow and that's like a personal decision where I'm like I can't risk a year of my life in a place where I don't have reproductive freedom it scares me yeah it like literally scares me and that is eugenics yeah yeah where it's you know what is it you know what is a modern day situation of a men of bridging reproductive rights because they think they know what's best for society you know and it's again it's not women picking sperm donors right it is the reproductive system it's not the empowerment of choice by the people whose bodies are actually affected yes and that I think that comes down to the main question and you know obviously this is a political philosophy question so it's so funny that as a psychologist and you know an individual who studies you know just twin studies and looks at genetic association studies that you are then facing these social philosophy and political philosophy fundamental issues these lock-in and Hobbesian issues that are basically like at what point and that becomes the crux of the argument right was at one point do individual rights freedoms abilities to pursue happiness butt up against social order norms and requirements and how can we sort of ensure and promote a culture and a society that is inclusive that celebrates diversity and that ensures these freedoms and these privileges to pursue happiness for everybody only to the point where they no longer in fringe on the freedoms and the privileges for anybody yeah hard it feels like it's what we tried to do at the beginning it's what it's the narrative of what the American cultural kind of experiment was but ultimately when you actually look at the outcome it's a meritocracy we live in a meritocracy yeah and I think I mean I I don't know what I said your listeners are aware of that's that even the word meritocracy was originally coined by a socialist writer in the UK who mentioned as a just chopian term right like it would be a just chopia if we ended up as a meritocracy um because amongst other things it would deprive us of class solidarity you know if we if we remove from every class you know they're the ones who happen to do really good in school and sort of shunt them up to a technocratic class so what is it is that corrosive to society as a as a whole he wrote this great article and I think it was in the guardian newspaper in 2004 Michael Young is the writer and he said you know um it's it's very hard in a meritocracy to be to be conceptualized as having none as having no merit of being meritless and they said no underclass has ever been left so morally naked is that and I just thought that was such a compelling way to think about the harms that our narratives of meritocracy do and I'm not the only one it's interesting I started this book you know three years ago and while I was writing it it just seemed like there was this ever increasing sort of crescendo of anti meritocracy books you know the myth of meritocracy and the tyranny of merit and the twilight of elites so I think you're seeing you know people who are coming at this topic from very different perspectives you know political philosophy versus genetics versus journalism who are converging on this idea that our our narratives around merit and deservingness are really not answering the big questions about inequality in America today right and how could we not see this given the sort of historical like you know this whole like we have to learn from history we'll be doomed to repeat it and we're repeating it right now in America we're repeating it all the time we do and we're literally watching like the French revolution like we're watching all these examples I mean to sit here and literally see Jeff Bezos launch his ass into space come back and go that was cool I'm so glad that all of my poor employees worked really hard for low wages to make it possible for me to do that because that's basically what he said he was like I did this because my workers are willing to work because I'm a capitalist and because I've been willing to like squeeze every bit of access value out of people's labor and he's like that's allowed me to hoard massive amounts of wealth one of the best what can I do with my massive amounts of hoarded wealth the most ludicrous display that one could possibly display yes imagine and yet he does this on TV and there's almost I mean I'm not saying there's no social criticism of course there is but there's still like a tacit acceptance that like cool rich boy gon be rich and then you're like no wonder people are literally like you know burning with rage and striking left and right and that there's violence and and you know when we see these like social unrest and then of course you have these arguments about like quote looting or these different and it's like what do you expect what do you expect when the social class system is so stratified and when individuals with differences are made to maintain in there it's a caste system in America like it's in a vert system in India and it's not as bad as it was but it's still pretty damn bad and Angela Saini writes about it very beautifully in her books this concept of a caste system a feudal system you were endowed with these things because of your family and your history and your pedigree and so you shall be in this caste and have these privileges afforded to you you are in this other caste and you're going to live in squalor and we want to think that America is the antithesis to that but it's not yeah I mean we have it could be yeah but it's not I mean even if we just look at like rates of intergenerational mobility right like you know to what extent is your income or your education level different than your parents we see that in the US it's lower than many other high income countries when I think about the kind of the how caste works in America one thing that I'm trying to call attention to is to the extent that people are thinking about it in this way you know in the way of like in it kind of in terms of privilege and oppression there are these very visible sort of markers right we can think of class we can think of disability status we can think of race as these things that you know shape your position in this American hierarchy where I think it's underappreciated often is that education and the psychological factors that make school easier for you or harder for you operates in a very similar way in in in just a strong way right like if we think about you know the longevity differences how long do people literally live right what are the risks of dying in midlife what we're seeing is that the racial gaps are actually getting smaller over time the education gaps are getting bigger right the people who are living shorter lives even before the coronavirus pandemic are white non-college educated particularly men who are dying of you know what in case an angus you have called desu of despair so we have the stratification by class we have the stratification by race we have the stratification by disability but we also have the stratification by education that is getting worse with every passing year and not just an income but also in health and psychological and mortality and so again like so often people think of genetics as sort of antithetical to thinking about these like and like these environmental structures whereas I think of genetics as a tool that allows us to see these dimensions of inequality that are sometimes that that sometimes sort of operate more invisibly in our society and I think that that comes down to the fact that you understand genetics as it is that it is a probabilistic concept and that you understand the kind of risk analysis whereas a lot of people going back to the very beginning when they hear the word genetics they think determinism and that's a completely different view because of course then if they're thinking of determinism as the as the variable within this algorithm then that is problematic but but that's not what genetics is. No no it's yeah like they're not with anything that's like college of study we've chosen the most complicated aspects of humanity to study complicated philosophically but also complicated scientifically too I think. And so I can I can only imagine maybe you're not comfortable talking about this maybe you are but you know one of the things I've gone so far over too so I've got to wrap it up I can't give you all day but one of the things that you know is like an obvious solution to a lot of these problems comes down to social social programs like it comes down to things like universal healthcare, universal education, even universal basic income like that when we start to minimize the sort of meritocritus view that oh this person quote worked harder and that's why they're ahead and not like you know you know that it's that whole Obama like you didn't build that or whatever he said like you know it's like yeah okay so so the rich white kid went to Harvard and he you know it's like oh but I I started an empire and I did it all by myself it's like yeah with a loan for five million dollars from your parents or whatever by yourself that when we start to really dismantle a lot of those things and say okay everybody has the same opportunities to get their health serviced you know and to not be ill everybody has the same opportunities to get a basic education or to put food in their mouths and to feed their family that a lot of these these disparities do start to not completely level out but I mean we see this all the time in countries where there are universal programs in place that the the class riffs are smaller yeah yeah I mean I think GenoX kind of has two roles to play in in this conversation moving forward and one is okay well we know that people who are advantaged economically their kids do better in school right and they're psychologically healthier and they you know and they're physically healthier um actually kind of reverse engineering what are the components what are the mechanisms of that that can then be replicated in scales particularly for children later in development is a really hard scientific problem but such an important one instead of going one instead of going like how do we remove these other people and just make it so that these sort of privileged people are the only class which is what the kind of worst parts of eugenics yeah like that was like the original eugenic frame yeah yeah then it's saying why don't we learn about these things that are helping these people maintain their privilege and apply those things to the people who don't have it yeah and so genetics there just turns out to be like one of the whole suite of research tools that psychologists can use when they're trying to figure out what causes what in the world like what parenting practice or what school practice actually increases your reading ability at age seven you know that genetics won't solve that problem but it can be one tool that you can bring to bear for that problem right it's why we integrated schools because we realized that separate did not mean equal and that the only way to have equality of educational opportunities was to integrate and of course it still didn't solve the problem but it made a massive massive step forward and and and that I think is almost a perfect example of what you're talking about like what is it that the white kids who are fairing so much a better have that the black kids don't well they have the better they have the more money in their schools they have the teachers they have the whatever so let's not just say let's do that let's bring it together and I think that was a sort of an attempt to try and do exactly what you just mentioned yeah so that's like a really pragmatic application of genetics and then I think there's a more rhetorical one which is what we've been talking about which is you know to just what to what extent if you keep genetics in the foreground of people's minds in this kind of reminder of the moral arbitraryness of their functioning and the ways in which their brain has been privileged over other brains does that you know puncture puncture pop the balloon a little bit of this sort of self-regard that can inflate people's like I deserve this in the meritocracy so I think genetics plays both a pragmatic function and a rhetorical function and we need to keep both of those in mind in our conversations about inequality yeah yeah well all right page I close every episode by asking my guess the same two questions okay and I am gonna be really I'm just like fascinated and really interested in what you have to say there's a part of me that feels like I can kind of guess but I always love the curveballs too so these are big picture questions are you are you ready for me to throw the menu I don't know about if I can be ready but yes go go for exactly all right so I want you to think about the future in whatever context is relevant to you obviously you've done that quite a bit in your work and in writing this book but if you want to take a left turn that's okay by me so so whatever context is relevant to you I want you to answer first what is the thing that is keeping you up the most at night the thing that you're most concerned about worried pessimistic maybe even cynical about and then on the flip side of that to end on a on a slightly more positive note where are you finding your optimism do you do you have hope and where and I mean this from a truly sort of earnest and authentic perspective what are you looking forward to yeah I would say on the what keeps me up at night has nothing to do with genetics and it's okay it's a really around climate that's the thing that when I think about my children's lives when I think about projecting out 10 years 20 years 30 years you know I'm in that kind of mid career stage in which I talk to my financial planner about my retirement and you know I think about as I get closer 40 is there any possibility I would have another child and the thing that's weighing in the background of all of those conversations for me is what is the earth going to be like in 10 years 20 years 30 years that's the biggest source of worry and despair in my life right now um in terms of things that give me optimism I'll pick two and one is I am loving the labor movements that are happening in the US right now the strikes the great resignations the people who are um saying I deserve more and not by virtue of my merit but by virtue of my humanity I think that is um really exciting to see and also I teach freshmen and I love my freshmen I really feel like being around college students is so energizing for me there's many narratives around college because today is these kind of like coddled snowflakes or something and that just does not comport with my personal experience at all I think that they they do push back against me when they feel like that I've gotten something wrong and I'm defensive and then I'm like oh wow I really learned something from that exchange and they are um you know they just really advocate for themselves and for what they think is right in a way that seems um even more energetic than what I saw when I first started teaching and I really am excited to see what you know what the 18 to 26 year olds of today will do as they seize more political power I think there are way forward I love that well everyone the book is the genetic lottery why DNA matters for social equality by Dr. Catherine Paige Hardin Paige thank you so much for being here thank you so much for having me this was such a delightful conversation I really love it when someone um reflects back the thesis of my book kind of even more articulately than I could have so you're really appreciate it right but that's so kind of you to say thank you and everyone listening thank you for coming back a week after a week I'm really looking forward to the next time we all get together to talk and dirty press play on encore isalia and binge watch gorgeous blooms all season long encore isalia's rebloom and spring summer and fall ready to add the number one best selling reblooming isalia to your watch list order direct to your door at oncore isalia.com press play on encore isalia and binge watch gorgeous blooms all season long encore isalia's rebloom and spring summer and fall so you don't have to wait all year for the next big show more compact more sun tolerant and more cold hearty with vibrant bloom colors and sizes to fit your landscape encore isalia's are a must watch ready to add the number one best selling reblooming isalia to your watch list order direct to your door at oncore isalia.com