 BBC Sounds. Music, radio, podcasts. I'm Hannah Fry. And I'm Dara O'Brien. And this is Curious Cases. The show where we take your quirkiest questions. Your crunchiest conundrums. And then we solve them. With the power of science. I mean, do we always solve them? I mean, the hit rate's pretty low. But it is with science. It is with science. We are joined today in the Curious Cases studio, not only by me and Dara O'Brien, whose drink you can hear clanking in the background, but also by two pieces of fruit. Yeah, I was going to add them to the cocktail, but I can't now. Are they for scientific purposes? I believe they are. Did you ever make a batch out of these when you were a kid? You're waving an orange at me. I am. Sorry. This is radio, isn't it? Yeah. I forget these details. You can hear the noises but can't see the pictures. Yeah. I did not make a batch out of that. Sorry, I'm always terribly afraid of landing Ireland in any kind of stereotypical stance. But the potato thing we did, you make a clock out of a potato. A clock? Yeah. I don't know about this. Yeah, you can put, like, I mean, because this is the acid, isn't it? And now that I say it, it seems so much more obvious that we should have used lemons, but lemons clearly not as available as a child. They're mainly used for the scurvy thing. Yeah, you can make a clock out of the acid in potatoes. Sorry. I mean, I'm with you on the whole vegetables being batteries, etc. Yeah, yeah. But the clock element? Oh, yeah, like a digital clock. It just needed a small amount of charge. Right. So you actually need the electrical components. It wasn't, no, no, I wasn't building like, it wasn't like a chronograph. It wasn't like we used... A sundial. Yeah. Yeah, we'd carve it into an arrow and then we'd place it to the shadow fell. You know. You want to all do that? Did everyone make, you know, did everyone make the pieces of a precision Swiss watch out of potato and then put them all together? Yeah, no, you're right. You really have done wonders for the stereotypes of Irish culture. Yeah, that's... Oh, God. Anyway. Okay. All right. So we should have used citrus, but who had citrus in Ireland in the 1970s? That's what you mean? Like using the acid, is it? Yeah. You can make batteries out of lemons, which is essentially what this programme is about. But particularly, we had a really sweet question come in from Elijah Thomas, who wants to know, how many lemons would it take to power a spaceship? Oh, wow. This is going to be a big number, isn't it? I hope so. I mean, if we find out it's just four, like four lemons, that would be... I think it sort of surely depends on the size of the spaceship, you know? When you are confronted with a quest like this, of course the person to call is our old friend Randall Munro, the author of a book full of serious scientific answers to absurd real world problems. Hi. Hi. Hi. Randall, okay. Have you ever made any fruit-based batteries yourself? No, I haven't. I know it's a really common experiment in like middle school chemistry class, but it was one of a couple of different things where I always heard about people making these for class, but no one ever told me, all right, this week your grade is based on if you can make a lemon battery. I also didn't get to do a volcano that erupted baking soda and vinegar. Feels like you missed out on a significant portion of the fun part of science at school. Yeah, exactly. But they still did make me dissect animals, which sort of put me off science a little bit for a while. Because I think dissecting animals is pan-culture. That goes across the globe. I never did it. Oh, no, there was talk of it in our school, but there wasn't like a supply of frogs. But the exploding volcano thing is such an American science fair thing. And it must be, because I grew up in a very geologically quiet region, that like at no stage they want to train kids to make models of volcanoes. I don't think I'm going to do that either. Thus far, I'm on zero out of three. All right, so we asked you the lemon-based science question though, Randall. Anything that you can offer to help us? Well, because my background's in physics, I'm always inclined to think about things in terms of what amount of energy is available. So if we're talking about using a lemon to provide power, you can throw them. You can eat them. Lemons have calories. Not very many. You usually, not a lot of people eat enough just raw lemons to get calories from them, but the calorie energy density is pretty high. You can burn a lemon if you manage to dry it out and get quite a bit of energy out of it that way. And so I usually like to think about just in a big picture, how much energy is here and then what are the ways to get at it? I'm quite liking the direction you're going with this. Although for a moment there in the middle, I thought you were going to suggest that we have an army of people, feed them exclusively on lemons and have them hurl the rocket into space. Is that... I mean, you can calculate how efficient that is as a process. Really? It's easy to look up. Sure, you could figure out. If a person eats this many calories, they're doing this kind of exercise, here's how much work they can do. You can figure out the calories in a lemon. That's easy to look up. You can chain all these numbers together and you'll get an answer. It's like, here's how many people pedaling could charge up a battery or pull back a spring and launch something. That's one of my favorite things about science and about mathematics is like, the physics doesn't care if the question you're asking is ridiculous or not. It provides you a way to get to the answer. Whether it's ridiculous or not is a judgment that's up to you. Have you done these kind of calculations before? Not with a lemon specifically. But in terms of how many people? Yeah, I almost feel like muscle power is something where the limitation is not usually the chemical energy. It's the ability to convince that many people to work together. How do you convince people to pedal on a bicycle, to run a mechanism while eating only lemons? That feels like a management problem that's way beyond my ability to tackle. Okay, so I don't know if we're going to go down that route. I don't think we ever considered... I mean, my go-to was this is like a battery like you'd have in the gift shop of a science museum, that this is essentially what we're going for. But the idea that we're just regarding lemons as a store of biomass in some way, that it just seems to me that we are in some sort of situation where all we have is lemons and a rocket and we have no more efficient way. This sounds like a dystopian view of the future. Yeah, I mean, can we bury the lemons and have them turn into oil? I mean, if all we're doing is any kind of thought experiment, then surely there are other ways we can create sump from our lemons and then process it into something explosive. I mean, this is very true. But okay, let's go back to the original sort of science experiment style because, luckily for us, we have current Guinness World Record holder for highest voltage from a fruit battery, Professor Seifel Islam, who's here with us in the studio. And slightly, I feel desperately more... A really good job title, by the way, but just doesn't quite have that air to it. Pizazz. Yeah, Professor Paul Shearing from the School of Engineering Science in Oxford University. See, that's great. It just doesn't have the Guinness World Record stamp on it. You research into emerging battery technologies, which often don't include lemons. That's right, yeah. We do all kinds of flavours of different batteries, but they're not lemon flavoured most of the time. Is there one definition you'd give what defines a battery? Yes, we need two electrodes and an electrolyte. So, bit of science jargon in there, but we need a positive electrode, a negative electrode, and something in between. Yeah, when you get a battery and you plug it in, you see where there's a plus and a minus, and you know that something is running from the plus to the minus to the minus to the plus. But what's happening inside the battery? Because, I suppose, as a kid, I just presumed everything is in one end, there's nothing in the other end, and it desperately wants to balance that out. So all the electrons will run along the cable and they'll light your bulb or they'll power the toy car or whatever. Inside that battery, they've got ions moving from one electrode to the other, and there's a chemical reaction going on from one side to the other. In a primary battery, like the AA in your remote control, it just goes one way. In a rechargeable battery in your phone, a lithium-ion battery, that can be reversed. So it's like a shuttle between the two electrodes. So actually, when you say, what's inside? There's a good chemical reaction. I think lithium is a really nice one because it's the smallest and lightest metal ion in the product table. Basically, it loses that one electron, goes round. That lithium ion itself now, it's lithium plus, it's lost that electron. That now moves across from one electrode to the other. So the negative bit's going one way through your device, the positive bit's going the other way through the battery. Exactly, yeah. Do they meet up again then, at the other end? Yes, in essence, yes. Hey, pal, how are you doing? I haven't seen you. I've had a long old journey around this. Exactly, they meet up on the other end. What's lovely is that when you plug in your phone, you want to give it some more electrons and that pushes the lithium ions back the other way. Back and back the other end. It raises to start the journey yet again. Yes. I like that idea of them both being at the edge of the battery and being like, okay, it's a race. Ready? Go. You'll be your way. I'll go there. I'll get some stuff done that I'm not even sure is happening. I'm totally unaware of it. But when I come round, we meet up again and there we go. Yeah. Okay, that's a much more vivid way to think about this. But a lemon? So if we take one lemon and it doesn't really matter how big it is, you still end up with about 0.8, 0.9-ish volts, so a little bit less than one volt. And you've got your two electrodes, so we've got a copper electrode and we've got a zinc electrode. You could use different types of metals, but we've got zinc and copper here. So in this particular example, one electrode is losing electrons and the other one is gaining them. And so when we've got the race around the circuit, it's the electrons that are being lost from one part and they're being gained by the other part. So in the case of the lemon battery, we've got electrons that are moving to and from the electrodes and we've got protons in the juice of our lemon, in our electrolyte, that's moving between one and the other. So you've got a race between protons and electrons in the case of our lemon battery. Do they also meet up for the finish line again? Not quite as neatly as the case of the lithium-ion battery because it's a bit more complicated in the case of the lemon. What we actually do is we have a reaction at the zinc electrode which involves the zinc, but at the copper electrode, what we're really doing there is we're evolving small quantities of hydrogen. So you've got some protons in your lemon, in the acidic lemon. Protons being the hydrogen... Yeah, a hydrogen plus atom. So an atom of hydrogen which has lost an electron and therefore it's become positive. So H plus is a proton. So we've got lots of these H plus protons in our acidic lemon. And when they arrive at the copper electrode, they pick up that available electron which is raced around the circuit and then they generate a really small quantity of hydrogen gas. So if we had a tiny little microscope, we might be able to see bubbles of hydrogen being above. Oh, that's great. That's lovely stuff. But lemons themselves, I mean, it's not like they're not electrically charged, they're not sitting there buzzing with electricity. When we put them into a circuit, that creates the whole thing, it creates this reaction. We need these two dissimilar metals and the full circuit and the acid in the lemon. Bring them all together and we've got a very basic battery. And a very, very low power battery as well. Really low power, yeah. So again, if we get the voltmeter out, we can measure the voltage, we can measure the current and from that we can calculate the power and it's a really small amount. How many lemons does it take to power up a little calculator? So the little calculator that I've got in front of me, which is a really basic sort of desktop calculator, it would normally take one AA battery but if we want to do it on lemon batteries, we've got to have three of them. Okay, so can we just keep adding more lemons? We did, yeah. Tell us about this world record. I was invited and very honoured and surprised to give the Royal Institution Christmas lectures and in one of those lectures we had to talk about energy storage and we demonstrated that with a classic school experiment, a lemon battery. And we want to show how battery worked and you can stick in a copper electrode and a zinc electrode and generate a voltage. but I didn't want to use just three lemons to power a calculator. We wanted to go very large and we did go very large. We bought 1,600 lemons. We cut them in half and we generated 1,400 volts based on that. So that was a world record at that time. I should add that two years after that a group in Denmark broke our record. So I wasn't feeling bitter or sour about that but the Royal Society of Chemistry sorry, the Royal Society of Chemistry approached me before COP26 and said, Seifel, we want to do something around energy and I said, I want that record back. So we then used 3,000 lemons and got to 2,400 volts. But as we've just stated, the amount of power is minute. That generated only two watts of power. I mean, less than an ordinary light bulb. But I have got I have got the world record for the highest voltage from a fruit battery. Have you ran your calculator off the lemons for a few hours, a few days, a few weeks? The inside of the lemon, what's up with that? Is it just not acid anymore? Well, that is a good question and actually one of these manky old lemons that's sitting in front of me is an experiment that I did at the weekend and you can see that the lemons become really kind of discoloured. And if you were to look at the electrode as well, the electrodes become pretty manky as well. So they don't last for a very long time. So you get a small amount of power for a really short amount of time. So they don't make the best battery in the world. This is not looking good for our dystopia future of eating only lemons. Yeah. Or just getting to that space shuttle as well. Hang on. Why lemons though? Are lemons the only fruit? No, you could use oranges. You could use a potato. It doesn't even have to be a fruit. I mean, the good thing about lemons and limes and oranges is that they're, as everyone knows, quite acidic. So actually that acid environment that we would think of as being a good electrolyte, obviously we find inside the citric acid in a lemon. What about a pineapple? Could do a pineapple. I tried it with a strawberry at the weekend. That worked pretty well as well. So yeah, I mean, anything that's got some level of acidity in those protons available, you can make a battery. What about sour sweets? You know, those... Tangfastics. Yeah, Tangfastics. Or those, you know, those toxic sludge ones that kids eat a lot of. Probably. You might maybe sort of grind them up and dissolve them in some water if it was acidic. Acidic, yeah. I think, Randall, we, a future where everyone can only eat fizzy sweets is probably going to solve your management problem. Yes, and my stockpile of sour patch kids will finally be useful for something other than rotting my teeth. Right, you worked at NASA for a while, so you have been there when these spacecraft have been launched. So do we have any idea of how much power we're talking about here? The interesting thing is that powering a spaceship itself does not necessarily take a lot of power. There are a number of spacecraft right now and many of them use ion engines and those are very low power. You're just sort of shooting electrons or, you know, charged particles off into space but you can run it for a long time using the solar panels and they'll produce just a very small amount of thrust but small amounts of thrust over a long time is plenty to get yourself around the solar system. The big problem is getting off of the surface of the Earth. Because to do that you need a whole lot of power really quickly because if you just do a small amount of thrust for a long period of time upward you're not going to go anywhere. People talk about building giant cannons, space elevators, this project involving propelling spacecraft with nuclear bombs but all of those are still, you know, theoretical because chemical rockets the fuel we use kerosene which has about the same energy density I think as, you know, some dried foods those fuels have just more energy density in a smaller amount of space than anything else that we can build a rocket with. Even with the high energy density of rocket fuel we are barely able to get rockets into space. You see a rocket sitting on the launch pad and most of what you're looking at is fuel tanks because the rocket is mostly fuel and only a small payload. I was thinking about this recently that like if you have a planet that had just surface gravity that's twice as high as Earth's and there are planets like this that we are finding in other solar systems now, a planet with just surface gravity just a little higher than Earth would make chemical rockets not just hard but maybe impossible to get off the surface with. So how much power does a typical spacecraft use? So I did a bit of googling looked up on NASA at the space shuttle which has obviously now been retired but according to NASA 44 million horsepower which you can convert to watts or kilowatts but yeah 44 million horsepower is what it takes to get the space shuttle off the ground. So we know what it is in horsepower what is that in watts? So 44 million horsepower is about 32, 33 million kilowatts. Kilowatts, okay so 32 million thousand watts. That's right, yeah. And then the other figure we had for watts earlier on was for 3,000 lemons you created how many watts of power? Just two watts. Two? Okay, I'm going to write those two denaroes down I'm going to put a greater than symbol between them because 32 million thousand watts is bigger than two. It is. Yeah, by some distance. Just for anyone who's a bit rusty and they're mentally Yeah, yeah. So how many lemons is that? So back of the envelope calculation I reckon it's about 138 trillion. Oh, okay. Okay, how many lemons are there in the world? So I also looked this up as well and I reckon according to some statistics website there are about 21 million tonnes of lemons that are grown every year and if you think that every one of those weighs about 50 grams it means that we need 329 years worth of lemon production. I think it's worth it. I think let's do it everybody. Randall, can I come to you on this? If we decide as a planet to move all of our production to lemons can you foresee any other problems with this? No, no. I think that sounds like a great idea. I tried taking there's that miracle fruit that you can get that makes sour things taste sweet. Yes, yeah, yeah. It's like a tablet that dissolves. I tried that and if you do that you can eat a raw lemon and it tastes okay but I think it's still not great for your teeth. The only way I've enjoyed eating pure lemons is when they're like candied or caramelised and you've added a fair bit of sugar to them. So I would think you're going to use a large chunk of the planet for growing lemons but we also I think we want some sugar cane or some other you know sorts of sugar so that we can add that to the lemons and make them more palatable because if I'm eating lemons for 300 years I'm going to have to add a little bit of seasoning to them. Surely sugar is more energy dense than lemons. Yes. We're not proposing I don't think Randall that you eat the lemons it's just 329 years worth of lemons in order to power our space shuttle. So I'm concerned I know that these lemons are being grown for use in batteries but if you've given over all of the world's agriculture to growing lemons you're going to have to start eating the people those of us who are working on the project at least are going to need to eat something. I mean look it would reflect badly on those of us who work on the lemon project that we weren't as dedicated to lemons as we should be pictured regularly happily munching on lemons. You can use a fraction to have some gin and tonics just to keep the Well that's it. That we can go to a section of the quinine production How much of the planet should we give over to tequila? Yeah. This is all well and good but there is a slightly more serious point here because we were talking about kerosene earlier how are we going to power rockets and spaceships in the future when we're trying to move away from that type of technology? That is a really good question and batteries are wonderful they're good for lots and lots of things you know you see more electric vehicles on the road powered by lithium ion batteries people increasingly are looking to how we can use lithium ion batteries maybe in things called e-VTOLs which are electric vertical takeoff and landing vehicles they're like electric helicopters but actually even an electric helicopter needs a lot less power and energy compared to a space rocket getting a space rocket launched and out into orbit is one of the most energy intensive activities that we can possibly imagine it's going to be an awfully long time before we get any type of electrically powered rocket let alone one that's powered by lemon batteries but we will see batteries in other aerospace applications so actually people send up batteries all the time to the international space station so once you're there it's the batteries accepting the energy from the solar panels on the international space station that keeps everything working every satellite that we have up in orbit they've got batteries on board when we've got Mars rovers they take up batteries with them that can then keep them running during the time that they're roving around on the Martian surface but in terms of the primary power for a space rocket I think it's going to be rocket fuel for a long time what is the problem here is it that you could do it with batteries but they'd just be too big to be able to take up you get into this kind of vicious circle because you need a lot of energy so then you've got a lot of batteries but the battery's way too much and because you're carrying all that extra payload and you need even more batteries etc etc and you just don't get close to the type of energy density so we would measure energy density in watt hours per kilogram so the amount of energy that we store per unit weight and you just don't get close to at least an order of magnitude maybe a couple of orders of magnitude lower in terms of current current sort of cutting edge battery technology than you need to be so wait what do you get from lithium ion batteries well so lithium ion battery that you would get in a vehicle would be about 250 300 watt hours per kilogram kerosene I think would be about 20 times higher I mean we've seen drones take off there on batteries a personal jetpack type thing would that work with electric power so you're right yeah we get lots of drones and you know you can buy like toy drones from yeah from wherever and they're getting bigger and bigger and you're getting surveying drones and I think that people have demonstrated actual passenger helicopters powered by electricity jetpacks I don't I've not seen one the ones I have seen actually have small handheld jet engines which look terrifying right you've literally two jet engines and you're pointing them at the floor but in terms of ones powered by electricity I've not seen any if you look at the really small like trainer aircrafts that you see in little airfields sort of buzzing around historically they would be powered by piston engines but you can buy now off the shelf almost electric powered fixed wing one or two seater planes and actually as the battery technology gets better and the airframes get lighter and lighter we see more and more of those applications in aerospace so it's not just helicopters it will be fixed wing planes and they're getting bigger and bigger but we will hit up against a bit of a limit in terms of how heavy the batteries are and how big the plane can be so is our limit say when we get to jumbo jet type planes we're a long way from jumbo jets I think we'll get to a place in the not too distant future where you'll get planes that can fly London to Amsterdam for example but London to New York that's a really big ask that's an awful lot of batteries and an awful lot of energy and power required in that journey could we have like solar powered planes so following on from what Paul just said there are those same planes because you think of batteries an energy storage device it actually stores energy so you could have on the wings and there have been some gliders we have the wings are solar panels and we mentioned the kind of satellites mentioned the earth station above the skies some of them have these massive solar panels and actually just storing energy straight into batteries so the combination of solar with batteries is quite exciting scenario research that I'm doing the technology surprisingly is there it's sometimes to do with economics just to get the cost down but we want obviously the next generation is trying to convert more energy from solar from the sun but also storing as much as we can in a smaller volume in a smaller mass and that's the excitement sometimes we are going beyond lithium-ion and going beyond what current technologies well I mean frankly if there's one thing I learned today is that lithium-ion is pathetic 20 you can't say that goodness me you're really you've got looking at a laptop there and you've got your own mobile phone without those there's a lot of headroom though before we get to kerosene that's what that's what I'm hearing when you say we're getting there with this technology do you think there will be one day where that you can sort of jump on a solar-powered flight I think in the near future unlikely but who'd have thought let's say 20 years ago that all of us would have not a mobile phone but a mini supercomputer almost strapped to their left or right hand so in terms of advancement that has been disruptive technology and we couldn't have predicted that so and that still uses the rubbish lithium-ion yes that still uses the rubbish lithium-ion but is is the model that we should think of it probably like hybrid cars that something that would alternate between the two sources you've got solar panels on your wings once you're in flight can you could you operate the internal services of the of the plane on that electricity it's important here to distinguish between what's possible in a kind of demonstrator prototype and the sorts of planes that one of us would get on at Heathrow airport in the sense of you know a prototype that has solar panels on the wing and a really lightweight battery people have done this they've done really long flights with lightweight batteries big solar panels enormous wingspans on these planes but it's not something that I would willingly strap myself to and it's certainly not something that we're going to get 300 passengers from Heathrow to JFK on so there's there's a really You should strap yourself to a space rocket though to be fair. Well I wouldn't one powered by lemon batteries for sure but yeah so I think it's a question of distance but also a question of scale and particularly in the aerospace industry as you would expect there's a huge safety concern there as well so they're a relatively conservative industry in terms of the technologies that they adopt but we do still need to get better battery technologies in a hybrid form or in a pure electric form in order to start chipping away at some more of those aerospace applications and I will speak up for the the lithium-ion battery because actually I'm a big fan of the lithium-ion battery you have to consider as well that when you've got fuel like kerosene or petrol you're burning it so you have a really inefficient process you're burning the fuel to then put in the engine to then make the wheels turn or the engine move to fly the plane when you've got a lithium-ion battery you're storing electricity you're putting into an electric motor you have a much more efficient system so actually even though you say storing a lot less energy you make the energy work much harder for the job that you're hoping it to do so yeah I'll speak up for the lithium-ion battery I mean of course it's the best that we've got right now but we can do better in the future can't we Paul we're working on lots and lots of different flavors of batteries and the wonderful thing about being in electrochemistry is you can look at the periodic table and think I can almost take pretty much any two elements in a periodic table put them together measure the potential work out if I get a good battery or a bad battery lithium-ion is the current sort of champion technology but we've got other batteries which we're exploring like sodium-ion batteries where sodium can be cheaper and more available or solid-state batteries or lithium-sulfur batteries which have a higher energy density so we're always chipping away at what the the next technology will be and the wonderful thing in batteries is that matchmaking in the periodic table we can think of lots more combinations is all this because a materials question there are materials we have yet to discover that could make these problems go away materials are key for step advances we haven't always discovered the best materials some of the materials that we discover aren't good enough for just too costly or even actually producing too much co2 because another thing to defend lithium-ion on is in terms of you've really rattled the angel of the lithium-ion industry here if you look at battery experts you could of course we're going to defend ourselves it's co2 emissions you know if you're burning fuel i mean you're just creating lots of co2 emissions so there are a lot of factors and trying to discover new materials but is a big factor is a materials discovery indeed if we're talking about being you know ecologically aware and all what did you do with the 3000 lemons about five of them for gin and tonics the others we went to a biofuel company and they used it for composting so they weren't wasted good they weren't wasted and anyone who was wondering that for the entirety of the program you can now rest easy so i think we want at this point say thank you very much to our guests professor seifel islam professor paul shering and randall monroe i think we've sort of answered the question yeah i think we knew the answer anyway we did no um well i think the answer is not a hard no it's just a very very very soft no okay you've got to give us 329 years to grow enough lemons then close down all industry yeah just just entirely lemon based for the sake of one rocket yeah which you know may or may not fail yeah yeah i mean i think sometimes things are worth getting behind you know you know i think would be you think it could be like a moonshot kind of moment this is like a lack of ambition on your part don't i remember in yeah what if it was potatoes would you be more excited i would because you can prepare potatoes like eight great ways irish mixed grill no i'm i'm just saying i'm just saying a bit of dole for mars a bit of not mash not mash but all the other ways are generally great i think you're absolutely right and i think that the great conclusion of this episode should be potatoes greater than lemons greater than lemons and all less than kerosene if you want to be notified as soon as a new episode is released make sure you're subscribed to curious cases on bbc sounds and have push notifications turned on you can manage your subscriptions from the my sounds tab hello i'm brian cock and i'm robin ince and we are back with a new series of the infinite monkey cage robin in 15 seconds or less can you sum up the new series of the infinite monkey cage yes i can do you want to learn how to win every single board game you ever play including monopoly and cluedo do you want to know about alien life coming from glastonbury do you want to know about the wonder of trees with judy densher and do you also want to know about the unexpected history of science with rufus hound and others at the royal society how is it unexpected i don't know which is why it's unexpected it's unexpected to me it might not be to the listeners the infinite monkey cage listen first on bbc sounds you