 You're about to listen to a brand new episode of Curious Cases. Shows are going to be released weekly, wherever you get your podcasts, but if you're in the UK, you can listen to the latest episodes first on BBC Sounds. I'm Hannah Fry. And I'm Dara O'Brien. And this is Curious Cases. The show where we take your quirkiest questions. Your crunchiest conundrums. And then we solve them. With the power of science. I mean, do we always solve them? I mean, the hit rate's pretty low. But it is with science. It is with science. Dara, welcome. Hannah, it's a delight to be here. Your first Curious Case. I know, my first ever episode. I'm very pleased to have you. I'm so excited, though. Do you know what I was really excited about when it came to being part of this show? Tell me. Oh, just the hard science. The big shiny science. You know, the science that has to be bolted together and takes ages to do, and the numbers are amazing. Oh, this science. This science took 40 million light bulbs and 6 million, like, cable ties. You know, 67 countries are involved in an initiative that will build the world's largest. And then you probably had to be put under a lake or, you know, burrowed into a mountain. You know, that kind of stuff. Like, oh, this can only happen by simply lifting the entire thing into space. And big, huge, hard, shiny science. Or, this week, bubbles. Slightly lower tech, I would say. Oh, it is, isn't it? Just bubbles. Just bubbles. We thought we'd ease gently. So this was a question that came in from a couple of best mates who were chatting at the back of a class and came up with this case for our investigation. Hi, I'm Sophia. And I'm Abby. Well, I saw videos of people online doing tricks where they get people inside a bubble. And I was thinking about, like, how big of a bubble could you make, in theory? And what would it have to be made out of to be able to make a really big bubble? Abby and I sit together in most lessons. And she told me about this idea. And I was, well, my family's very into saving the planet. So I was like, what if you could get the Earth into the bubble and therefore create, like... Whether you could use that to combat climate change. But how could we get it that big without it popping? OK, so there is big stuff in here then. How do you make the biggest bubble? And, I mean, why not? You could make a planet-sized bubble to save us from climate change. Why not? OK, I see how this show works now. That's a good question. Yeah, I mean, I can see some technical challenges here. Yeah, OK, fine. Are you a fluid mechanics person? Do you know what? I have a PhD in it. Wow. I'm not in bubbles, though. In droplets. Oh, yeah, but surely this is a bit like, you know, you go to a doctor and you go, yeah, but you did feed at some stage, you know. Not to be a point where you did bubbles as part of it. You know fluids that are enwrapped in surface tension? Yes, I do. Yes, I do. But they were a different, you know, a different phase. OK. All right. But, you know, I think, yeah, I've dabbled in bubbles before. I can write you an equation. OK. Which is more than I can do. I have to say more than I can do. But mainly, if I can dedicate this episode. Do we do that? Do we dedicate episodes? Hey, you, co-host, you can do whatever. You damn what it is. OK, fine. Right, OK. I want to dedicate it to the parents of my middle son's class who, along with me, when homeschooling began on whatever that day was in 2020, when school said, right, we're going to be, OK, we'll send you the schedule, but no accompanying material. We'll just send you the schedule and then you can mimic the day at home. Right, OK. So we're sitting in the house and we clicked on it. And the very first day, and I have asked the other parents, we all remember this vividly. The very first day said, 9.30 to 11am, bubbles. And it was part of a science lesson. No other information? No other information offered. And so we all had to riff a 90 minute science lesson about bubbles with an eight year old beside us. And it just, it was like, it was science, colon, bubbles. You and one child, that was done. Couldn't sustain it. Five minutes of that song. Take me back to school. I can imagine what the sound. Well, OK, I'm going to give you some exposure therapy, basically, for your bubble related traumas. Thank you. Your history of that. I'm going to give you essentially material if you find yourself in this situation again. Because I am going to hit you with a giant bubble straight away. Because we managed to track down the Guinness World Record holder for the biggest ever bubble. And I'll tell you what, I'm going to let you hear from the man himself. Well, my name's Gary Perlman. They call me Dr. Awesome. I'm a professional bubbleologist. The records I hold right now is the tallest free-floating soap bubble. And the tallest supported soap bubble. Then another one that I did is the largest outdoor free-floating soap bubble. And it was a bit windy that day. And the poles that I used were fishing poles. But they were mega-sized, like 20, 22 feet. So I had this huge monster lasso rope that I put on to dip. And for some reason, Mother Nature and the wind gods were in my favor. And I blew the bubble. And I've held that record since 2015. It was calculated by one of the directors here from NASA Glenn Space Center. That's stationed here in Cleveland, Ohio. And with the blast of wind that I had, that bubble ended up being 3,399.7 cubic feet. Or 96.27 meters. The guy actually took a day off from his job at NASA Glenn Space Center. And came down to the field where I was doing it at at 6 o'clock in the morning to come watch me blow a bubble. That's Gary Perlman. Who, as he says to himself, they call me Dr. Awesome. They don't they call you. I think you very much forced the name on people. Dr. Awesome. At least we now know if something goes wrong in the next NASA space mission. It's because this guy was taking a day off measuring bubbles. It was when he introduced the word NASA that I think we all went, oh, hello. I wasn't expecting NASA to hear at any stage during this endeavor. But yeah, 96.27 meters. Oh, that's big. That is. That is. It's big. Do you reckon his doctorate in bubbleology is legit? I know. It's from the legit University of Bubbleology. Bubble Town. Yeah. Yeah. Look, he knows who he's talking about. As do our guests, I have to say. Do they do? These two who really are the real deal. Yeah. Because we have got Dr. Helen Chesky, an oceanographer and physicist at UCL, who is famous for her love of bubbles. And I would like to point out that bubble physicist is a real job. Bubble physicist. I note your skepticism here, but this is a real job. How about bubbleologist? It's a different form of a real job. Our other guest is Justin Burton, a physicist at Emory University in Atlanta. Justin, you wrote a paper that caught her eye. In the physical review of fluids, you went with how to make a giant bubble. Am I right? Yes, that's right. By the way, how did you get into this? What drew you to bubbles, Justin? Yeah, well, I mean, I've been studying drops and bubbles ever since I was a PhD student back in the early 2000s in California and generally interested in fluid mechanics that involve surface tension. I used to study how droplets break apart. And then I also studied bubbles in the same way and earned the nickname Dr. Bubbles. So maybe not Dr. Awesome, but Dr. Bubbles. A lot of titles been thrown around in this field. Yeah. So help us out. What's the short hat? You know, you just add a little soap and water together and you can make a bubble pretty easily. But it turns out to make the kind of bubbles that Gary was talking about, you need something special. Okay. I'm presuming it's a materials question, basically. You have to get away from just a bit of washing up liquid and water. That's right. That's right. For the work we published, we tested a few different recipes and kind of teased apart all the basic ingredients for making the world's biggest bubble. So what's the secret? On a basic level, what's actually happening there? Well, for any bubble to last a reasonable amount of time, you need something called a surfactant molecule. In the case of a soap bubble, we add it to there. These are molecules where one side likes to be in the air and then one side likes to be in the water. And they really stabilize this thin liquid film and make it last for a really long time. So that's the basic ingredients. But then the real secret is this stuff called guar gum, which is a seed that's grown in India. But you can then grind it up and make a powder out of it and soak it in water. And the polysaccharides form these long chain polymers after you soak them in water for a bit. And you don't need much. Just need a spoonful, a couple of grams per liter. And you'll turn your soap bubble mix into this kind of soupy, stretchy liquid that when you try to pull a soap film, it is able to stretch ridiculously fast without breaking. That's really the secret. Does the gloopy stuff, the long polymers, are they helping the water to make a bubble? Or is the water helping them to make a bubble? Whose surface tension? Is it a combination of the two? Where the polymers come in, think of them as like chains with hooks on them or like Christmas lights or something. You know, you try to pull them apart really quickly and they start to stretch out and they resist that stretching. And they can also entangle with each other. And then they create this kind of entangled network of molecules that help keep this liquid film stable and resist. You can even like poke your finger through it and not break the soap bubble. It's really amazing how much stability these things give it. How big are we talking? How big can your bubbles get with this recipe? I would say the biggest one we've ever made, we could put, you know, we put my son and a dog inside of a bubble that we made in front of my house. How are they getting on? Are they OK? They, yeah, it took a while. We had to call the fire department to get them out. The bubble was so resistant to breaking. By the way, just for context. So your biggest bubble fits a boy and a dog inside it. Dr. Awesome's, just to picture it, roughly the size of a double-decker bus. So we have actually had mixed up some of Justin's recipe. Really? Of bubble juice. OK. Can we stop calling it that? It's just mixture is the word. It's mixture. Bubble mixture. It's in the script. I'm reading it. OK. That's the end of it. And are we going to have a go? Why not? Do we have a small child and a dog? No, unfortunately. OK. No double-decker bus is there. That's the unit by which we're measuring this, is a small child and a dog. But yes. All right. So this is recipe. This is, according to Justin's research, this is guar gum dissolved in rubbing alcohol. A bit of baking soda. Yep. And, you know, just a little bit of washing up liquid in there for good measure. And water. And water, of course. Water being the most important. So I have to point out that I'm looking through the window at the face of the radio engineer to see what he's going to do when these bubbles drift across the studio for the expensive electronics. That is a small wand. It's a tiny wand. Do you know what? That is a good bubble, though. Yeah? Yeah. They're very colourful. I would say it is a quarter of the size of your head. Yeah. No, no, no. I want to go for size. It's a small wand. It still hasn't popped. It hasn't popped. It still hasn't popped. Which is just a measure of how the water is being held inside. Isn't it? Yeah. So it's not draining very quickly. Those are the two things that stop it if the water evaporates or if it just drains down to the bottom. So bubbles like this tend to pop at the top because it drains away and then the two sides pop at the top. Unfortunately, because this is radio, you couldn't see how perfectly on cue that bubble popped. It popped just as you said. It was amazing. Let me ask you some questions about the physics of this then, Helen. While Dara plays with his bubbles over there. You know, you were making fun before, but you're looking like a happy small child now making bubbles. Bubbles are great fun. It's a fun thing. And we can pretend like, tell me about the science. I'm just going to be sitting here doing this. Just playing with bubbles. Yeah. That's literally what I'm doing. Go on. All right. Surface tension is the secret here. Yes. Why is it only on the surface? So, well, the thing about a bubble is it's a pocket of gas enclosed in a liquid. And so you need a gas and a liquid. But if you just have those two things, they're not very good. And the reason is that the surface tension of water, this tendency to be elastic is so powerful that it will pull itself inwards really quickly and basically pop anything. So you need to stop the surface doing that. So that's why you need these surfactant molecules that will sit at the surface and stop it, stop it trying to move so violently, basically. And then the polymers, you know, they make it more viscous. They make it harder for it to drain. He's still playing with his bubbles. The same bubbles. And so, yeah, so basically the behaviour of bubbles is all about the surface because that's the critical interface between the liquid and the gas. And that's what determines what happens next. So that act of the water pulling itself inwards, that's the thing that makes it spherical. Yes, that's right. So a sphere is if you've got a fixed amount of film, that's the way to minimise the surface area. But if you don't have to make soap bubbles that are spherical, you can. And people have done these wonderful things where they dip in kind of wire frames that are all kind of strange shapes. And you dip them in the soap film. It has to touch all the edges. But the shape you get in between can be quite striking. And in fact, there was an architect in the 1970s called Fry Otto who designed buildings based on this principle. So the stage in the Munich Olympic Stadium, the way he designed it was he held wire frames. He put them in bubble solution, lifted them out. And, you know, if there's a sort of three-dimensional structure, the bubble films kind of, they sort of curve in weird ways. Well, he designed a stadium based on that minimal surface thing. And so bubbles have been actually really interesting because it's solving a maths problem. That film is solving, you know, how to minimise the surface area. And before they could calculate that, they could just get some bubbles to do it. So a lot of the fragility of bubbles seems to be about the water running down out of it and making the film so thin that eventually it breaks. So let's do this where the water isn't going to run down. If we go to a zero gravity situation, what happens to bubbles there? Well, think of all the very serious things NASA has to do on the International Space Station. But it turns out bubbles have made it to the top of the list on at least one occasion. And they've done quite a lot of experiments on bubbles in zero gravity to see what happens. And the first thing is that you can blow bubbles. You know, it works in the same way, but they don't have to be as thin. So bubbles on Earth drain very quickly. They tend to be very thin. You can see that one is kind of dripping liquid off the bottom of it. But in space, there's no reason for them to get thinner, right? Nothing is falling down. So the liquid layer can actually be thicker. And there was an astronaut called Naoko Yamazaki who had a young daughter when she went to the space station. The daughter said, why do we not have coloured bubbles? And so she took some red food dye with her and she blew bubbles that were red. And they were red because nothing's falling down. They could be thicker. And so you could see the red food dye. So the reason that if you put coloured food dye in one of these bubbles, a soap bubble, the reason you can't see any colour is because it's just too thin. It's so thin. There's almost nothing there. There's almost no dye in there. So you can't see the colour. But if you make it a bit thicker, like Naoki had could on the International Space Station, then you can, there's enough liquid in there to actually see the dye. And then you can blow bubbles that are any colour you like. And that will stick around for a bit longer. And that will stay. Yeah. Will stay full stop. Yeah. Well, there's nowhere for them to go. I mean, unless they evaporate or someone bumps into them, they just kind of sit there. So, yeah. It's very funny watching the astronauts do this. So there's video of astronauts playing with this and you think all the very serious things astronauts have to do. They are giggling like small children while they're playing with these bubbles. Much like us. Yeah. I think I'm taking the last five minutes just making giant bubbles over here, half listening to what you're saying. It's very interesting. But the question then is, if you're in space in zero gravity, what if you're outside of a warmed environment, if you're just out in space? Could you do that in the vacuum of space? Could you blow a bubble? It wouldn't last very long. Gas just disappears. Things evaporate. There's nothing to stop it. There's no humidity. There's nothing sort of bouncing on it to keep it in. And so it would evaporate incredibly quickly. So a soap film in the vacuum of space basically wouldn't survive. OK. This doesn't sound good for their grand idea of enveloping the Earth. But just hold on to your horses. You might be able to freeze that bubble, though, too. Well, you might be able to freeze the bubble, says Justin. You know what? I've actually got a little bit of science to bring to the table here. OK. So, so far we've learned bubbles on the Earth. It's all about surface tension. If you want to get a really big bubble, you've got to get your bubble juice right to get the polymers in the right way. And the bubbles in space are possible, even if they won't hang around for very long. But, OK, I want to take this to the next level because we did also discover a, frankly, absurd project by actual scientists based at MIT in the US. And they are exploring whether or not you could set up a massive raft of bubbles in space to reflect sunlight. Sort of a last ditch resort to save us from climate change. Here is Professor Carlo Ratti, who is leading the MIT, MIT people, project that is literally called Space Bubbles. When I talk to my colleagues, well, everybody's concerned about the temperatures we've been seeing over the past 12 to 18 months. So there's a growing concern. Clearly, we need to work on the planet on mitigation and adaptation. But do we have a plan B? Well, the only plan B we might have is actually to reflect a small percentage of the sunlight incoming on the planet, say 1, 2 or 3 percent. And by doing so, we can actually cool down the Earth. Think about something like an umbrella, more or less the size of Brazil, to be placed in between the Earth and the Sun. In order to do that, you need to think about how to ship a lot of material outside the planet. You need to think about how to fabricate in space. And also, you need to think about a system that's dynamic enough so you can control it, change it, adapt it, and eventually remove it. Clearly, what you want to do is have the maximum surface with a minimum thickness. And, well, the beautiful thing about bubbles, you get this very, very thin surface, just a few molecules thick. The second thing, you can fabricate in space more easily. And the third thing, you can actually put them together and create 3D arrays that then you can actuate, move, and control. This is only a last resort. Again, we should fix our problems here on the planet. But still, it would be important to have a plan B. Who knew that plan B stood for bubbles? A Brazil-sized umbrella. What do you reckon, Dara? I love the idea just as an idea. I think it's amazing because it would be, you know, you have to fly it out of the space. You create a bop, bop, bop, bop, bop. Like, I mean, I'm presuming you could make a fairly thick bubble in this situation, obviously. And that might be the one thing that would... But no. I'm feeling a no coming from you here. Well, I'm just, you know, the bit of the many things that made me raise an eyebrow in this. The one that got... It's the bit about it being the size of Brazil. I mean, that's quite big. And so the effort required to put all that up there and to launch it and then to maintain it. What happens if a little meteorite comes along and just, like, nudges it, you know, hits it and just pushes it off course somewhere. And it just drifts off to the wrong place and starts shading Mars instead. I mean, that's no good. Well, I think Mars... We're not going to get any angry letters from Mars saying that you've taken our sunlight away. I presume the idea is the place you'd have to be was what's known as a Lagrange point, which is the point of space where the gravitational pull of the sun and the Earth is the same. So you can stick something there and it'll stay there. I suppose the idea is that the Brazil thing would shield Earth entirely, but take a little bit of the sunlight off. So, yeah, I mean, the problem with climate change is the problem of Earth accumulating extra energy. So you can say that, well, if you stop some energy coming in, then maybe that helps solve the problem. It doesn't solve the problems of, you know, ocean acidification and air pollution and all of those things. But it might stop the energy problem if you didn't take so much energy to do it that it counteracted anything. It stops coming in. Details, details. Honestly, someone's not seeing the big picture here. Where's the optimism? Justin, back me up on this. Well, he's right that this would be the ideal way to do it. So maybe, you know, you go to a party and somebody has one of those foam machines that's just pushing out, you know, kind of a foam of bubbles that, you know, people like to run around in and play in and stuff like that. And that looks white. And that looks white because there's so many bubbles that when the light comes in there, it scatters in all different directions. But it doesn't take that much liquid or whatever liquid they plan on using for this to make it. So I can imagine a bubble machine sitting out there in space, you know, constantly pumping out this foam until it's the size of Brazil. I don't think it's impossible. You certainly get the biggest bang for the buck in terms of, you know, reflecting light and having the least amount of material possible. Yeah. You're talking about a silicon polymer here. You're talking about a very, very, very, very, very small amount of gas because you've got the vacuum of space, as you mentioned, Helen. And the idea is that these things, they just freeze. You know, it's a bit like when you go in your garden in the dead of winter and you blow bubbles and they freeze. It's like that, but just in space. I've got this mental picture of the clangers blowing bubbles. And it makes me happy. I'll give you that. I just made a picture of the bit where an umbrella in the shape of Brazil lines up over Brazil. And the people in Brazil go, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. Why did we lose out here? Why did you do it this way? Yeah. That feels unfair. Oh, was that not part of the plan originally? I don't think they signed up for this. Like, whatever. It's great. OK, so we get an umbrella in the shape of... OK, fine. Cool. Yeah, absolutely. People have been talking about this idea for a long time, you know, putting something in front of the earth to divert some of the sunlight. Think of a giant lens or something like that. But this bubble idea, I think, actually could possibly work. Well, there is a serious point about why bubbles would be an interesting structure for this. And it's because bubbles are interesting because they're a liquid and a gas not mixing. But together they can do things that neither one of those things can do. So, you know, for example, if you have a latte and, you know, it's got foam on top, you can balance a spoon, you can sort of put a spoon flat on it and it will support the weight. But the gas doesn't do that. If you, you know, if you put a spoon in midair, it just falls through the gas. And if you put a spoon on top of water, it would just fall through the water. But if you mix the liquid and the gas together in the right form, you do have something which will take the weight of a spoon. And so bubbles do form these very lightweight structures. And foam like that is very useful in all sorts of places. So that's the serious idea. Very, very small amount of material and presumably something that you could undo quite quickly if you decided that actually you were deflecting light in the wrong direction. With a big pin. With a big pin. No, now we've got to fly a pin to the Lagrange point. Now we've got to build a second robot. If only they could call up NASA and get them to help. But unfortunately, they're too busy measuring double-decker bus-sized bubbles on Earth. I just feel there's a lot of unforeseen consequences that we haven't thought through here. And then we have a second round of fundraising for Earth's Saviour 2, which is just a pin that we fly up and the pin pops all the bubbles. But still, look, I like it. I like it as a... And I'd imagine it was the closest we're going to get to... Because we're not going to be able to build one single giant bubble over us. No, that's absurd. Yes. That's absolutely ridiculous. But lots of bubbles way off into space could be the thing. Could be. Look at you. You're all... I've come round to it. Actually, because I expected more... I expected to be in with you guys on this. But actually, you've now... You're all like, no, that's actually probably right. Yeah. That could probably work. So, yeah, let's go for it. OK. Enough of space, for that I'm being, and science fiction. Coming down to Earth, though, for a moment, Helen, you research bubbles in the ocean, which is a different kind of bubble. And it's true that these bubbles already have a massive and kind of underappreciated impact on our climate. They do, yeah. So, underwater bubbles, they're the really fun bubbles because they do all kinds of interesting... They're a lot more dynamic, basically. And so, it is the case that, you know, the ocean is massive and the atmosphere is massive, and the layer between them, the ocean surface, that's where you get breaking waves. Breaking waves make bubbles. And bubbles are like little packets of the atmosphere pushed down into the ocean. So, they actually help the ocean breathe in. So, if you get a really big storm at sea, which is the kind of thing I study, you know, you're out in a big ship and there's these enormous waves around you, big breaking waves. You can see the bubble plumes underwater. And what you can also see is that all of that is pushing gas underwater, extra gas. And the two gases that matter are carbon dioxide and oxygen that get... The bubbles speed up the transfer of those gases into the ocean. Now, it depends where on the planet you are. So, near the equator, the ocean tends to be breathing out carbon dioxide. And then the North Atlantic, for example, it tends to be breathing in. But are those bubbles not constantly trying to rise upwards through the water? Yeah, but even so, I mean, they're still underwater for long enough to push that gas into the water. And you can see this, right? So, just over Christmas, I was out in the Labrador Sea in the sort of northwest corner of the North Atlantic. Big stormy seas. And I had oxygen sensors that were just half a metre and less than half a metre below the surface, right? So, right up at the top. And every time you get a breaking wave, you get a stonking great big spike in oxygen because those bubbles are pushing oxygen into the ocean. And if that water then moves downwards, then you're moving that gas deeper into the ocean. And the only way, all those weird deep ocean creatures with kind of like, you know, lights, little fishing rods with lights on coming out of their heads, they breathe oxygen. And the place that oxygen comes from is the surface. And it turns out that the way oxygen goes down, it seems to happen during the very stormy periods. And it seems that bubbles are making a difference. Is that part of the reason why the ocean's a carbon sink? I mean, because there's carbon dioxide in those bubbles too, right? Yes. You know, the ocean has taken up around 30% of the carbon dioxide that we've put into the atmosphere, the extra. And the question is, will it continue to do that? And that's why studying the bubbles is important. It's quite interesting then that all of this fancy pants sci-fi, turns out bubbles are already helping with climate change. That's certainly what I'm taking away from it. So it remains then to thank both of our guests, Justin Besson and Helen Chersky. Thank you very much for joining us. So, my friend, how's that bubble trauma? If I'd known all this at the start of lockdown, I could have made the... It would be the best bubble lesson ever. You'd barely have had time to blow any bubbles. Yeah, I've been there going, oh, time's up. And they're going, no, no, father, please. Which is the way they address me. Father, please, tell me more about the bubbles. Well, then, in terms of our questioners then, we've got the answer for you there. Yeah, Abby wanted to know how you make it. Guar gum, G-U-A-R gum, or any gloopy thing added to the soap will work. And if you want to save the planet from climate change by using bubbles in space, you can. Just not in the way you were thinking at all. Yeah, not one big one, but loads of little ones. Yeah, and also, maybe don't do that for fear of unintended consequences. Who knows? People in Brazil are totally with you. Subscribe to Curious Cases on BBC Sounds and make sure you've got push notifications turned on and we'll let you know as soon as new episodes are available. Imagine a scrap of data that could help rescue a man lost at sea. That far north, most people aren't found. This is a race against the clock. Or expose staggering financial fraud. All the Swiss banks, the British banks, the French banks. What I was looking at was a horror show. Or uncover a medical breakthrough. Within 10 years, the whole world was convinced that he was right. 10 extraordinary adventures of data and discovery. Uncharted with me, Hannah Frye, on Radio 4. Now available on BBC Sounds.