Hello everyone, welcome to another episode of Study Live. We're so glad you're all here. Joining me today I have Dr. Pascal Lee of the Study Institute and he is working with two graduate students, Charlie Willard of the University of Chicago and Aaron Pimentel of Hamilton College. They are working to find where we might want to put a moon base on the moon for the Artemis program, which seeks to send the first woman and the next man to the moon dates pending. Anyway, we are here to talk about their work on their project and I'm really excited to have them here. I'm going to turn it over to Pascal in just a second, but first I want everybody to let me know where they're watching from. I will give you guys a shout out and appropriate moment and we will get this show on the road. So thank you for joining us. Thank you Dr. Lee for joining us. Thank you Charlie and Aaron for joining us. You guys can come join the fun now. So Pascal, what is this program? What is this project? You have these two students working on. Hi Beth, thank you for having us. So you know, where NASA is heading back to the moon. In fact, humanity is heading back to the moon. And the way we want to do moon exploration this time around is not just do sorty missions where you go to one location. And then you really don't set up an infrastructure you leave and then you go somewhere else. And in which case, each mission is really maximum cost because you don't reuse the infrastructure that you might have brought in in the previous mission. And we don't want to do it that way. That's how we did it for Apollo. But Apollo's goal is very different. Apollo's goal was, well, first of all, to beat Soviet Union and communism in space. And then of course, we wanted to maximize the science and the process. And so what you do is that you, you know, in a quick way. So you you land in different locations each time. That's why the Apollo program was the way it was. And really in hindsight, we wished in the end that Apollo, you know, stuck to one location set up a base and then maybe lunar exploration might have gone on. So in any case, as we return to the moon, we are looking at, of course, possibly a couple of initial sorty missions that might not necessarily return to the same exact location each. We want to already be scouting for a place where we might set up a base on the moon, a base that would be essentially us, you know, an international space station on the ground in some sense, where we would have a foothold and from which we could explore. And you know, this is really a very important and well proven approach in sort of a in any strategy of exploration. In fact, it's even broader than exploration in any strategy of wanting to access and control in some sense. At least have the freedom to access a large vast piece of territory without infrastructure. We do that in Antarctica, for example, you, you want to explore Antarctica, United States sets up a big base, which is the main logistical hub. And then from there, you radiate to other locations. And usually the site of the base itself is not necessarily super exciting. It's above all easy to access. It's safe. It's, you know, in a place that is manageable in terms of power and resources. So, you know, so, so, and we do the same thing as well. When we, for example, want to conquer a territory, you know, from a military standpoint and you know want to set up a garrison or fort. You set up a fort and then you radiate from the fort. So, I don't think we have this militaristic approach at all for the moon now, but it's the same strategy, generally speaking, when you want to sort of be effective at accessing a vast piece of territory. And so, so where would we set up a base on the moon wish we set it up. And as it's pretty set on going to the lunar south pole. I, you know, or thereabouts, the vicinity, I actually think that it's an idea that warrants to be revisited. I mean, that would be my personal humble advice to NASA, which is that you might consider setting your base on the moon setting up your base somewhere where conditions, the environment are a little more manageable and predictable and benign and terms of roaming around. Because in the poll regions of the moon, the solar lighting conditions as Charlie will explain. And the communications capability, visibility to the earth are really challenged. And it's the same with how you might roam around and access sites of interest like Aaron will explain as well. You know, how do you, how do you handle this really rough topography that we have on the moon? I mean, the lunar south pole is what's called the lunar highlands during your Apollo program, we, we went as far as landing at the edge of the highlands. And on Apollo 16, we landed on the highlands, but in a relatively benign spot, there's nothing really like that at the south pole the moon, it's it's steep hills, steep slopes in many places to go from A to B, you have to zigzag around several big craters. It's a challenge. You know, maybe we should consider setting up shop somewhere else and do what we do in Antarctica, which is it's not just the base that's your infrastructure, it's the base plus your mobility system. So that's the key thing, you know, maybe we should set up shop somewhere that's a little more run of the mill. You know, clavius to go after 2001, a space Odyssey, but then have these shuttles that you can take to go back and forth to the places where you want to spend a little more time excavate a, I don't know, a slab. Like in 2001, you know, you have these outposts where you're doing something where you do a little more focused work, but then you get to these places from a base that's in an easy to access, anyway, I don't want to monologue for too long, I want to show you some slides. And, and then we can go from there so you're. Are you showing slides first, Pascal? Yeah, I'm showing some slides first. If I may, here we go. All right, so I'm ready proud to be working with these two undergraduate students actually, Erin and Charlie, Erin's at Hamilton College, Charlie at University of Chicago, and they're here with us on a project that's jointly run by city institute and NASA aims this summer. So Apollo went to the low latitudes of the moon on the near side, this is a view of the near side of the moon, you can see where the Apollo landing sites where we avoided the polls for thermal and orbital reasons we avoided the far side for communications reasons as well. Here we're going back to the moon now that we realize from Apollo that the moon is not this dull gray ball like we see here in visible light, but something that's more like this, this is the geologist moon. Okay, so the moon is super exciting everywhere you go, you can do something different. And we are interested in the South Pole, the moon will get to that in a second, okay, well, this is the South Pole, the moon. We are interested in the South Pole and moon for several reasons, but one of the main attractors is the fact that in the polar regions of the moon north and south, there are craters and areas that are permanently shadowed. And even in places that are not permanently shadowed in these places, there are concentrations of water ice and even of other ice, carbon dioxide ice, carbon monoxide, a few other ice. And the reason why there are concentrations of ice in these places is because they are super cold, some of these places are permanently shadowed or almost permanently shadowed. The ground and the environment that the surface is super cold, we're talking about temperatures of order 30 to 70 Kelvin. So that's just about as cold as the surface temperature Pluto. And you have in these shadow regions this process called cold trapping if you have a spot that's really cold and a little molecule of water that's bouncing, mining its own business bouncing around on the lunar surface, wherever it came from, it was either synthesized on the moon by interaction between the solar win protons mostly and the lunar soil. Or if it's brought in by comets and other impactors or it's even released from the inside of the moon, these water molecules will just bounce around randomly at the surface of the moon. And if they don't get broken up by sunlight photo dissociated, they might just get trapped in these cold spots whenever they encounter them. And so over time, apparently concentrations have build up in these polar regions and the South polar region has the biggest concentrations of water ice on the moon. And water ice is a super attractive thing because we needed for ourselves for hydration as a solvent as universal solvent for the things we do and use. But also, of course, as rocket fuel by breaking it down into hydrogen and oxygen. So having access, waters like gold, so to speak on the moon or places that are off earth, it's such a versatile material that it's a treasure you want to you want to tap into those resources if you can harvest them economically, viably. And that's a big if so, Shackleton crater is one of the larger craters that's almost smack dab the South pole the moon, Southples just off to the side it's 20 kilometers in diameter 4.2 kilometers deep. It has ice at the bottom even exposed ice. Okay, but it's very hard to get to the slopes all around Shackleton of order 30 to 25 degrees. I mean, that is really steep. So 33 degrees is is what a pile of rubble will sort of stabilize that is sort of the angle of repose it's called in geology. So we have slopes on in this crater that are an angle of repose you step on that screen and it's just going to slide down and you with it. So exploring these places are very challenging anyway. We are not phased and so Charlie and Aaron will tell us, you know, how we could set up shop in places that are close to Shackleton and other PSR's permanently shadowed regions to explore. But just to give you a sense of scale, Shackleton could fit Washington DC. I mean the beltway would fit well within Shackleton crater. So it's a big piece of real estate there. And another attractor of the South Pole, which the North Pole doesn't have is this gigantic ancient impact basin. So on the left, this is just showing you topography. First of all, what's blue and purple is low in elevation. What is red is high in elevation. The yellows and greens in between on the left, you have the near side of the moon, the side that we always see where there are impact basins, but they're mostly filled by these dark volcanic lava is called basalts. Okay, so the Maurei that this what look like seas on the moon are actually ancient volcanic floods that are filling in some of these even more ancient impact basins on the near side of the moon. But then there are impact basins, a few small ones on the far side as well. And on the right, what you see is this gigantic humongous one. It's probably actually one of the oldest impact basins on the moon that we have a record of called the South Pole a kinbasin. And that is viewed as some sort of a geological holy grail to get close to as we set up shop near the South Pole the moon, because we want to sample the materials in the South Pole can basin. This basin is so big and apparently has not been filled by assaultic lava is like the other basins that are smaller on the near side. This basin is so big that it would have dug up chunks of upper lunar mantle rock. Okay, so rocks from deep down inside the moon would have been brought up naturally by this ancient impact basins and are probably just lying around getting tossed around further by later impacts for astronauts to just you know bend down and pick up. So we want to go check out the South Pole can basin different parts of it and Aaron will tell us more about this in a bit. Ultimately, we want to place for a base that is also expandable not expendable but expandable that we can make it larger, make it grow over time. I don't envision us having a city of a million on the moon although some do. But at the same time, you want to place that you know is is on a decent piece of real estate so that you can have an infrastructure that you know will grow over time. But even a shown in this image where in the movie 2001 the moon base was set up at in clavius crater which is on the near side in the southern hemisphere of the moon. You are you have this big fixed asset but then you are also equipping yourself with the mobility system. These shuttles that one of them you see there in flight. These shuttles that take you back and forth to to other parts of the moon or to vessel and orbit. So we have experiences with bases and Antarctica. And in fact, I myself spent a year of my life, in fact, 402 days, who's counting I was in Antarctica at this base at Dumont Joviel. And you know, so that gave me some sense of what you need for base, how it needs to be set up. It's a essentially a concentric pattern here with a core habitat in the middle of the base and the various structures labs, power plants, storage workshops scattered around this this core social facility. And then in addition to the fixed base, you have mobility systems. So here I was standing next to one of the World War II weasels that were recycled into a polar vehicle and also helicopters for longer range. So weasels for short to medium range overland helicopters for short to medium range. And then we have a big version of this is mic merdo. mic merdo is a city of a thousand in the summer, there's even a jail in mic merdo. Okay, which I've not visited, but just one of the point that out. And again, it's not just the base, it's the mobility system that you had it really is your capability. So long haul flights across Antarctica and even back to northern latitudes. We have twin otters planes smaller planes for shorter hops. We have helicopters for even shorter aerial hops. We have land vehicles, the habitable ones that on tracks for long haul road trips. And also snowmobile for short range excursions. So so that is how you that's how I think we should envision a moon base in the future a fixed infrastructure plus a varied mobility system to go along with it. So at the other pole on Devon Island, I've actually been working on this project called the health Mars project where we've actually set up a base ourselves. And a Devon Island where we are and where we go every summer, COVID permitting is the largest uninhabited island on earth. We have a fixed base there. What I've drawn here on the map of Devon Island are two concentric circles, the solid circle is the 100 kilometer range. Radius circle around our base and then the daughter circle who's the 200 kilometer range. The point is this is following NASA's concept, which I think is really good for not just having a landing site with a base, but an exploration zone. This is a concept that was actually brought about when when NASA has been has NASA's been thinking about setting up bases on Mars. It's actually an interesting concept to sort of divide up the territory around you into, well, first of all, a circular perimeter that's based on range and then sectors that you might explore over time. Okay, so a few years ago, NASA actually was looking already at where to set up potentially a base on Mars down the road, including landing the first humans there. The first human early concept of this exploration zone that you see on the left here, which is simply a landing site surrounded by big circle of 100 kilometers within which you have science, regions of interest resources, ISR you in situ resource utilization, regions of interest. So over time as you explore this place with a more realistic outline for your explorations on their places that you just won't be able to go at all to progress to steep or there should be protected for astrobiology or whatever. And there are places that that you can traverse very quickly in which case, what really matters is not so much the distance, but the time it takes for you to traverse it's all boils down to life support system autonomy, how much oxygen do you have well if you can drive much faster on some salt flats, for example, then you can extend your range quite a bit more in some directions, okay, then 100 kilometers. So anyway, at Halton crater up in the Arctic on Devon Island, Halton craters this meteorite crater that we have up there that's attracts us there every summer it as it turns out it's just about the size of Strachleton crater it's 20 kilometers in diameter it's an impact structure it has. Rubble that's full of ice both at the surface and in the ground like at the trackleton crater in the summer when we're up there in the Arctic there's permanent solar power which is similar to the situation near the poles of the moon we also have calms that are constrained by being very horizontal in other words to when you're on the moon in the poll region you want to see the earth you're looking essentially at the horizon because the earth is very low on the horizon. And similarly at Halton crater if you want to talk to people down south you have to look at a geostationally satellite and that too is along the horizon because even though they are above the equator sorry even though they're pretty high up geostation satellites at 36,000 kilometers radius they. They are above the equator only so so they end up being just above the horizon that Halton crater which means that you have calms that are subject to ground effect and other challenges like that that are relevant and then finally we have an outpost that we did not set up inside the crater but on the rim of it and it's sort of the same idea that we're exploring here for for Strachleton crater. So very quickly the terrain at Halton has ice buried in the surface that's similar to the moon, including on slopes we have permanently shadow regions as well at Halton crater there there are this topography that's similar there's terrain that's very similar my point about this is to is to indicate that whatever experience we are collecting here over the years with operating this base that we have in the Arctic and is really relevant to what we're planning to do on the moon because we're. We have similar types of challenges and opportunities as well. I mean they're giant boulders to be visited etc. Okay jacked the blocks and then of course our project unlike most field geology experiences that most geologists have are is actually vehicle based we drive around a lot. Most people do their field work on foot they park their SUV somewhere in the hike in here we're essentially roaming around most of the time on ATVs and it's a different mode of exploration and again it goes to you know how we it is I think more relevant to how we'll be working on the moon of course as well. So similarly we picked out base at a place that was strategic what you have each square on this little map is one kilometer in size on the side the dotted circular quarter circle there that you see is the rim of the northwestern rim of Halton crater and then we are set up right at the outer edge of it. We have a little air strip that's 200 meters long we have our base camp the HMP RS and we've over the years named a few features around us incidentally informally but there are city institute hills right there at the end of the runway. Hills to avoid when you take off and land I should add an etc. Anyway this is our research base and I'm not going to dwell on this slide just except to point out that you know you we pick a base in a location that's not necessarily the most interesting spot at Halton crater but it's easy to access this room for an air space and a strip there's room to expand the base over the years and then of course with the vehicles we have we roam around to get to the interesting places. So I'm going to show quickly the little video that I wanted to show. Well before you do that I'm going to take a moment and welcome people who are watching from around the world and across the country here so we have Liverpool and the United Kingdom the states of Kentucky and California Toronto Canada then as well as Germany. Oh there was one more Montreal and also I want to thank John and Sabine for their donations as a reminder of the city institute is a nonprofit we bring these to you because you help us make that happen so if you like what you're watching your stars your bits your subs your super chats all of those go to making these programs continue on so if you have a moment take a chance take a look at those kinds of things and help us out here okay Pascal you're ready for your video. Yeah so this video is where is it oh there it is this video is on YouTube you just search for astronaut smart glove it was filmed at Halton created last time we were there which was in the summer of 2029 sorry 2019 and we weren't able to go last year and looks like we won't be able to go this year either but we have a plan B that we're implementing. Anyway here's the video real quick just want to show you two parts of it the very beginning where we have a drone approach to camp to show you the lay of the line. The focus of this video was the astronaut smart glove concept but you can watch this in your own time I just want to show you the approach to our camp. So here you have our base okay nest sold at the foot of some relatively manageable hills it's actually built on a coral reef well actually a reef that was that had some coral but mostly the sign of bacteria algae from the order vision. So who would have thought that coral reef would one day be host to a moon Mars planning camp but anyway. So we use this site as a as our hub in the Arctic and we roam around in ATVs most most of the time I should point out not in a space suit but. And then I just wanted to show you here base camp. Which we can study with these drones that we fly with just one love. So here you have the core of our camp and then surrounding it clockwise we have the garage tent the geology tent the medical tent the biology tent and then the office tent which is sort of the command center and then the central core is sort of a social area. And behind the office tent showing up now we have the systems and communications tent which is off to the side a bit so that's not blocked by buildings. And then we have vehicles including humvees that we use as pressurized rover simulators and then of course ATVs that are unpressurized. And every now and then when we have a bit of budget we have a helicopter camp as well but that's not so often. Okay that's it for the part that's relevant to this talk. So I'd like to hand it over now to Charlie and Aaron and I will let them explain to you what they've done. I just really privileged to work with these two very smart students and I'm glad they are working with us this summer. Thank you. Welcome Charlie. And Aaron Charlie I believe you have a few slides you want to show us as well correct. So we're going to go back and talk a little bit about the criteria we're using to look at these potential lunar base locations and Dr Lee touched a little bit on the illumination conditions on the South pole. And I'm going to go back to those really quick. These are some maps of the illumination conditions on the South pole and the thing that's unique about the South pole of the moon and the North pole as well is the combination of extreme cratering along with low solar angles. So you get these very wild wild illumination conditions which give rise to these dark blue regions that Dr Lee referred to as the permanently shadowed regions, which are very interesting because they may contain water ice. And then as well, the things that we're interested in when we're looking at where to actually put the base are the these little red regions that are often on ridges or the tops of large areas of elevation. Because those are areas that get upwards of 70% and even in some cases 90% illumination, meaning that at any given time there's a 90% chance that it's receiving direct sunlight, which is really ideal for a base that is almost definitely going to be powered by solar energy. So what this allows us to do is really narrow down the choices that we have for where we actually want to put a base location. This is a map of the areas of maximal illumination on the South pole. And then what we can do after that is start to add on layers of more like more criteria. So another important criteria is the ability to actually communicate with earth. So this is a map of earth visibility for any given location on the South pole. And what that means is you're when you're able to actually see the physical earth from the surface, you're able to directly communicate. And whereas if you're not able to see the earth, you have to use an orbital relay, which adds an extra layer of complication with communicating with the earth for any astronauts or any base that would actually be there. So just with these two criteria alone, you can actually begin to narrow down the locations that you're actually able to build a base on the South pole. And for my work this summer, I'm specializing in sort of the areas that are justically the most sound locations, meaning that they have the highest illumination and they have the highest earth visibility. And when we're limiting ourselves with these criteria, we begin to lose flexibility and where we go, obviously. So Aaron will talk a little bit more about some of the other locations where actually able to go later on. But just to give you a taste of one location, this location up here, which is one of the few locations that's always able to see the earth. And this was a location that was considered way back during the constellation program, which is malpert massive, which is basically this big mountain. And the near the earth side of the South pole. And these are just a few images to give you a little bit of a taste about what we're doing after we use some more general criteria we have to go and we have to look at very specific sets of topography. So on the left here is an image of, is the image just an image of the surface. So we have to look at the cratering of the surface to look at how traversable it is. We also have to look at the local topography. So on the top right here is a slope map and the highlighted region is sort of the area of maximal illumination, the area that you would want to theoretically theoretically set up a base there, but. As you can see, these white regions are anything in white on this map is basically an untroversable area. So basically what this is, is this is the top of a mountain essentially. So it's great for illumination, but you know, then you also have to consider this this fact that you're on the top of a mountain that's very hard to reverse. So there's a lot to consider here and Aaron can talk to you a little bit more about some of the locations that are a little more that have just some great locations for science, but maybe aren't as eliminated. So yeah. Well, thank you. That's a really interesting look at some possibilities. So Aaron, what are you what aspect of this are you working on? Why don't you give us your slides to yeah absolutely. You go ahead and share my screen. Okay. Yeah. So as Charlie mentioned, as opposed to prioritizing the logistics like where are we in terms of Sun illumination and Earth visibility. I'm kind of lowering the standards there and that's so that we can prioritize some of these science. So Charlie was looking in this region surrounded by the great box here and I'm looking in this region. So greater than 50% Earth visibility, but between 60 to 60%. 75% Sun illumination. So this map here is just showing the locations of PSRs and I've zoomed in right here near the pole because this is where like closer to the pole, that's where we get these large PSRs. And as Dr. Lee mentioned to and us Charlie mentioned were interested in these perhaps for future potential as a resource, but another thing that's just really cool to think about is the kinds of science we can do if we have access to these water ice exposures. So yeah, this is zoom in on some of the larger PSRs of the region and then from this map, this colorized map here is just showing elevation. But you can see that the farther away we get from the poll, the less access we have to be larger PSRs. So that's one of the criteria I'm looking at in terms of science. The next one is access to South Pole Akin Basin, which Dr. Lee also mentioned. So this diagram on the left here is just showing elevation. You can see South Pole Akin Basin is really just this depression in the far on the far side of the moon. So these purples blues and greens kind of outline that depression. And then this is some of the higher topography. The science comes in when we're taking a look at the minerals within the South Pole Akin Basin. So this is a simplified diagram that shows off the structure of the basin. We have this inner ring or inner circle really called the pure team bearing zone. This is where we find a lot of interesting minerals that could tell us well, it could answer some interesting questions that we have about the moon's evolution. And then the heterogeneous annulus right here this ring. That's where a lot of the sites that we're looking at sit within. So we're on this margin where we have we might have access to some material from South Pole Akin Basin. But where we really would love to go is within this inner circle right here. South Pole is down here. That's where Shackleton is just for reference. And we want to see if we can venture farther in. But that's hard to do because again, we're on the far side of the moon. So access to South Pole Akin Basin and access to PSR is what I'm looking at and seeing how we can balance both of those. So this is some of the work I'm doing. This is a crater northwest of hallworth crater and then northeastern fastini, which is another crater. And what these two diagrams illustrate is kind of the geometries that we're working with. Dr. Lee showed that schematic that essentially shows that although we would like to have this five kilometer in diameter circle where we can just place a base and you know everything is traversable in the conditions are great. That's not really what we get at the pole. So what I'm going through is mapping essentially areas where we have land that is less than five degrees slope because we need flat land in order to build up a base also to land. And so what these show is polygons indicate where we have areas less than five degrees and smoke. That's outlined here and it's also denoted by these green and blue pixels. So the first thing is we just aren't going to get a lot of area. You can see the scale here. We have about two kilometers, about another two kilometers. Those just aren't large regions to work with. So we have to be more flexible. And that's why you can see this color colored bar here goes from seven degrees because seven degrees is still traversable. So if we have these relatively flat areas, they are still promising places to look at even if they may be small and extent because as long as we have traversable connections, we can work with them. But these are also just illustrating the different kinds of geometries we get. So here we have more concentrated flat areas, whereas here the area that is flat is much more spread out. And we would have to think about if we're setting up a base in terms of traversability in terms of ease. So we're going to see what kind of place would we want to go to. And then this is again just some good imagery of this Hawworth Northwest greater and the flat areas there. And another part of my project is simply going through and mapping the places where we do find areas large enough we can build a base. So this is a map that I've started to create in our GIS. And this black boundary right here is the boundary between SPA exterior, South Pole, Akin Basin exterior and the heterogeneous annulus. But this white line right here, this is the inner part of SPA. And this is where we want to be in terms of looking for interesting minerals that could answer some really cool questions. And this is just colorized so that the green those are all the locations with high illuminations that we find inside this white ring oranges close. It is in proximity to that boundary, but not quite in there. And then these red ones, these are where we had our big PSRs. But these red ones are pretty far away from this white band. And that concludes that. So when you when you say air and that they're pretty far away from that white band, what kind of distance are we talking? Yeah, absolutely. So for example, let me show my screen again really briefly. This is Shackleton crater. This is historically the place where it's constellation program considered building up base. And this is something that we've looked at a lot from the edge of Shackleton crater right here to this white ring. If we're drawing a straight line into about 80 kilometers, but that seems like it would be reasonable because again we have human exploration zones of about 100 kilometers. But you have to consider we aren't going to be able to just go in a straight line down to where we want to be. We have to consider slopes surface roughness several variables really distance as well. So getting from the rim of Shackleton to the inside of this annulus would be a pretty big ordeal. That makes sense. That makes sense. So what's next for you, Aaron? What's the next result you're looking to hand over to Pascal? So actually, I'm actually pretty excited about this because I figured out some stuff last night while I was working. But speaking of this idea of how are we going to get from a to be while considering slopes while considering distance while considering terrain roughness in the program that I'm using arc map 10, which is down here. I've been working with this tool that essentially allows you to take into consideration different things like slopeness, I mean slope answering roughness and figure out the best way to navigate through that. So it's essentially the least cost path you can take from point A to point B. And I figured it out last night. So I'm feeling pretty good about it right now. But yeah, that's where once I've kind of gone through most of my sites in terms of slope analysis figured out where the best areas are that we could land in just in terms of area. Then I want to figure out, OK, given that area, what science is nearby and given what science is nearby, how are we going to get to it? So what are the paths that we are going to take? So I'm curious, your work of this particular map is working on the far side of the moon. How do you resolve communicating with earth in this case? Yeah, that's a good question. So because of the topography near the poles, there are some locations where we do have greater earth visibility than you might expect. So let's look at this topography, this higher elevation topography down here. A lot of these points, these orange and green points actually have earth visibility of about 50%. And that's really what I'm taking a look at. So greater than my criteria for earth and sun visibility. I'm taking a look at places that are greater than 50% for earth visibility and in between 65 to 75% for sun illumination. So even though we definitely are on the far side, we definitely are in the interior of South Pole, like in basin, we still have relatively good earth visibility. So that's why it's interesting, but I'm looking at it. OK, great. Charlie, what's next for you in this project? Yeah, so yeah, Aaron and I are doing a lot of a lot of fun stuff. We're definitely looking at the topography of the points that we've identified. So like I sort of touched on a lot of my points are, you know, they're these ideal illumination locations. However, because they're so, you know, by by the nature of them being very illuminated. There are often in these locations that are like at the peaks of ridges, like peaks for ridges, which means that a lot of them have very difficult topography around them. And so identifying the locations that are well illuminated, but also easily traversable. And so identifying these reversible areas and like what targets are traversable from those locations. And then using those to compare what objectives we can actually achieve from different different sites. Okay, Pascal, any last thoughts were you were coming up on 45 minutes, you're muted. It's just that the selection of a good place for base is really a multi parameter thing, right. So as Charlie showed, we start with power. You have to have solar power above a certain threshold. And so Charlie and Aaron divided the territory basically into places where you have maximum power for Charlie and then power that you could probably get by with for Aaron, but then where you might maximize science with Aaron. And then do whatever you can science what was Charlie. But power and then direct to earth visibility, you know, it doesn't have to be 100% of the time that you really want to be in comms with the earth directly if you can as much as possible because using a satellite for relay is is a bit iffy, you know, and you don't want major dropouts and what if that satellite stops functioning, if there's a sort of storm, whatever, you want direct to earth comms really that's that's an important thing. Okay, now once you've established those, then you want to place where you can really have some flat ground, flat is ground and you need two locations per base. We need a site for the structures, your buildings, so to speak, but also a landing pad that really should not be right next to your buildings, it has to be some distance away, we figure about two kilometers. So that you are not going to be exposed to the jet blast, the sand blasting from the exhaust from, you know, from the from the thrusting of landing rockets and launching rockets. And then once you have a good base, you want to place that's big enough to that the base can expand over time. And then of course you want to be able to do local excursions to places that are meaningful like PSRs and hopefully hit some of the major ones so that Charlie and Aaron are essentially going after the options available for each one of these dots on on Charlie's scattergram. And then the point that you brought up, which is sort of the long term options that you have for science, you know, how far can you drive eventually. South pulley can basin is not somewhere we will go on the early missions with, you know, that we would set up that would set up a base. But if it's 100 to 150 kilometers away, even 200 kilometers, eventually it's not out of the question. You know, when we drove on sea ice in the Arctic in a Humvee, like I said, on unprepared terrain for, you know, doing the Northwest passage thing. We actually covered on good days, we covered about 100 kilometers a day. And that that was on an unknown route, okay, on really rough sea ice. If you have a known route that is marked GPS so to speak and you've been there before, you know what the terrain is like, you can zip along there relatively efficiently and cover about 100 kilometers in a day. And then the location that would that would have been scouted out that's 200 kilometers out might just be two days away and that's well within range of a pressurized rover. So again, that's not for immediately, but it's for down the road. But still you want to pick a good place with a base now, right, to do all this because otherwise if you set up in the wrong place, then that's that's going to do me for a long time. Okay, well, I am I am excited. I am looking forward to you guys telling us where we can land. So I'm glad that you guys are coming up with ideas. Unfortunately, we're kind of out of time. So I'm going to have to sign us all off. Thank you, Aaron. Thank you, Charlie. Thank you, Dr. Lee for joining us today and for sharing your research with us. Again, as a reminder, we are a nonprofit 501c3 you can go to study.org and find other ways to donate to share to like all of those things are always helpful. And I just want to remind everybody that tomorrow morning at 9 a.m. Pacific time, there will be our next study life. It is a week, chock full of study lives. So if you like space science, this is your week at 9 a.m. Front March, Jesus going to be talking to Mary and Bentley about the exo moon. So moon discovery where it looks like possibly moons could be forming around an exoplanet. We haven't found the moons, but we do see the dust. So come back and join us tomorrow again. That's 9 a.m. Pacific time. And we look forward to seeing you all then once more. Thank you so much. Thank you so much for wonderful guests for being here today. Thank you everyone. Thanks for having us. Thanks. Good job guys.
