Hey everybody, welcome to the SETI Institute in Mountain View, California. Let me show you something. Okay, don't touch your phone. The problem is not with your electronics. Did you see a bright flash that maybe washed out your screen? Temporarily blinded you. Of course, Lee is temporarily blind. So sorry about that, Lee. But we're going to talk about something extremely interesting today that we hope you'll find quite amazing and extraordinary. What if we were looking up at the sky with our radio telescopes or optical telescopes or any kind of our normal observing instruments and saw a pulse of energy from billions of light years away, not billions of miles away, billions of light years away, and that pulse of energy was so bright that in one millisecond, it emitted as much energy as our sun does in entire year. That would be pretty incredible, wouldn't it? And we'd wonder what is the source of that energy? What could possibly be creating so much energy? Well, guess what? This has actually happened. We've observed these phenomena. They're called fast radio bursts or FRBs. And you're going to look them up on Google and you'll find lots of information about fast radio bursts. They're literally and figuratively the hottest topic in astronomy today, particularly radio astronomy, because these are in the radio frequency, but they're massively energetic pulses of radio frequency energy coming from billions of light years away from distant galaxies. That also means from billions of years ago because they're traveling at light speed, crossing the cosmos. If something is three billion light years away, it means that phenomena happened three billion years ago. So we are here, joined today at the SETI Institute by Dr. Andrew Sivian. Andrew is an astronomer, radio astronomer at UC Berkeley. He also is heading up the Breakthrough Initiative Listen Project, which is the Breakthrough Initiatives SETI program. And he happens to be the Cher, the Bernard M. Oliver Cher of SETI Research at the SETI Institute. So he heads up our SETI Research. So it's going to be two weeks in a row of talking about SETI stuff, because if you were with us last week, you met John Richards, who's the software engineer who runs the Allen Telescope array. And we talked about observing the track bus system and looking at a conjunction. And if you didn't see that one, you can still find it on our Facebook page. So check it out. But for now, we're going to talk about fast radio burst and we're going to go meet Andrew. So let's take a walk and say hello to Andrew. And he's got some pretty amazing graphics and stories to tell about fast radio burst were just really beginning to observe more and more of these and find them. I was about to say we're just beginning to understand them. We're not. We don't know what they are. We don't know what causes them. And that's what makes them so fascinating. So let's see how much light or radio energy Andrew can shed on this topic. All right. There he is. You the person. Hey, Andrew. Nice to see you. All right. Glad to have you here with us today. I gave everybody a little demo of something bright and mysterious in the sky. But of course, what we're talking about today is not in the optical domain. It's in the radio domain. Yes, that we know of so far. So we know of, yeah. Right. So tell everybody what a fast radio burst is. Why they're interesting and exciting and what you and your colleagues and we are hoping to do to observe more than an understanding. Sure. Well, FRB is an acronym. It stands for fast radio burst. And that's a very apt name for what these phenomena are. They are a very brief flash of radio energy that usually only occurs once. And by brief, we mean about a millisecond in duration, maybe even a little bit less than that. And by powerful, we mean a really huge amount of energy. So a typical fast radio burst can release as much energy as the sun does in an entire year in just a millisecond, just a fraction of a second. Fast radio bursts were discovered in 2007. And in fact, this plot here that's behind me is the very first depiction of the fast radio burst that showed up in the astrophysical literature. It was in a paper in the journal Science by Duncan Lormer. And this tells us a lot about fast radio bursts. So maybe it's worthwhile to be talking about it. Just a little bit. So on the Y axis here, we have radio frequency. So this is the part of the electromagnetic spectrum or the part of the radio spectrum where this observation was conducted. And this is in gigahertz. Correct. Yeah. So this goes from about 1.2 gigahertz up to about 1.5 gigahertz. So this is right around the frequencies where cell phones and global positioning systems, those kinds of technologies operate. So a few hundred megahertz of radio bandwidth there on the Y axis. And on the X axis is time. And that's about 1.5 of one second. These units here are in milliseconds. It goes from 0 to 500. And you see this region of high intensity, this black area here, that indicates that there was excess power that arrived at the telescope during that period. And it has a very characteristic curved shape. It turns out that curved shape is very, very important. That's a quadratic shape. We see that the higher radio frequencies receive energy earlier than the lower radio frequencies. So we'll back here, algebra texts, and look up quadratic equations and quadratic shapes. So that's new, the frequency to the minus 2 power, the quadratic form. And it turns out that that very particular delay, that very particular dispersion relation that we see in this pulse, is something that we expect to arise from the interstellar medium, the material between the stars and our galaxy, in particular the cold plasma, and also the intergalactic medium, the material that's between the galaxies. And as an initially broad band radio pulse. You can imagine that when this source was emitted, it would have just been a vertical line here in this plot. It would have occurred at all frequencies at the same time. Instantaneously. Yeah, over just a millisecond. As that radio pulse travels through intergalactic or interstellar space, it acquires this delay, this frequency dependent delay. And when we see something like this with our radio telescopes, it's a very, very strong indication that the pulse that we're looking at is indeed astrophysical. It's not some kind of radio frequency interference. It's a real bonafide astronomical phenomena. It is also give an indication that this is coming from a great distance. That's right, nothing local. That's another very important part about dispersion is that we can actually use the amount of dispersion so the total delay across the band that we observe to determine the distance that the source traveled, the distance that the pulse traveled on its way to the Earth. And in this particular example, we can take the direction that the telescope was pointed. We can estimate how much material there is in our own galaxy along that direction and how much of this dispersion must have come from intergalactic space. And that was really the incredible discovery that was made for this particular pulse. And that only a very small amount of this dispersion could be accounted for by the material in our galaxy. So the implication is that the rest of that dispersion came from the much more rarefied intergalactic space, the much less dense material between galaxies. And indeed, we believe that this pulse traveled something like 1 billion light years from where it was emitted to where we received it here on Earth. So for this particular observation, how do we identify a specific galaxy where it was located? Yeah, so that's going to get into some of the more recent activity that's been going on with fast radiopers. So this burst only happened once. It was re-observed for several hundred hours and never seen to reappear. So only one millisecond or a few milliseconds worth of radio energy came from this source and after that just completely went away. It was quite by accident. That's correct. Yeah, it was actually found in archival data. So the challenge, if you only see something once in astronomy, is you better get all of your data at that moment that you see it because you're never going to get any more data again. And in fact, because of the type of radio telescope, a single-dish radio telescope that this pulse was observed with, our localization on the sky was relatively poor. And we don't know which galaxy there are many tens of thousands of galaxies that it could have been. Which galaxy or which particular radio source, persistent radio source that this pulse came from. But recently, that situation has changed. Between the detection of this burst in about 2012 or so, there was about 10 or 15 fast radio bursts found. And all of them looked very similar to this one. They flashed for a millisecond or a few milliseconds. We're never seen again. They had a very large dispersion like this one that indicated that they probably came from an extra galactic source. But other than that, that's all we knew about them. And they also came from different parts of the sky. Right? There was nothing that's wrong about where in the sky they were. That's right. And that remains the case. All of these bursts so far are completely isotropic on the sky. Or at least to the extent that we can determine that they're isotropic on the sky they are. And that is to say that they come from every direction. There's no preferred direction where more of them appear to be coming from. Now can we, before you go on, people might be interested in what's the inset part of this graphic? Ah, yes, exactly. So this is what the raw data from the telescope looks like. This is the telescope records data as a function of time. And then here you see the pulse. But if you wanted to detect something like this, you probably don't want to just sort of collapse the data in the sort of wide direction here on this plot. You actually want to sum along the curve. You actually expect the energy to fall on. That's called a dispersion measure curve. And this inset here is that summation along this track. And this indicates a fairly large signal to noise ratio. It was quite an easy signal to detect once you knew what you were looking for. So that's spiked. And the large spike is really the summation of energy along that curve. Yeah, that's right. So if you summed along just the y-axis here, you would probably see a little bit of extra energy. But it would be pretty hard to detect in what we call a time series. But if you sum along this specific dispersion measure curve, then you can get quite a strong signal. And that's of course how we detect these pulses when we're looking for them in survey data. So I have a couple of slides here I guess we could go to. So this is the situation that we have today. About 60 fast radio bursts are known. And we're detecting about one new one per week, which is a dramatic increase in the rate that we're finding them. Amazing. And we're finding them so quickly because we're actually building new telescopes specifically to look for this population. And soon we think that we'll be finding something like one per day. So we'll truly have a very large population to draw from and to infer statistics from. Now, a couple of them, as I started to mention earlier, are known to repeat. So in 2012, an FRB was detected with the Aerosivo radio telescope in Puerto Rico. And like all previous fast radio bursts that had been discovered, follow-up observations were undertaken to see if perhaps there were any additional pulses or simply to learn more about the direction in the sky where the FRB came from. And surprisingly, this particular FRB produced additional pulses. And this very quickly told us something incredibly important about the physics of fast radio bursts, which is that whatever was producing the burst was surviving the production of the burst. It was not an explosion. It was not something that destroyed the progenitor. It was something that was capable of recharging or reamitting additional bursts. Now just let me ask you something about that. So if we didn't have that location specificity on that first observation, probably the first several observations, now when you're talking about repeaters, are we able to say that these are exactly the same source? I mean, is it possible that we're seeing a phenomena that is in the same location, very close together, but is unique or indeed it looks like these are really the same source repeating that phenomena? Yeah. Well, so that's a very interesting question. And the answer is that we don't know for sure that they're actually coming from exactly the same object or exactly the same region around an object. And we'll sort of, we can get into that a little bit more. So let's maybe talk about what we do know about this first repeating fast radio burst, so-called FRB 12-11-02, which comes from the date that the FRB was... Right that down because there's a quiz at the end of this, okay? So it's FRB 12-11-02. So the really incredible thing that we were able to do with 12-11-02 was to localize the source. So if a source produces multiple bursts, you can observe it with other radio telescopes. You can observe it with radio telescopes that have exquisite angular resolution. In fact, radio telescopes that are spread across the entire planet Earth involving observatories all over the world, and you can use that very long separation between the antennas to very accurately localize the location where the source is coming from. And in fact, we know for certain that FRB 12-11-02, which I have a plot of here. This is actually one of the bursts from FRB 12-11-02. We know for certain that it comes from a dwarf galaxy that's 3 billion light years away. And even more, we know that there's a little tiny persistent radio source, a very unremarkable radio source, buried inside that dwarf galaxy where these pulses seem to be emitting from. So you mentioned that before. You mentioned radio sources. Can you describe what constitutes in galaxies and other celestial phenomena? What constitutes a radio source? What do we mean by that? And what is the phenomena that's generating the radio frequency emissions? Well, the sky is full of continuous radio sources. Most of those are what we call active galactic nuclei. They come from accretion disks that are around large black holes in the center of galaxies. And the sky is covered with those. The universe is full of them. And we detect many, many such sources. Sources like this pulsing sources are quite rare. There are a few thousand pulsars that are known. In fact, the first detection of an FRB in that data from the Park's telescope that I mentioned was actually discovered in a search for intermittent pulsars. Oh, that's interesting. I was going to ask you that. And now what were the otherwise trying to observe them? Yeah, it's an interesting story. So most pulsars produce a fairly continuous string of pulses. And if you remember back to, or what did we say, algebra class? If you remember back to algebra class, you might have learned about Fourier transforms, or maybe in calculus. And Fourier transforms are a very good way of detecting periodic sources, sources that repeat at some fixed interval. And indeed, performing a Fourier transform of the data string is typically how pulsars are detected. But around 2000, 2001, it was realized that some pulsars only produce pulses very intermittently. So not just once, like fast radiovers, but maybe a few times per hour. And sometimes the pulses can be much brighter than the weaker ones. And is the periodicity uniform or is it also? The periodicity is still uniform. It's still uniform. Yeah, so it's still a rapidly rotating neutron star. Just for one reason or another, likely an intrinsic reason, the pulsars only produces a few pulses. And so if you have something that's intermittent, it's actually a more effective method to search for pulses to look for the individual pulses rather than to look for the repeating source. And it was, in fact, an application of an algorithm like that that ultimately resulted in the discovery of a fast radiopers. So back to 1211.02. Again, this is some data from 1211.02. The fact that it repeats has allowed it to be observed with literally dozens of different telescopes now, including these data that actually came from the Green Bank telescope. And you probably notice that if we compare these data to this data, these look a lot more interesting. And that's because if you know that something's going to repeat, you can marshal all kinds of observational resources and computing equipment to observe the source in great detail. And that's what we did here in some work we published last year. So the plot I showed you previously had about 100 megahertz, few hundred megahertz or so of radio spectrum. This plot has five gigahertz of radio spectrum. And it's a much, much shorter time interval here, just a few milliseconds rather than 500 milliseconds, as you saw in the previous plot. And you see here some really phenomenal structure, both spectrally in terms of what radio frequencies the source of mid-tat and also temporarily. So that's the dark and light shading is what you mean by the structure. And that's right here. So it's, we're inverted from where we are here. So here excess energy is indicated by black versus white. Here the excess energy is indicated by white over black. But all of these little sort of spotches that you see here are all regions of enhanced emission. And essentially this structure is not yet understood. We don't know if this structure arises with the source itself if it's intrinsic or if it's somehow diverse is basically broad band and very simple when it's emitted. But somehow gets that structure extrinsically or as it travels through the intergalactic medium or the interstellar medium, either in our own galaxy or in the host galaxy that produces it. And also as I mentioned, these very stark regions where it stops emitting and then starts emitting again. So that's where these vertical dark bands are where it stops and then it starts. Yeah, that's right. So the dispersion that we talked about before, this pulse has a very large dispersion. This has been removed in the plots that we see here. So all of the structure that we see here is basically intrinsic to the emission that we observe. There's no more dispersion here. And we similarly see a collapsed 1D plot above here showing how the total flux or radio energy varies over the two milliseconds or so that we actually received. So this is time up here. So you've got pulse off, pulse off, pulse off, indeed. Oh, indeed. Interesting. And then so you've got that shading in this part of the data that shows the on-off characteristics but you've also got shading or striations in the horizontal, indeed, going on there. Well, we don't know. Okay. That's what makes the… It's really nice and the source is so interesting. And they show such very rich structure. Now there are some ideas having to do with potential magnetosphere, the region of magnetized plasma around the object that's producing these pulses. There are some ideas having to do with what are called in homogenities in the interstellar medium or intergalactic medium, either again in the host galaxy or our galaxy. So we might sort of think of interstellar spaces fairly homogenous, basically kind of all the same everywhere that you look, but in fact it's not. All of the plasma and the dust that's in between the stars in our galaxy has a lot of structure, some places it's more dense than other places. And those regions of overdensity, we think might cause some kind of a lensing effect called plasma lensing that might lead to this kind of phenomena arising. All we have are ideas at this stage. We don't know for sure what causes these. Recently just a month or so ago, it was announced that a second repeating fast radio burst had been discovered by the Chinemoxervatory in Pentectin in British Columbia. And interestingly, that repeating fast radio burst shows very similar structure to this one. So we haven't gotten all of the data on that source that we have on 12-11-02 yet. But it does show some very interesting similarities. So along those lines, let me ask you another question. I'm noticing here, if I'm reading it correctly, that the frequency of these bursts is between five and eight gigahertz, whereas that first plot you showed us was between like one and two gigahertz. Yeah. So the place in the radio spectrum where they occur is also not the same. And so when you talk about this other repeater, is that also in this frequency band or is it in another band? Yeah. So another very good question. So it turns out that radio telescopes see more of the sky, the lower the frequency that you go to. So the area on the sky is proportional to the observing frequency. So if you go to lower and lower frequencies, you see more and more of the sky. And so if you're doing a survey for something like fast radio bursts, lower frequencies naturally give you some advantage because you can see more of the sky and then you have a greater likelihood of detecting them. And so for that reason and other technical reasons, most fast radio burst searches are conducted at frequencies between a few hundred megahertz at about 1.7 gigahertz or so. Basically the upper end of that plot that I showed earlier. Basically this is the highest radio frequency. But once you know that one of these things has been found, you can observe at higher frequencies and study at higher frequencies, which is indeed what was done here with 12-11-02. So sort of to foreshadow a little bit of I think what we're going to get into maybe towards the end of the talk you might ask, well we know that 12-11-02 has a mission at these high radio frequencies. Perhaps we should also be conducting searches at these higher radio frequencies. And it's exactly what I was going to have to do. So the lower radio frequencies and indeed it would be wonderful to do that. But it really requires a very innovative telescope in order to be able to do that because again with large single-ditch telescopes or even existing interferometers, the amount of the sky that you can survey at these high frequencies is usually very small. So that is what we call in the business a leading question I haven't seen. And you can explain what we mean by that. Yeah, sure. So let's see here. By the way, while you're out there and while Andrew is pulling up this additional information, some hearts and thumbs up for fast radio bursts, the coolest, hottest, mysterious thing in astronomy and radio astronomy today. And for Andrew for spending some time to explain all of this to you. And remember, like always, if you've got some questions, please let us know. We're jotting down questions that we can ask Andrew. So let us know what your question is and if you can, tell us your name. And of course, as always, we'd love to hear where you're watching from. And this time around, if you happen to be in British Columbia or maybe Australia where the Parks Radio Telescope is, or West Virginia where the Green Bank Telescope is, all instruments that Andrew has referred to, give us a special shout out. And back to you. Right. So many of the viewers today are probably familiar with the Almond Telescope array. We just, in fact, we talked about this last week because we had John here. Oh, okay, excellent. And we talked about the Trappist observation we'd gotten in December. So that was good fun. And ironically, one of the first times we'd done a setty talk and about the ATA on Facebook live. So if you want to hear more setty talks, send Bill an email like that. Exactly. And he needs to schedule some work. We do, we do. So the Almond Telescope array, of course, is made up of 42 antennas that's located in Northern California. But one of the things that is sort of belied by this picture is the tremendous flexibility of the digital system that actually operates the telescope. The Almond Telescope array was designed really with the future in mind and can deliver a huge amount of radio spectrum to the control building where all of the interesting stuff happens, which is that little building with the green roof there. Way in the back. And among the science programs that we're undertaking with the ATA and are really just getting started with is a search for fast ray of Earth. So of course, FRBs were not known when the Almond Telescope array was built. So the digital technology doesn't currently have the capability to search for these very, very brief signals. But because of the way it was designed, we can actually, relatively easily, design some new digital hardware that can plug into the array and can allow us to conduct a very, very powerful search for these bursts at high radio frequencies. And in fact, this is a truly unique capability of the ATA because the array is made up of a relatively large number of small dishes. It naturally sees quite a lot of the sky. And so you can conduct effective FRB searches even at high radio frequencies, a part of the spectrum that other telescopes cannot be very excited about that. And I wish you luck, Greg, you're talking about. We're in the process of now doing things to the collaboration with Caltech and the funding that we've received. Yeah, that's right. So just in the last couple of months, we've received some support for a pilot program that will allow us to conduct a survey with 12 antennas. And we're hoping to add a few more to that to increase the sensitivity and also our ability to localize the source in coming months. Now, this is a bit of a sidebar question. But some people may be looking at this picture and curious about the arrangement of the dishes because it doesn't appear to be that there's any pattern to the arrangement of the dishes. Maybe you can explain that. Yeah. Well, there's deliberately no pattern that I guess the answer. Indeed, the antennas are spread out in a pseudo-random configuration. And they're designed in such a way to have no two similar baselines. So you want all of the separation distances between all of the antennas to be different. And fundamentally, that comes from how you sample the Fourier transform of the intensity distribution that falls on the array. You want to have kind of uniform sampling of that. And to do that, you want to have as many unique separation distances as you possibly can. So must be an interesting algorithm that plots out that arrangement. Yeah, so this is a very rich topic. Depending on what kind of science you're doing, what kind of imaging performance you want to have in the array, you can choose different designs, different configurations of antennas. And in fact, for some science cases, it actually does make sense to have redundant baselines. It all depends on what you're trying to do with it. But of course, as I said, the ATA was really designed to allow a lot of different things to take place. And as we continue to bring more capabilities to the ATA, that's something that we really want to take advantage of. It's flexibility. And our ability to do an FRB search with it is a great example of that. Yeah. So continue. I interrupted your question. Do we get questions like you've called on us? We've got some questions. Okay. So do you want to start doing some questions? We'll pop some over here. All right. We have the amazing crew team here handing them off. Okay, so the first one is, do you use machine learning for any of this? James wants to know. Thank you very much, James. I appreciate it. Another loaded question. We didn't set that up on us. Yeah. Indeed, we do use machine learning. And I can talk a little bit about that here. So if you imagine trying to detect a signal that looks like this, it seems like a pretty straightforward thing to simply sum along various quadratic curves. We know that the intensity varies in time as new to the minus two. And we want to search a range of different curves. So we could easily program a computer to do that. That's called a matched filter. But when we see a mission that looks like this, this is far richer than a simple dispersed curve that goes across the entire observed band. There's all kinds of structure here. And I think if you have some experience with machine learning, it suggests that machine learning might be a powerful approach to try to search for more of these. And indeed, it is. And this is just a quick example of this. We observed the one repeating FRB 121102 for about six hours with the Greenbank telescope and using the conventional algorithm we detected about 21 bursts. And one of our graduate students came up with a convolutional neural network approach to search for more bursts and did so very successfully. And actually, you're using the same data set. Exactly. You're using an algorithm to extract more information. Light gray ellipses here show the initial bursts that were discovered. And then these blue ellipses show the bursts that were found using machine learning. So they're weaker bursts. But one of the very interesting things we found is that in fact, the source was active over the entire period of time that we observed rather than just the beginning. So what it was possible to go back through some of the other archival data, including that very first one, and apply this algorithm? Absolutely. And that's actually happening now. Now this approach, this is kind of a detail, is really especially powerful when you have very wide bandwidths, which we had when we conducted these observations, and which we will also have at the Valentelloscope array. But here on the left is a known pulse. This is something detected with a conventional algorithm. And then on the right, a weaker burst that only covers a small amount of the observed band that was found with machine learning. So in summary, machine learning is an incredibly powerful technique. And I think we're just beginning to scratch the surface of what we'll be able to do with machine learning and FRBs. Yeah, so interesting. I think that also presumably addressed a similar question we got from Per Paolo. Per Paolo. It's hard to read, but it's writing sometimes. But anyway, the question was, can AI algorithms detect FRBs? Clearly, the answer is yes. Here's an interesting question from even, or Evan, could these bursts damage any potential life that might be nearby? That's a great question. That is a great question. The answer that's yes, of course. I mean, if there were DNA-based life on the surface of a planet near one of these fast radioburst sources, something like the distance between the earth and the sun, it would be obliterated. It would be a very intense environment. Now with that life, we're below a few meters of water, for example, in an ocean, perhaps maybe a few kilometers of ice like Europa or Titan in our own solar system, then perhaps it could survive that environment. So, certainly, you wouldn't want to be on the surface. But I think if you were sort of suitably protected, perhaps you could survive this for a brief period of time. Now whether the life could develop in such an environment is another question. But in fact, I think a very appropriate question for the SETI Institute, in that there are, in fact, scientists here in this building at this moment, asking these very questions about radiation tolerance to life and what kind of environment's life can actually arise and thrive. Sure. And we know, we talked to one of our collaborators and scientists who does his research in the Antarctic a couple of weeks ago, Tyler, and we were talking about extremophiles and extreme biology existing in extreme conditions, and that, of course, can be in terms of temperature or in terms of the city and pH. It can be in terms of radiation level. Natalie Cabral's research at the top of Lincoln Cabur, this 20,000-foot peak in the Otacama, has found biology that seems to survive and thrive in a highly radiative environment exposed to very high levels of UV that would be generally considered to be lethal. So lots of interesting extreme biology questions here as Andrew says, or researchers are exploring. This is another great question. This is from Silla and also John. Is there any indication of intentional information sent in these bursts? Maybe that's what those started like patterns. Yeah, that's another fantastic question. This is something that's come up quite a lot in the media. I think over the last couple of years, Tabi star, Omo Moa, and of course with repeating fast radioverse. And I think to sort of wax philosophical a bit, we know without a doubt that the universe is capable of giving rise to intelligent, technologically capable life. We here in this room and you at home in the fact that we're communicating over the internet is evidence of that. Life can communicate with electromagnetic radiation and the universe gives rise to it. Now that happened only once in the 13 and a half billion year history of the universe or did it happen many, many times. And this is the question that we ask in the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. Now, when we see some sort of individual phenomena that's very mysterious to us, like fast radioverse, a lot of interesting structure and things, I think naturally the question sort of comes to mind, well, could that be evidence of intelligent life elsewhere? I think we have to be a bit cautious. We've so far not detected any intelligent, technologically capable life elsewhere in the universe that we know of. And yet we have detected all kinds of interesting natural astrophysical phenomena, gamma ray burst, pulsars themselves, neutron stars, astrophysical measures. Sources that we could have never predicted from basic physics and in fact only really discovered because we observed them and saw them. So I think we have to be a little bit cautious and start with the more mundane explanations. But we should keep our eyes and our minds and our theories open to other explanations. And indeed, the structure that we see with FRB is not currently explained. We don't have a conclusive theory. And so we keep our minds open. And I think there's actually some very interesting work for perhaps some of you in the audience that have some experience with information processing and looking for patterns in noisy data. There's some very interesting work that could be done with FRB's to look to see if there's some evidence of what we might call information content and some definition in the data. So the more we work with video production crews at the City Institute on a variety of programs, the more I'm learning about that whole industry. And there's a couple of things that industry really likes a lot. And one of those is countdown clocks. And we see them everywhere. How many movies and TV shows do you watch with a countdown timer that if they don't cut the right wire at the right time, something is going to blow up. We talked about that a little bit when we did the conjunction observation of that trap assistant. The other thing, of course, that everybody loves is a mystery. And this is a classic example of a mystery. And that's what makes these so interesting is Andrew is alluding to here. We really don't know much about the nature of the source. What is the phenomena that is generating this much energy and why? And so, yeah, it's a fascinating area of research and why. It's really exciting that thanks to Andrew and the collaboration with Caltech, we're going to be able to investigate them with the Alentelus Cochlearate and hopefully generate some new science. Another interesting question that has come from Patrick, and that is, can you detect FRBs more easily from orbit than from Earth than on Earth from Earth? So every kind of astronomy is better from space. The problem is, of course, that going to space is expensive and it's hard to build very large telescopes in space. But yes, having a radio observatory on the dark side of the moon, for example, would be absolutely phenomenal. Which we've talked about 50 or 60 years, we might have such a thing. And you may or may not know it. I mean, interestingly enough, it didn't get a lot of media attention in the United States. But the Chinese just recently landed a spacecraft on the opposite side of the moon, the dark side of the moon. So there's already a human presence there. And as Andrew says, I think it's safe to die. I think it's fair to assume that in 50 or 60 years of radio observatory on the dark side of the moon, you can be a reality. That would be pretty amazing. Another question came up. You addressed this earlier, but maybe you've got some other comparisons that would be helpful. Jim was asking, how strong are these signals? You talked about that. You know, the equivalent energy of a solar year packed into a millisecond. Is there much variation in strength, or is that a sort of a pretty consistent level? Yeah, so some of them are very bright. And for the brief moment that they flash are some of the brightest radio sources in the sky. So if we had a very, very sensitive, all-sky radio telescope, we would see these things quite commonly. And a few thousand of these go off every day. So they're quite common. And they do release quite a lot of energy, but only over a very, very brief period of time, which is why they are very challenging to detect. And what about variation in intensity? Is there quite a lot? Yeah, so we've only found 60 or so. So I think we're still in sort of the small numbers, statistics, regime. But indeed, there is quite a lot of variation in their intensity, a factor of 100 or so. So like two orders of magnitude difference between weakest and strongest, so far? Yeah, that's right. And even with 12-11 or 2 here, each of these plot points indicates the intensity of the signal. So there are some very, very powerful bursts that occurred during the early part of this particular observation, and some much weaker ones that occurred later. And I think, as you said, a few orders of magnitude, two orders of magnitude is a good kind of number to keep in mind. Interesting. All right. And then somebody from the space-time creative labs wants to know, can we detect the speed of an FRB? What can that measurement tell us? I don't know what they mean by speed. I mean, I'm assuming this is a phenomenon that travels at the speed of light. That's what we're seeing, but maybe there's some other. Yeah. So no, we can't. But with repeating sources of pulses like pulsars, we can, in fact, measure the orbital speed of pulsars very, very accurately. If they're in a binary system, or if they're in orbit around to some other object. And these systems can be very, very extreme. The orbital periods can be very, very short, and the objects can be moving very, very quickly. So far, we haven't been able to determine any periodicity in the emission that we see from repeating FRBs, which is a topic of quite intense research. If we were able to determine a periodicity, and we could see some change in that period, because of the Doppler effect, then we could measure the speed of the source. But so far, we haven't been able to determine this. So far not. All right. Now, somebody asked a similar question, which was, what is the average travel time for radio burst that we're receiving now? And that's Brian is asking us that. So thank you, Brian. I think really that would translate back to, you know, what is the range of distances over which these objects are traveling? And the sort of closest observed and the most distant observed FRB. Yeah, that's tricky. So the one FRB for which we know a fairly precise distance is 12.1.02, the first repeating FRB. And we know that that one is about 3 billion light years away. For the other FRBs, it's a little bit tricky, because we see a certain amount of dispersion in the pulses that we detect. And we have an estimate for how much of that dispersion comes from the Milky Way galaxy. And then we have to sort of guess what the density of the material is in intergalactic space and in the host galaxy of the source to sort of estimate a distance. And that is a difficult estimate to do. But I would say that about a billion years or a billion light years in distance is a good characteristic number to keep in mind for the FRBs that we found thus far. Interesting. Fantastic. Okay, so if there aren't any more questions for the moment at least, let's give a shout out to all the different places where people are watching from today. And you'll probably be amazed at how far and wide the audience is. And I'm always especially impressed by people who should be sleeping right now, but are awake waiting to hear from you. So we've got people watching from Florida, from Paris, Tennessee, from Christian sand, the Norway, from Seattle, from Bergen in Norway. You know, it's a rainy, that has a reputation for rainy, rainy drugs. I've heard that. I've heard that. And I've been there once. I was actually lucky. We had nice weather in Bergen. But I remember a great joke that somebody told about the tourist who's in Bergen on a rainy day. And the tourist goes up to a young man and says, excuse me, young man. But it doesn't always rain in Bergen. And the response was, I'm sorry, I don't know. I'm only 27. Anyway, that's Bergen. Beautiful, beautiful place. Kernau in the UK, London in the UK, Bolzano in Italy. Let's see, Forty in Australia, Roy in Washington, Rome, Italy, Auckland, New Zealand, Venezuela, Silwis Springs, Florida, Cosmere, Poland and Chile. We have Sweden, Greece. We have Caratiba in Brazil. We have Libya, Maine, Morocco, Northern California, North Carolina, Ireland, Orlando, Florida, Staines in the UK. I know Staines, Sydney, Australia, San Jose, California, right down the street from us. St. Louis, Missouri, Quebec, some Paulo in Brazil, Scotland, Toronto and Canada, Charleston, South Carolina, Washington, DC, Buffalo, New York. So all over the place, as usual, which is wonderful. It's great to have people from all over the world that just, again, as I love to observe, it points out how curiosity and the fascination for science and for space science in particular is something that unites all of us from all over the world. So a quick question for you. This is the quiz. I told you there was going to be a quiz. The first person who sends us their name and the reference number of that first repeating radio, FRB, that we've talked about, that Andrew has talked about, gets a prize. We'll send you a setty patch in the mail. You'll have to give us an email, send us an email with your mailing address. But the first one that Rebecca sees who says the right answer tells you your name, the Javier Chauda, and we'll send you a patch. So in any case, this has been wonderful. A final question that I'll ask you. What do you think, what speculations do you have if any about what is behind this phenomenon? Must be something you think about. It is. So I think that there are probably more than one phenomenon at work here. And we saw this with Gamma Ray-Burst. I think we'll also see it with fast radio-bursts. There are different astrophysical environments that can produce these bursts. Perhaps there are two classes, perhaps three or even four classes. Perhaps the repeaters are different than the ones that only occur once. I think we know from astrophysics that neutron stars are very effective at producing fast bursts of radiation. We don't quite know how the energetics can work in the case of FRBs, which is one of the things that we struggle with. But I would venture that with at least a few of the FRBs neutron stars or some other kind of degenerate object, like a neutron star, perhaps a cork star, our Ard lab. Yeah. Interesting. Way too logical and reasonable. But your problem is. And maybe. Just maybe. Some of them, or perhaps in looking for more of them, we will uncover something truly, truly extraordinary. Now I imagine when they were first discovered, there must have been some of those in the community speculating that these were non-natural in an origin. Yeah. And some of the most prominent astrophysical theorists in the world have and continue to include this possibility in the list of explanations for what are causing FRBs. And it absolutely remains the case. And instead was some example of radio frequency noise or interference. And it took some time to convince the astronomy community that this was really a bonafide astrophysical population. So a last question from my side before we sign off here is, you know, you did mention somewhere in your discussion that we know these phenomena are occurring, what there are several, there are a few thousand different first-guide. And so this is basically a statistical extrapolation from what we've observed for FRBs. Interesting. And I guess another thing that you talked about previously is that these are more difficult to observe on the plane of the Galactic plane rather of our galaxy because of just the density that you're looking for. Have any of you been observed in that direction? So I think I'd have to look this up, but I think a couple have been found at a Galactic latitude, which is the angle above the Galactic plane of about ten, didn't like that. But indeed, because there's an extraordinary amount of cold plasma that causes dispersion and scattering and other things within our galaxy, it is very hard to look through the exact plane of our galaxy and find things that are very distant. So it's in fact easier to look when you're looking mostly out of the plane. Yeah. Interesting. All right. So just a couple of things before we go. First of all, Rebecca, do we have a winner? We do, yes. We do. All right. I will be emailing us so that we can get the proper information. All right. You have just a name and location. I know the name, Cila. Who wants to question? Cila. Okay. Congratulations. Congratulations, Cila. Fast fingers to come back with 12-11-02. And we'll be, you know, hopefully hear from you with your mailing information so we can send you a very cool city patch. Now, speaking of cool, you know, we tend to think here, I think, for good reason, that the work of the City Institute of the Scientists here and our colleagues at other places like NASA, radio astronomers all over the world, Berkeley, etc., we do some of the coolest things that there are in science. In fact, some of the coolest stuff, I think, period. And one of the ways we prove that is by wearing cool socks. So Andrew and I are going to show you our cool socks. And we want lots of some hearts and thumbs up for that. So here we go. Here's one cool sock. Now, you'll have to see if you can observe what's going on in this sock. I don't know if they, if you can make that out, it's a little, a little bit weird. But that is a, it's not a real photograph. Actually, it's just a knitted sock, but it depicts cows being beamed up into a spacecraft by aliens. And I want to assure you all that just because I'm wearing those socks, I don't actually believe that has ever happened. I hate to disappoint some of you. But anyway, it does make for fun socks. Andrew, you don't have to disappoint. It's spatial, but you have, it's rare. It's very cool and colorful. It's rare that I get out done in the cool, cool sock department, but today I have them. Yeah, but I, I simply have pineapples. But they're cool pineapples and, you know, bright colors. So anyway, if you got a cool sock that you want to send us a picture of, go ahead and we'll shout about that next week. Anyway, thank you so much, Andrew, for sharing this story with us today. Really fascinating. Stay tuned because there's undoubtedly more of this story to follow. And as we get going with the project on the other, Alan Telescopa, right? I think we'll get Andrew and the team back here for some updates and, and how that project is going. It's, it's really quite impressive and interesting. Next week, I won't be here because next week we're going to be talking about women in science and who better to talk about women in science than women in science. So next year we'll have people from our research organization and education. It is next week, right? Next week. Next, which day? Monday. Monday. Okay, so, so actually on Monday of next week, we'll be the next Facebook live from the City Institute. We'll be talking about women in science. We have, you know, a great cast of characters doing science here at the Institute. The head of research is woman. The head of education is a woman. We have a large number of women scientists who are based here and also in our lab facilities at NASA AIN. So a great opportunity to celebrate women in science. We'll want lots of parts and thumbs up for that episode as well. So they will all see you next week. I'll be joining you in watching on my own little Facebook phone. So that should be a lot of fun. Don't forget and please join us then and in the meantime, thanks for joining us today and we'll see you next week from the City Institute Mountain View, California. Thanks again for joining. Thanks again, Andrew. Take care, everybody.
