Welcome everybody to another set a live. My name is Beth Johnson. This week is Black in Astro Week and the astronomy community is celebrating and amplifying the Black experience in space related fields such as astrophysics, planetary science, cosmology, aeronautics and so much more. So as a part of the celebration of which we are sponsors, we would like to welcome today, Black and Astro founder Ashley Walker, an event co-organizer Dakota Tyler. Ashley is an incoming atmospheric science PhD student at Howard University studying astrochemical phenomena in planetary atmospheres within our solar system. And Dakota is a former football player for the University of Kentucky and current second year graduate student studying exoplanet atmospheres and demographics at UCLA. So please join me in welcoming them to our show. Thank you Ashley and Dakota for joining me. Thank you for having us. Thank you. Yeah, thanks really. So yeah, I'm so excited to have the two of you here. So just to let everybody know, once again, we want to hear where you're watching from. So please feel free to share that in the comments. I welcome everybody who's watching from YouTube, Twitch, Twitter and Facebook. Thank you all of for all of you joining us. So Ashley, let's just start this right off the box. How did Black and Astro come about? So Black and Astro came about through watching years of racial violence against black people in this country and all over the world. And we want to make sure that we focus on black people everywhere and people of the African diaspora everywhere. And we were encouraged and we were inspired and encouraged by people who start the moments of black and stem, also Vanguard stem, Black Berters week, someone and so forth, so many other black movements prior. It's a two black and astro week, which really took off and we also wanted to share a similar space for black people and people of the African diaspora within the space community. And it's a wonderful thing. I have made so many new friends just through this alone and that has been fantastic. I'm not going to say that I was one of those people who was great at seeking you out, but I was definitely much better once there was a lot more shouting of here we are. And it's like, oh, awesome. I'm going to follow everybody because there's so much more science out there to be done. And so it's so nice to show that this community can be diverse and can be welcoming. And so I hope that we give that to you today. So this week you're celebrating Black and Astro week. It's the anniversary basically of the founding of Black and Astro. So Dakota, what was the event planning for this? What did you want? What do you want to come of it? What are you hoping for? Yeah. So ever since I got back into astronomy or not back into, I guess back into academics, but into astronomy, a handful of years ago, I was just like really interested in passionate about doing it. I thought that the science was cool. I think that it's actually mind blowing to think about there being like an infinite number of planets out there that could be composed of anything, including life. Because I got more and more into astronomy, I realized like, oh my God, I'm like the only black person I know that does this. And there wasn't like a lot of this strong community that actually really spurred in starting Black and Astro. And it's been great to be a part of all of it. Both connecting with other people, kind of like sharing our experiences, people mentoring one another. And it's really something that I want to be a part of because as I've been like moving through my own personal kind of like career track, that's something that I've been very passionate about is like wanting to be a representative, you know, for Black people in astronomy. Because yeah, like I can't really think of anybody growing up that I wanted to be like that was in astronomy, you know. Most of my like childhood heroes were basketball players and football players, you know, various celebrities of that sort. So yeah, it's like really important that we get this spotlight on Black people, not just in astronomy, but in sciences in general. Like this is something that we're all like very well suited to not only participate in, but to thrive in and to lead them. Which actually brings me to a question I wanted to ask Ashley about next anyway. So Ashley, I know Black and Astro is not the only baby you gave birth to last year, you say. You have also founded a couple other movements about Black and STEM. What are those and who are you focusing on there? So there is the Black and Tim movement, which shout out to all my girls and the Black and Tim movement and my now binary folks in the Black and Tim movement, which Black and Tim is coming up August, this upcoming August. And also the Black and Physics movement, which I love everyone over there as well, which takes place in October. And so these move to movements, they also focus on the chemical in the chemical sciences and also the physics of Black folks in both spheres. So this is also under the umbrella of the Black and Ex movement, which is basically everybody with Black and Astro, Black and Tim, Black and Physics, Black Birders Week, Black and Immun analogy, I hope I said it correctly. It's so many different Black and Engineering, so many different movements. And so currently there, we have a Black and Ex conference, which is coming up this upcoming weekend. Yes, this is this upcoming weekend. More so to us next week. And so there's also STEM new are, which also focuses on Black women and STEM. So these are so many different movements that we all work together and try to pull each other up, going through some of the same similar hurdles and letting folks know that we exist in these spaces. And so Black and Tim actually was recently awarded. We were recently awarded for the diversity and inclusion prize for the Royal Society of Chemistry, which I was really, really excited about. That's awesome. Congratulations. Thank you. Dakota, so you talked about looking for role models and not seeing them in this particular fashion. Are you excited, scared? Is it out of your comfort zone to think that you might be a role model in this position for other young Black men and women coming into the field? Yeah, well, I certainly hope so. You know, yeah, and it's not, it's not even always that you're like looking for like that superhero to look up to, you know, but it's just that you just don't see it. You know what I mean? It doesn't even cross your mind. Like it never even crossed my mind throughout, you know, the first 20 something years of my life to do a strumming. But it's something that as soon as I kind of looked into, I was like instantly passing it about, like instantly intrigued by. So yeah, like I hope that I can be as well as, you know, everybody, yeah, all Black and Trondon is really that they're getting, you know, the spotlight's going on and through organizations like this can be something that can just like put, be put on the radar, you know, for, for young kids. Yeah, from all different types of, of marginalized groups, really. But yeah, like this is a, it's a fun thing. It's like it's fun, you know, like we have, they like, you can, you can tell, like right now, Ashley and I are having fun. Like this is a fun thing. Like we love doing this, you know, it's just not like some boring, I don't know, like traditionally, I don't want to do science, sciences and fun. That's kind of like the vibe that I always had growing up. Yeah, so I would absolutely love, you know, to influence even, even just a couple of people, even just one person, you know, to come into this field. That would be awesome. That's always the goal. If you, if you, if you, if you, it's one person, you need to drop. I, I hope I can say that somebody too, really. I can, I can name the people who influenced me and, and they were women. So, you know, I, I understand the need to see yourself in your field. And it's also very hard to be on that groundbreaking edge of it, really. They're, how, I mean, how big do you, would you say right now that your community is, Ashley? Ah, so we're growing. We're growing. And so speaking of like community, we know that there, you know, there's some of us out there. And so currently, we're trying to grow more black men and women in physics and astronomy. We know that the numbers here in the US are extremely low. And so we want to make sure that like we provide support, whether it's through black and physics, black and astro, wherever we can provide support it. And so we want to continue to grow the field. And so we also have like on our website, like a meet our community. And so we currently have some people in there, but if you're black and astro, we would love to have you like on there and show your beautiful faces. And just to let you know that you exist. Well, that's fantastic. I just want to speak of community. I want to take a moment to give some shout outs for our community. Welcome to people who are watching from Kentucky and California. Denmark, Brazil and Toronto, Canada. We definitely got a bit of an international crowd going. Thank you so much. Is there anything you want to say about this on an international level? I know sometimes we get a little hyper focused on what amounts to race relations here in the United States. But you talk about it as a global movement. So what are you looking for globally? Globally, we're looking to expand. And so I want to give a huge shout out to Dr. Tana Joseph, who is a South African astronomer. And she has been awesome in helping us like expand globally. And she's been really, really, her and one of our other co-organizers, two of our other co-organizers, David and Kathleen, who are also African astronomers. And they've all been really, really empowering us and telling us like, okay, this is how we see us running through our eyes. And this is what we want to focus on. And let's give you a little background story. And so this has been really, really helpful because we want to also show to our neighbors across the pond that they don't have to feel like they're alone in those spaces as well. And so this is a fantastic, Dakota, what sort of events have you planned for this week? What's coming up still? How has everything gone so far? It's Thursday, so we're more than halfway through. What's it been like? Share some of the experiences you've had so far? Yeah, so we've been meeting, we planned basically like a different kind of topic for each day throughout the week. Yeah, it's already Thursday. Thursday is black hole. So we're talking about black holes, gravitational waves, areas that personally, I'm not much of an expert in, but we've got some very, very fine experts that are running the day for us today. Tomorrow we have all the stars coming up and we're going to talk a little bit about kind of like the process of star formation, star life. And the death of the star and ways that we can kind of relate that to our own trajectories and in our own careers, which I think is pretty cool. Yeah, and we had a talent show on Sunday to start everything off. That was a lot of fun. We had some great singers. We had some nice poetry being read. Yeah, poetry tonight too. We have a poetry tonight as well. It's astronomy themed poetry I take it absolutely. I have a friend who did some slam astronomy poetry once at a double A.S. meeting and I think it was the highlight of the talent show was what she wrote. It was so I make sure that that. Some of the link for that absolutely absolutely. If you could go to me here in our zoom chat, I will make sure that that goes out on to for everybody else to have so that they can they can join tonight and hear some of this fantastic work. So I'm sure it's going to be amazing. Absolutely because that was yeah, perhaps like our trivia night too on Saturday. Oh, that's I love trivia. I'm kind of not allowed to do astronomy trivia anymore. It's not astronomy trivia, luckily. Oh, okay, so it's just general trivia just. Generally general general general. All right, well that sounds like fun. So I want to step away from from the theme of the week for a moment and Ashley want to talk to you about your research. What can you tell us about your doctoral research that you're working on or we'll be working on soon. So right now we're still in the works because I obviously am just now transitioning and so we're currently going to going to be continuing planetary atmospheres working on cloud, hazes, aerosol and a logs, which were really excited about. I'm really, really excited to be at HBCU. I came from a predominantly black institution and so now going over to an HBCU. We're definitely going to be talking a little bit more about cloud micro physics and we're going to be looking into the processes and the physical and chemical processes of cloud micro physics on other planetary atmospheres. That that sounds are you looking okay. This is kind of like the cursed question. Are you looking forward to JWST launching? Oh absolutely. Fingers crossed. Yeah. Fingers crossed. Everyone said that I asked Caprice. So I asked our other Ali Quo Organizer Caprice. How does she feel about this? Because she's like that's what she does and I was just like, so how do you feel about this? And she's always like. I know every time we hear about it being moved back, everybody just kind of shutters a little bit more and a little bit more. And I actually got asked yesterday. What would happen if we lost JWST and I think I just kind of went. I don't let's not discuss that. I don't even want to think about it. That's just like horrifying to me because we've just invested so much time and money and Dakota, I think your research would be would benefit from JWST as well, right? Yeah, yeah. So I do, I do exoplanets. Right now I'm doing some transmission transmission spectroscopy on a hot Jupiter to study how the rate at which it's kind of losing its atmosphere because it's a bit too close to to a to a star. And I'm also really interested in exoplanet demographics. So I think that JWST will be, there'll definitely be a lot of interesting transmission spectroscopy that's done with it. You know, assuming that every exoplanet is not like covered in these hazes and clouds that actually is actually studying. But yeah, there's going to be some interesting. I don't really have any, any plans in my research group to work directly with JWST observations. We have some different instruments that we work on mostly, but undoubtedly it's going to like, you know, revolutionize the field and push the knowledge boundary far beyond where it is now. Well, that just that I, I'm looking forward to it for both your sakes as well as mine. I just want to welcome some more viewers. We have some more coming from the United Kingdom and Australia. So again, very, very global. Global view going on. This is fantastic. So on kind of on that note Dakota, the Caltech recently, and this is something that kind of wanted to pick your brain at Caltech recently came out with a demographic report on exoplanets. And I, one of the things that we keep bringing up is this radius gap and this mass gap, right. So we have that that missing bit in between sort of our super earth and our, you know, many net tunes. So do you have any like hypothesis on that like why that's happening or what we might find out what are what are you, what do you think you're going to discover or not. Yeah, so I guess like the just to elaborate a bit on what I think you're asking this radius gap where we, you know, we look out, we see tons of planets and it turns out that the two most populous planets that we see are these super earth and these sub Neptune planets, which ironically we don't have in our own system, which is like interesting in itself, like why is that. But if you're a star and you have a planet, you're most likely to have one of those two, but there's like this distinct gap between them where you either have the super the sub Neptune, there's like not really anything in between. And I think the two leading kind of theories for for why this is is that a either. The atmospheres are getting evaporated away so they're losing it through photo evaporation the star is just blasting it with energy and then some atmosphere gets excited and escapes and the other is like a core powered mass loss. So you know, as as time goes on the planet cools. You think about earth, we have like magma inside of the planet right from volcanoes and this is like leftover from the formation right and over time, you know earth cools in that way and as it cools some of that energy is dissipated so there's really like these two competing and likely you know they both play in effect for certain planets, but. Yeah, I think that those are a bit you know, those are the two ways that we believe that this radius gap is kind of carved out. Okay, Ashley, what what's like exciting for you in your research, what are you looking forward to. I'm definitely looking forward to hearing about more planetary missions because that's what almost inter interested in so i'm very much interested in how like Venus is having a whole party over there they are having a party okay I want to go to the Venus party okay. I want to go also Titan strike and fly which I am an entitian enthusiast if don't you know if done by no I am a Titan enthusiast I love Titan okay. Okay, thanks to farm thanks to far you think it too far you have fighting too much. No no no no no okay you know what between my could be Jordan and Titan you know they up there they up there so also I love I want to hear more about your real quicker. These are you know these are things these are missions that i'm really most passionate about that I want to hear more about which I can see myself in the future potentially working on these two. Yeah, that would that would be I you know I left graduate school for several reasons, but. I do remember that my my thought was definitely of what what's going to be happening in 10 years down the road that I could get to work on and at the time I definitely was very much a I would like to work on Europa Clipper. So I feel you on that and I am definitely starting to get more into Venus and Titan like the more we learn the more fascinating they are and the more exciting they have become. i'm going to welcome some more people wow Missouri Massachusetts Poland Florida Germany Nevada so we're we're now running the gamut of the United States and and clearing up some more of your about there so wow thank you everybody for tuning in. At this point if you have any questions for Ashley and Dakota either on their research or on black and astro and I do ask you please be respectful. We would love to share those questions and ask them so please put those in chat and our moderators will pass them on to me and I will I will get them out there so. Ashley. A question I like to ask of people kind of like young in the field looking forward to what they're doing. What advice would you give to someone entering grad school right now or not grad school but undergrad right now going into either astronomy specifically or. I would definitely highly suggest to find your passion that something that I did it took me a while to do so it took me a while so i'm an entrepreneur I'm an entrepreneurial student so I went from forensics. Well I want to think and I was going to be on say choreographer for instance so I went for that to that to the but you know becoming an astro Kevin's which I had no idea that was even a thing so like I highly suggest you find your passion and explore as much as you can. And because it's not every day that most folks get to do something that they love and so if this is something that you're really and truly passionate about I highly suggest that you go for it. Dakota same question to you. Yeah so I really have to echo what Ashley just said about finding your passion it's it's a hard thing to do in the path can be like long and kind of cumbersome. But when you're doing something that you really love you know where you get excited you wake up you get excited to do extra work on it that's when you know you're not going to be. The hardships that kind of come with it the negatives they're they can be worth it at times you know it can if you just love what you're doing you know I like I love this so much so I'll do like whatever it takes you know to keep to keep moving on in this path. And it's because i'm passionate about it i'm also an entrepreneur student obviously I played football and then I you know went back to school so it took me a long time to get into this too and it took me a long time to like figure out how to do academics. And i'm still figuring that out you know there's there's you never learn everything right you're you're always learning more and more. But yeah you find find the passion and then just like keep dumping wood onto that flowing you know get a bigger and bigger and people respond positively to that like people will respect that and the people who also share that passion. That are maybe like a little bit ahead of you you'll notice that they you know we'll try to like pull you up and feed that passion as well or you know help you navigate a tricky field or you know whatever the case may be but yeah I would I would encourage everybody to make whatever that they're doing if this is something you're passionate about go all in for it absolutely. Yeah I as a fellow non traditional student i completely agree I I definitely respect anybody who I I respect anybody who goes to college straight out of high school knows exactly what they want and goes through and gets it but in my experience and it sounds like for you and Ashley as well it's more of a. Wander around for a while pocket things that you think you're expected to do until something finally lights that fire and then you know follow it grab it with both hands and keep running. It looks like Ashley might have actually lost her connection so decode i'm going to focus on you for for these questions that we're getting. How did you pick your grad school how did you end up at UCLA. That's a great question so for me I knew that I was interested in exoplanets so I kind of looked at you know a series of of schools that I thought I had at least a couple people who were doing research that I was interested in. I also talked to many other grad students some young some older some who had just finished their PhDs at various institutions that I was interested in to get their opinion on the university the department any particular advisors that I was thinking about working with. I think you'll find that grad students will give you you know a pretty straightforward answers right they're not. Trying to trick you to recruit you to the team or anything like that they'll be they'll be honest with you and you know because I think that they they understand like they also want to they there's probably things that they wish that they had been told you know before they made. Their choice on grad school so yeah talk to as many people as possible do research getting contact with the advisors that you're interested in working with and see if like you know you can spark some sort of connection there something or you know get some communication going. And then also a big one for me saw me in LA I'm in so Cal I've never lived in a place with whether this this good but that was like a huge bonus as well sometimes when I get them for work with work at the end of the day I go down to the. And that's like not something that you can i'm from the Midwest so that's like not that's not a possibility right there's no mistake without here because it's dry it's yeah because but you know a grad school is a long commitment right this is like five six years so. You know all your life is not just the work like you're you know you're going to be living there for a considerable amount of time and you know you want to put yourself in a position where you'll be happy and successful right because you do your best work when you're comfort when you're comfortable when you're relaxed you know when you're in a good environment a good community yeah so try to. Talk to as many people as you can and take like a holistic look at you know the entire experience that you get at that place. The I have another audience question are you more observational or more theory computational. Definitely more observational and i actually apologize if i said anything delirious or delusional today i've been up all week i've observed every night this week so i've been up all night for the past handful of nights observing but it's like really fun like i you know i love doing it it's a it's a great experience so i'm definitely observational. yeah i'm 100% actually observation without a doubt no no theory. So so you've been you've not only been working on on this whole celebration this week but you've been observing every night you are exhausted. i'm pretty tired but i mean like this just goes back to what i was saying about the passion thing like i'm like pretty tired but this it's like it's great you know we're doing this this outreach this fun event for black and astro i'm observing stars at my you know. Study and planets like this is like this is what I want my life to be about you know so. Talking to city right now. I mean i mean i yeah i'm. You're going to be a. And it's it's it's weird for me. Like you know here i am i'm the social media coordinator that's that's my somewhat official title but for me it's you know yeah i have a degree in in physics with a you know a focus in astronomy i. I took did grad school in geology and you know for me sometimes I feel like I have to clarify that I have the scientific standing to do what I do. But I just love what I do so much and I love that I get to talk to people like you. And and find out about your research and your passion and and watch you share it with other people so it's a huge honor for me to be able to do that too so I just want you to know like. It goes both ways in this conversation. yeah so actually actually just texted me I think she's she's restarting her computer and coming back it looks like it crashed. Oh okay well well well i'll ask you a couple more questions and hopefully come back and then i'll ask them of her to. Who another audience question for you who inspires you who were you inspired by. Mm hmm where who inspires you now great another great question. um so my dad actually I remember talking to him around the time when I stopped playing football I had a meat injury so I couldn't. Couldn't really train anymore like that that path was was basically done for me and I was. Trying to think about like what to do next you know and should I just you know get a job and find some like financial stability should I go back to school for like the next decade that seemed like far fetched in like I have my work cut out for me. But my dad really encouraged me to. Basically do the things that i'm talking about now like find the passion and go with that you know like there's it's hard to replicate that that feeling right because you feel it's you feel like you're doing your purpose like you're doing what you're supposed to be doing so I would say that my dad inspired me he's always inspired me to kind of. Um do the be my own person you know and make my own choices because I can tell you like the vast majority of people that I knew when I started to do this they're like what you're doing what you're going back to school for 10 years to do what like what's what do you do like what's wrong with you know. And um that certainly isn't the response that I get anymore but in the beginning. That is probably like a lot of that kind of attitude that I had so I would say that my dad really inspires me as well as I you know through this black and astro group and a lot of the work that asked some of the other court co organizers have done to get some black astronomers verified. And black people in aerospace is they've amplified those stories and you kind of like hear these you know unsung heroes stories of people that. Have like these remarkable past and make amazing discoveries that we don't really hear about you know they're not like well known and i'm always inspired by them always inspired by like. The people who like grind and dig it out and stick to it and persevere and they kind of like weather all of the storm and they you know stick stick to doing what they love and i'm with their passion about. That's that's i like that thank you thank you for sharing that. Is there one more audience question is there any do you have any knowledge of any new technology that's being developed that you're excited to use to to help in your observations anything interesting. Yes so there's this new precision radio velocity instrument being developed right now called the Keck planet finder kpf. um and it will be going online in 2022 but it's going to be a high resolution instrument that we're going to be able to get really really good RVs for stars so we'll be able to detect. smaller planets like smaller rocky planets. that are maybe a little bit further out from the star so we're like approaching the earth like range if you will like earth earth both in size and in distance and i'm really excited about that so i'm actually working on the data reduction pipeline team so like the software the both hardware and software being developed. Currently and i'm i have a role on the. data reduction pipeline team so this is an instrument that i'm like extremely excited. To go online and to be able to to do some early science with. Yeah absolutely like this is this is one of the biggest excitements of my research right now being being a part of the steam. That's yeah i that's that sounds like a lot of fun and that sounds really exciting for you i. We're going to have to have you back when when you have some some results and stuff to talk about so we'll have to have you back on to talk about that. Yeah that's that would be fantastic so is do we have any word from Ashley is she she working her way in. Yes she said she restarted and she's coming back i haven't heard anything in a couple minutes so maybe it's taking a minute to reboot. Oh computers computers people. Uh let's see. Um i don't see anymore i don't have any more questions right now um. Just kind of waiting on Ashley here so so Dakota um what. Does a a typical observing run look like for you. Um so you get on a couple hours early to do the setup and calibration make sure everything's looking right the um detectors and everything are reading out properly. Um then you have like a small break before uh the sun begins to set wherever the telescope is in this case we're using keck so it's in Hawaii. Um and you there's a script that's generated that basically has a list of targets. Um kind of ranked in order to like minimize sleutime take advantage of when is the best time you know to hit the various targets because the night sky changes right as time goes and then there's also like some priority indicators where um we have like top priority lower priority and then we have a lot of time to do the same. And then if it gets cloudy or something like that you kind of have to like do this extreme audible where you're like going through and this actually happened on on Monday. Um it was like super cloudy we weren't able to get a lot of the stars that we wanted to but you don't want to waste the time because I believe that telescope time on keck is like a dollar a second or something like that. So you never want to just be sitting there so there's also like some targets that are kind of low priority that are pretty bright. Um that you can go to you know if seeing conditions aren't that optimal and uh it's kind of fun though because you're like you're like Wayne and kind of like gambling like oh could we get this one well it's it's priority one we might be able to get it might be usable but you don't want to waste like 10 minutes and then you didn't get enough photon counts. Uh it's like a fun fun kind of chaos. Um and Ashley said she's coming back now. Okay okay so uh do you all right one of my one of my colleagues has has asked a question a couple of questions here so I'm going to pass these on to you while we wait for Ashley. Um do you think that life exists beyond earth? 100% I would bet yeah like if I was a gambling man I would bet I would bet the bank on it whether or not we'll be able to like find it or confirm it through detection or whatever. Um I don't know about that but without a doubt that like just statistically it has to almost like the fact that we're having this conversation right now means that like statistically there should be life somewhere else. At least the at least in my mind maybe that's like some sort of fallacy or whatever I'm not a philosopher I'm going to start. Welcome back Ashley thank you my computer was just like you know what I can't take this no more I'm oh crash. I know. As Ashley has has livestreamed far too much this week. So so Ashley I'm going to catch you up on some of the questions that Dakota graciously answered while we were waiting for you to come back. Um these are from the audience so this is really cool that they've been asking these so how did you pick your grad school. So I actually this was my second time applying so I applied the first time um the first time did not go so well um I was very devastated. So what I have two amazing mentors huge shout out to fellow co-organizer um an assistant professor at UC Santa Cruz Dr. Nia Amara and also um NASA Goddard's uh space flight center plan for geologist Dr. Lene Quick. So when I was very disappointed about like not getting in the first time they were like okay well let's regroup right we're going to think about some different strategies. And so this time they told me because initially our own class like five or six schools in addition to something that's called the bridge program so it's your students that may not feel like they're completely ready. Right. But they have the passion and the drive um to uh continue on um and it's typically for underrepresented minorities. So um moving forward I applied to those and so it didn't work out the first time but then this time it's okay let's regroup and so I interned at NASA during that time so I was at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center um where I worked in the spice laboratory which focuses on um stratospheric ice chemistry on um side of the Titan which is adding addition to my Titan enthusiasm. And so um listen Dakota I think you're hating over there okay so then you have a problem. So then I reapplied um to several different grad schools um I applied to at least. At least I want to say 13 or 14 this round and then I applied to the bridge network which has a plethora of like oh my god it's like 80 something plus schools and that's no exaggeration you can look on the website the hygiene um website they have several different schools for different bridge sites so um and it's it's just one application in your um uh it goes everywhere your application goes to all these different schools. And I really like to see that I'm not going to be able to see the school and every day and so um when it came down to um cruising at school I looked at like the community I looked at the um the area they're living area to see if I like it there um and I have to take in consideration that I'm a quote unquote girl from the city is city girl so like I love smart like some of it and I have to look at me along Dakota. A Chicago in the Inglewood neighborhood so like me being there I'm like all right I live in the hood I need to figure out like a former live so that was also something too um that's a consideration and I also um looked at um the advisors in the department and whether or not it's it made sense to me whether you know it'll feel like a right fit. And so um I chose Howard because I felt like that would be closer to home for me being in Chicago and I just love love love the DMV area um from a previous experience of Johns Hopkins and so um and I also like seafood so um yeah the seafood that sold me. There we go there you go uh so who um who inspires you for for being in what you're doing who inspired you to get this far who continues to inspire you now. Oh my gosh so um my mom my uncle who bought me a telescope when I was five and he oh my god he brands on it too like I did that I did that sir sir. Like every I don't care what we doing he'll drink his beer and I'm like oh god here we go he goes humbub set like I did that I'm the one that did that and we're like okay Uncle Kazoo we know um which I'll be talking about him on uh talking about him tomorrow for all the stars um also dockynyah maura dockylyne quit dockylyne and walk away um who all have contributed to my um but my push my drive uh doctor Elsa Cleese and doctor especially doctor Karen over when I first saw a tennis doing astronomy that was hard doctor Karen over and so um I'm I'm very so much graciously happy to be in this array of women um and there's so many more such as um miss uh when they're Williams who's a physicist who's a biophysicist at Harvard and miss Yana Jones who is a biogeo tennis and astro-kennis at emery and plastic that is I'm I'm so glad you have so many people that you can give shout outs to like that that says you and it's a long list I'm like I gotta it is if I don't add Caprici probably going to yell at me tonight so Caprici's watching so she is watching I know I I did glance over and see that she's she's in our YouTube chat so so hi Caprici's um so my colleague is wants to ask you Ashley if you are excited about dragonfly and I think she's just trying to open a can of worms and start stuff with the code but let's do it are you excited about dragonfly absolutely absolutely let me tell you a short story which I tell everybody everywhere I go because I want people to know that I was right haha when in doubt listen to Ashley I was really so enthused about it I was telling the group that I was in at the time I was just like it's gonna get picked and it was just like over crossing our fingers we're hoping me who want to go to a comic who want to go to a comic we're gonna go to another place that look like herb who want to go so I was so and I'm animated anyway so I was just so dramatic about it I'm like I'm telling y'all I'm telling y'all this was going to happen and I was right well there you go I was very much right I don't you know I kind of shouldn't I kind of shouldn't have been bedding people because that's what I did but you know what are the odds huh what were the odds of it not getting picked here I mean I mean I mean people send in comments to like they were sending like you know you know they were sending stuff to comets and so like I mean a comment and like I was really cool too yeah that was a cool video though when they landed they landed that yeah yeah yeah I think it's really I think it's just you know I really think that it's really really cool like I'm obsessed with it and one of my friends I'm not gonna say her name because she's not ready yet but one of my friends is to work on it and I'm like really like happy for her so I'm just like I talked to her like the other day and I was just like how is it she's like I love it I'm just like I'm by fallacy living through you so um we have definitely exceeded our half an hour and I'm glad that you are back Ashley one kind of last question before we go how can people connect with your community how how do they reach out to you what kind of platforms are you using how do they how do they how do they contact you and connect you yeah they can connect with us over at black and ashtrow at blackandashtrow.com they can connect with me on twitter at that underscore ashtrow underscore chip without the k because twitter didn't let me get it so um and also the same handle at instagram yeah my my twitter handle is dt star kid um you could definitely connect with me uh on there or or instagram with the same name dt star kid and like absolutely feel if you like reach out um I have absolutely no problem with that talking to maybe like perspective perspective grad students or undergraduates who are interested who are needing like a little advice on how to you know get to the next step wherever it is wherever it is if they they hope to get to or if they want to be involved with the group like I think that we're um definitely looking to expand and into grow absolutely yeah we're trying to expand and grow all right well we'll we'll get those links up to your various twitter accounts at the very least and again uh check out blackandashtrow.com the link is in the description of the video both here both on youtube and on facebook so um go take a look at what's going on I know there's a flyer there for the remaining events that are left in this week and and definitely let's all go check out that poetry reading tonight and trivia this weekend that sounds like a lot of fun so thank you both for being here thank you so much for taking the time to come and talk to me and I hope it was as pleasant for the two of you as it was for me I really enjoyed this thank you so much for having us yeah yeah thanks for having us all right and we'll definitely get to have you back on a future setty-life talk about science that you've been doing and and what you're where your research goes so and if you have you know all of your you know network they've got something coming out you let me know and we will get them on setty-life there too okay absolutely absolutely all right thank you guys for being here thank you everybody for watching uh just as a brief reminder both black and astro and and study institute are volunteer run and and nonprofits and so well we have employees but we're also very much a nonprofit so if you feel the need to to encourage us in our outreach efforts and keep bringing on people like Ashley and Dakota so that we can expand our community as much as possible um feel free to make a donation you can donate on Facebook you can donate on youtube bits on twitch and then you can go to our website setty.org and click the give now button and follow any of the instructions there that you would like to follow we really appreciate everybody watching we will be back again next week with more amazing science and more amazing scientists so thank you once again everybody for watching
