 You're listening to an Air Wave Media Podcast. This episode is brought to you by Walmart. New beauty is in bloom at Walmart and it's all about springtime radiance. From dry bar, tool of skincare and hundreds more available online, Walmart has the premium brands you want and this season's on trend products for flawless, glossy hair and hydrated skin. Big name beauty brands? Check! The things you love? Check! Spring beauty and all you need to look and feel gorgeous at Walmart on app and online. It might help to think of viral onslaughts such as the Delta and Omicron coronavirus variants as attacks of the mutants because that's what they are. All the legends created by genetic mutations. Now, we've been pretty good at fending them off but aside from getting more people vaccinated and boosted, can we do better? Can we use what we know about mutations to create a more elegant and useful defense against coronavirus or even seasonal flu? That is a single vaccine to fend off all variants. So, I'm not throwing away that shot. This is Big Picture Science produced at the SETI Institute and I'm Seth Chastig. I'm Molly Bentley in this episode how genetic mutations keep viruses circulating in intriguing theories about where the fast moving Omicron variant came from, hint, a rodent may be involved and surprising progress on the development of universal vaccines for coronavirus and flu. This episode is Attack of the Mutants. In the movies, genetic mutations are mostly a bad thing. They produce grotesque monsters or mutants with fearsome physical aberrations like half man, half fly. Indeed genetic mutations are mistakes. They're errors in the sequence of amino acids that are produced when DNA or RNA replicate. And these copying errors are like a throw of a dice. They could produce mutations that are harmful but they also might give an organism a lucky break creating mutations beneficial to survival. Now we see the consequences of billions of years of beneficial genetic mutations everywhere in creatures that have evolved to have wings or scales or venom or eyes. Well, the list goes on. Without genetic mutations creating new forms, we'd still be slimed, oozing over a deep sea rock. Which would make it hard to watch the X-Men movies. They provide a twist on the mutation theme. It's beneficial mutations that provide the unique powers of these heroes. Mutation. It is the key to our evolution. It has enabled us to evolve from a single-celled organism into the dominant species on the planet. This process is slow, normally taking thousands and thousands of years. But every few hundred millennia evolution leaps forward. If only mutated viruses brought about peace and justice. Alas, the mutations, known as variants, popping up in SARS-CoV-2 are upending lives. For example, the Delta variant spreads more than twice as quickly as the original strain. A new variant grabbed our attention when over 10 days in November 2021, the number of COVID cases in South Africa jumped from 400 a day to more than 2000. Genetic sequencing revealed that many of the cases were caused by a variant known as B-11529. We now know it by its Greek name Omicron. And it is spreading faster than any variant seen so far. Omicron won't be the last variant we'll see or have to defend against. We're facing off against a mutating viral villain. So we need to think like one. So the question we're asking in this episode is, what sorts of mutations give this virus and advantage over our immune system's defenses? Seth, when I think about how it is that genetic errors crop up when DNA or RNA replicates, I know I picture those medieval monks whose job it was to copy manuscripts by hand. Yeah, well, it doesn't sound like the kind of job I'd like to have sitting around with only a candle for illumination. And it was inevitable that they would introduce errors. These might be spelling mistakes or perhaps they would skip over a word or two. You could understand how that would happen. Yeah, undoubtedly they made errors because they're copying long manuscripts. I mean, imagine sitting down, your job for the next 10 months, whatever it is, is to make one copy of this here Bible. And of course, it's going to make mistakes. One thing that they didn't have that really would have helped was some way to correct errors because they didn't have, you know, white out and they couldn't just hit the backspace and try it again. Now, fortunately, we do have a kind of eraser in our DNA. We have enzymes that proofread our DNA when it's copied and they're really good at it. So when you get a scratch or something and you need to make a new cell and your DNA is replicating, these enzymes correct most mistakes so that there are hardly any mistakes at all. And occasionally mistakes do happen. So the system isn't perfect, but it is very good. The system is different in an RNA virus like SARS-CoV-2. It stores genetic information in a strand of RNA instead of DNA, but it still has to copy that RNA. And like those all-to-human monks, it's prone to making errors. Turns out that coronavirus does actually have a little proofreading function. They have some enzymes that go back and check. It's very inefficient. So viruses make a lot of mistakes. And their enzymes that copy and replicate there are probably make at least one mistake per every time they replicate. Hi, I'm Robert Garam, Professor of Microbiology at Tulane University School of Medicine here in New Orleans. Well, clearly the viruses also have some sort of proofreading, but it's not very good. They're not paying them enough for something. Now the vast number of copying errors in a virus don't help it. Those variants are erased from evolution's history books, you could say, but you might be surprised to learn that scientists detect a new SARS-CoV-2 variant about every week. Yeah. But how many of those actually make it into the population and get a Greek letter? That's their name. Most of those variants just visit out. Scientists do keep an eye on those that stick around, though. And Seth, have you heard of the variants Epsilon or the variant Iota? I haven't heard one Iota about the variant Iota. These variants, they also include ERA and Kappa, and some others are among the variants that the WHO calls variants of interest. But you didn't hear about some of these variants of interest Seth when Iota, because they never made it to the second group of variants that make health officials sit up. Those are variants of concern. Yeah, that happens when that variant of interest starts to take off. And in fact, a lot of different people. And the ones you mentioned like Iota, those were there. And even you can put variants like beta and gamma into that category where we saw the virus is spreading in certain countries, certain places in the world, but they didn't become worldwide. And they didn't displace the variants that were already growing. You know, beta was at one time a variant of concern, but it got kicked out by alpha and subsequently by delta. So that's how you determine whether it's a variant of interest or of concern by its real world behavior. It's not by looking at the mutations of the proteins and then assigning it a category. It's just watching what it does. That's right. So today, WHO's technical advisory group on virus evolution met to discuss the variant B11529 to discuss what we understand about this variant and if it should be classified as a variant of interest or variant of concern. Based upon the information that we have, particularly from South Africa, they have advised WHO that this variant should be classified as a variant of concern. So today, we are announcing B11529 as a variant of concern named Omicron. So you know, these guys are being evaluated on one thing. How successful are they in human hosts? I mean, I think that this would have interested Charles Darwin very much, but it wouldn't surprise him in the sense that he knew that species made mistakes when they reproduced. And it was those mistakes, most of which were bad, just like for these viruses, that led to the evolution of species so that they might become a different species or they might develop better hearing or whatever it was going to do. But he didn't know about DNA. Obviously, he didn't know about DNA or RNA. He didn't know that. But we do. And not only that, we can, in fact, tell you what that blueprint is in detail. The molecular structure of that blueprint. So that gives us a tremendous advantage. We don't have to wonder. Gosh, is this virus the same as its predecessor? You just sequence it and you could tell. And the genetic sequence of Omicron has revealed that it has many more mutations in previous strains. Now, the number of mutations itself is not usually a red flag. Of course, when you see a new variant come up with that has 50 mutations all at once, that is concerning. South African scientists were the first to sequence Omicron. Robert Gary was part of the team that used that sequence to determine that Omicron has a whopping 36 mutations on its spike protein alone. For comparison, Delta has 18 mutations on its spike. So it's those spike proteins on the ends of those little stems that actually attach to your cells and then let the virus inject its genetic material into your cell and make you sick. So what Omicron did and what Delta has done really is to actually change some of the amino acids in the spike protein so that the antibodies don't bind better. It sounds like then from the perspective of the virus and not that a virus has perspective or even will, but it is trying to get around the immune system. And by mutating the spike protein, it may be able to defy those defenses. Absolutely. That's what we call an in-escape. And that was what was so concerning about Omicron to start. Up until this point, you know, immune escape hadn't been such a big deal for these variants of concern. And Delta does have a few changes that make it escape the immune system a bit, but Omicron really took that to the next level where there are probably, you know, whole clusters of mutations that it has put on its spike that basically are there just to resist our immune system. But just because you're a variant with spike protein mutations doesn't mean that you accomplish immune escape. For example, there was a variant that popped up in early 2021. It was called C12. Its spike protein had what scientists described as a constellation of mutations, which sounds alarming, except they didn't help C12 spread very far. The variant didn't even stick around long enough to get a Greek name, and it's probably extinct by now. But as a side note, it is amazing how fast scientists can sequence variants. The South African team did it in days. Dr. Gary compares that with his experience in 2014 with a team that churned out one of the first viral sequences in real time. It was during the West African Ebola outbreak. It was kind of a revolutionary at the time. Nobody expected that you would be able to get a sequence and publish it and share it with scientists. You know, at that time, it was like two months, and that seems like an incredibly long time now. Back in 2014, that was like, I'm heard of. Scientists say that where mutations land on the spike protein hold the secrets to whether the virus is more transmissible or creates more severe illness. Again, it comes down to location. So picture that spikey protein. Each spike has three areas that are key to helping the virus's efficiency. They are the receptor binding area, something called the end terminal domain, and one that scientists especially zero in on is called the foreign cleavage site. Furn is an enzyme that we carry throughout our body. I haven't heard of the foreign cleavage site. It sounds like an archaeological dig. So the foreign cleavage site is a bit on the spike protein. It's that famous protein that sticks out on the surface of the virus. It's what you make into bodies too. But that spike has to be activated. The activation process involves clipping the protein into two segments, two subunits. The furan enzyme is a protease, and that means an enzyme that cuts the protein. Because if the spike protein isn't cleaved, then it can't do the business that it sets out to do, which is to fuse the viral envelope with the host cell membrane. So the furan cleavage step is really an important step in the virus, and the more efficiently that's done, the more efficiently the virus can replicate. So if you start to see mutations in and around that furan cleavage site, you could start to say, okay, the virus may have a leg up on some of these other variants, and Omicron has three mutations in that general area. So it sounds to me like the mutation here is necessary in order to give that spike protein a better crowbar to get into my cells. It may also be the key to more severe illness. Dr. Gary thinks that the furan cleavage site is likely one of the reasons that SARS-CoV-2 can burrow into lungs and make people very sick. But even more, the mutation that introduced it into a bat coronavirus may be what kicked everything off. Some of the bat viruses that SARS-CoV-2 came from don't have a fearing cleavage site, and they're not very efficient pathogens, at least in people. They don't spread to multiple organs, and so they're not very pathogenic. And once this virus kicked up probably that one mutation, the most important one that gave it a fearing cleavage site. I mean, it was inevitable that it was eventually going to show up in a person. It was basically destined at that point to become a pandemic virus. Okay, so this obviously really, really up the capabilities of these viruses. I mean, it sounds like it was this mutation that turned a problem for bats into a problem for us. But one unanswered mystery lingers about Omicron, says Dr. Gary, how is it that all of its mutations appeared at the same time? That is a big question. I mean, seeing 50 mutations pop up all at once. We don't have really a good notion about how that could happen. It's been seen before in some people that have had either on immune-suppressive drugs or conditions that cause their immune system to not work as well. In fact, in those patients, those immune-suppressed patients, we have seen mutations accumulate more than one. Never up to 50 like with Omicron, but dozens have been seen before. This is a plausible way that Omicron could have arisen. The reason why a virus could replicate, continue to replicate in an immunocompromised individual is that there is not a robust immune system there to stop it. So it can continue testing different things out. Can a variant then arise in a single individual, a single immunocompromised individual? What about one of the theories? That's one of the theories that all these 50 mutations came in at once. There's some complicating things happening now. There are actually two variations of Omicron now. We have the B1 and the B2 that have different sets of mutations. They're overlapping, but the virus is either diverged from some common ancestor and then picked up different sets of mutations in other places in their genome. Or it's a lot more complicated than we understand. We're missing a lot of the evolutionary history of these variants. Okay, so you're saying there are two variants of Omicron. This is news to me and maybe too many of our listeners. Why isn't it another variant? Why haven't we moved down the Greek alphabet with this second variant of Omicron? Well, because they do have these overlapping mutations and some of the overlapping mutations are basically what defines the virus as Omicron. So people that make the numbers that do the nomenclature decided that these were two variants of the same variant of concern. The quite interesting, Molly, that there are two sort of flavors of the Omicron variant. In fact, and first thought as well, are the differences significant? Are they consequential? Are they just like the color of my car doesn't really affect its performance very much? But all this discussion certainly just blows me away because of the efficacy, if you will, the effectiveness, the efficiency of having some little bit of RNA called a virus change itself very quickly. Robert Gary says that one theory is that Omicron picked up its mutations in an immunocompromised individual. But he has another theory about where the variant arose. So the fact that there was such a dramatic change, so many mutations led some of us to think that the virus may have been involved in some other species. Coming up, how coronavirus variants jump between species? This episode of Big Picture Science is a tack of the mutants. This episode is brought to you by Audi. The road is calling. Embrace the thrill of the drive with the all-new fully electric Audi Q6 e-tron, featuring effortless power, serious acceleration, an advanced Audi tech. It's not just a new EV. It's a new way to experience driving. The all-new fully electric Audi Q6 e-tron is here. The next chapter of Audi starts now. The Omicron variant is on the move. Scientists describe its spread as surging. Titan transmissibility is due to a whopping 50 mutations, more than we've seen in other variants, and the presence of some of those mutations on the virus's spike protein. But here's a puzzling question. How did Omicron develop all those mutations at once? One theory, Robert Carrey said, was that they arose in an immunocompromised individual. Later in the show, we'll hear how scientists are using their knowledge of coronavirus mutations to develop a single vaccine to defeat them all. But first, the Tulane microbiologist describes a second theory about how, rather where, this cluster of Omicron mutations arose. It shows us just how adaptive this virus is. Well, the alternative theory about the evolution or one of the alternative theories about the evolution of Omicron in particular is that it evolved in another animal species. By that, we mean a non-human animal species, because, of course, humans are animals. What is this theory? Can you give us that in broad strokes? Yeah. We have these two variants of Omicron. When we look at the phylogenetic tree, the family history, if you will, of the Omicron variant, it seems like it arose a long time ago, very early in the pandemic. A year or so ago, at least, maybe longer than that. People have been doing a lot of characterization of the SARS-CoV-2 variants. It's been six million genomic sequences made of SARS-CoV-2 viruses. We know a lot about how this virus has been evolving. But there are places on the planet where there hasn't been as much sequencing. Thinking about places like Africa and places in the east. We don't know everything that's been going on with the evolution of the virus, but we know a lot. The fact that there was such a dramatic change, so many mutations, and that we don't see the intermediates in humans at least, led some of us. I think this is a plausible explanation to think that the virus may have been evolving in some other species that we're not sequencing the virus from those. We know that SARS-CoV-2 can basically jump from one species to another without any problem at all. We've seen animals in zoos, gorillas, and lions and tigers, and otters, hippos. You cats and dogs? Cats and dogs, you can go through an incredible range of species. Most of them are carnivores, but it will basically jump from species to species with no problem whatsoever. There's been a thought. I kicked this around with some of my virology colleagues. I think it's perfectly plausible that the virus, what we call spillback or you can call it reverse sonosis, went into some other species, and then the similar kind of things happen. You get into another species and it's going to start to adapt, but animals have immune systems too. They're going to start to make immune responses to the virus. You notice what goes on in those species. Maybe a chronic infection is fairly common. One of the species we've seen the virus go into our deer, white tail deer. It's been mostly the best study was done in Iowa, but we've seen deer infected in other states in the US. It turns out that those deer may have had a chronic infection because the virus was sampled from their lymph nodes and almost a hundred percent of the deer were positive at some point, a 80 percent at least. That would seem to imply that they're not just being infected for a short period of time, that the deer are actually carrying the virus for a long time, which would be an ideal situation for mutations to accumulate, like we see in Omicron. In that case, the virus is living within the deer and it doesn't seem to be making the deer sick. Is that right? I think people that have been hunting and looking at the deer don't seem to see a whole lot of respiratory illness in the animals, but I think that's going to take a more intense study. Other animals do get sick. We've seen a lion die, for example, an elderly lion and gorillas have gotten very sick, too. Even dogs and cats, it's rare, but there have been some cats and other house cats that have gotten sick and died. I remember early in the pandemic, the advice from health practitioners and officials was be careful petting other people's cats and dogs, or at least wash their hands. Afterwards, to be clear what you're describing here, it sounds a lot like the origin of the virus. It started in a bat, we think, and then it may have jumped into an intermediate host and then into humans. You're talking about a variant. A variant may have jumped into another animal in what you call a reverse zoonosis and then a new zoonosis, meaning it reinfected humans. That's a lot of jumping around. That's a lot of jumping around and you know, it hid somewhere. But you have an animal candidate. A case could be made that it was a rodent. Yeah, a lot of the mutations that are in Omicron have been seen when we try to pass the virus in rodents and laboratory mice. It turns out that there was one mutation in particular, I'll call it by a stame, in 501 Y. That mutation actually gave the virus early on the ability to replicate in rodents. It's in Delta, but that actually expands the host range of the virus. It gives it the ability to replicate in rodents and other animal species that it didn't have before. It's a real thing. This is what we call a pan-tropic virus. It will jump species without any problem. It's not so unusual though for a pandemic virus to have that property. It's almost a requirement in some sense. We know that viruses like rabies that jump species a lot will replicate basically in every mammalian species that we know about. This is like influenza come to us from birds primarily, but you know, small and other animals too. So, you know, viruses that are able to do this are the ones that are of major pandemic risk. What you said, it went by maybe a little fast, but it's very interesting that when the original strain came out, it wasn't able to infect rodents and then it mutated and then it could infect rodents. I think I can imagine how rodents might get infected because we are living with some rats in our basement right now. How does it jump back into humans? Well, I mean, yeah, we get exposed to rodent viruses too all the time. I actually, one of the main viruses I work on is a virus called Blasivirus in West Africa. And so this is a virus of a rodent species who called mastomy's netalynsis. It's kind of a rodent that's sort of between a mouse and a rat in size. It's more of a mouse. It's pretty close to relate to the mouse. It's a big mouse, but it's what we call parodemestic. It lives in people's houses, comes in to eat food, just like the house mice and the rodents in the U.S. I mean, our houses are maybe built a little stronger and a little bit more rodent proof than the ones in some of the villages in Africa. But the virus spills over all the time for rodents to humans. Can you say more about specifically of how a rodent was spill over into a human if it weren't a pet rodent or if you weren't touching or eating? Invade people's houses and they set up colonies. I mean, we have a lot of rodents here in New Orleans. It's a temperate climate. The rodents mice in particular like it to be a little bit warmer. But how does the virus then get from the colony to you? Well, it would spread just like a human spreads the virus from another human. If it sets up a respiratory infection, then when the mice would breathe and you would breathe in that same air, or it could be from mice have, they excrete things. You're in the species and things. So if you come into contact with that, trying to either get rid of the rodents or put in your eyes and give it an effect. It probably only had to happen one time. That is so incredible to imagine that maybe a mouse sneeze or a rat sneeze. I'm not trying to make light of it, but we share the same air. And if the particle is, they go airborne, you breathe that in. Yeah, they make little burrows and colonies say they're stess and they kick it up when they move around. You hear them. And when they're walking around in your walls sometimes they're kicking up desks and things and the virus kicking up on that. And then you could breathe that in and also get infected that way. Does it matter where the variants originated, whether it was in one immunocompromised individual or in a rodent or in a deer? You did not suggest a deer just for the record. But does it matter? I mean, once you have the variant, what we're concerned with is now what its future spread is going to be and whether or not it's making people very sick. Is it important to know where the variants came from? Does that help us at all? I mean, it's really going to be difficult to pin that down in most cases. I mean, we've seen, like with some of the variants that they show up. The first cases of Delta, for example, were in India. Did the Delta variant arise in India? Probably, but I mean, actually saying, okay, this is the Indian variant. And it's now spread worldwide. We have a worldwide pandemic of Delta, which is actually, that's a true statement. It's not all that terribly helpful. It could happen anywhere. That could happen in Louisiana or New York or Washington, DC, wherever it could happen in the US or in Europe or anywhere in terms of actually just saying, okay, start of there. That's not very helpful. I mean, looking at the virus, the mutations that it has, which changes it's made, that tells us a lot more about the potential of the virus for causing, you know, either increased pathogenesis, increased transmissibility, escape from our means, is to escape from vaccines. I mean, let's look at what the virus is down. I think, you know, trying to say, okay, it came from this or that or whatever. It's not really very helpful. Although as I hear you explain this, it occurs to me that perhaps it does emphasize just how adaptive a virus is. And it's important to understand that it will keep circulating and jumping host as long as we allow it to. I mean, I guess there is one point to make though. I mean, and that's the vaccine, equally, the distribution of vaccines. And we have vaccines. We have boosters. We have more vaccines than people want to take it. Seams here in the United States and in other countries. But there are other countries around the world where, you know, they don't have access to the vaccine. Say they don't have distribution systems for the vaccine. Even if we gave them the vaccine or if they're able to get it, it's more difficult for them to deliver it. I think Nigeria had to destroy like a million doses of vaccine a week or so ago because they couldn't distribute it. They didn't have the infrastructure to do that. And so when you allow a virus like SARS-CoV-2 or, you know, any virus, basically, to just run ramp it through the human population, you're going to see the mutations pick up. So it really, you know, we need to think this through better because we're one planet, you know, we're one population of human beings. And so any place that a virus like this, you know, gets loose and starts to spread, you can see what happens. It gets increasingly more adapted to people and better able to spread in us and cause disease. So let's get these vaccines distributed. I guess this is what I'm saying here. But more we can dampen down the virus the less chance it has to do these changes, these mutations. Dr. Robert Gary, thank you so much for joining us to talk about mutations in variants and how to slow down or even stop this virus. Thank you. I'm pleasure. Robert Gary is a professor of microbiology and a virologist at the Dutland School of Medicine in New Orleans. He's part of the team tracking and mapping the mutations of SARS-CoV-2. Now that we know a lot about the structure of coronavirus variants, can we use that knowledge to develop not just another vaccine, but the ultimate vaccine? The goal is that you would be protected against coronavirus, those that are circulated in humans now and then those that might be circulated in other species that could cross over to humans. Coming up, the challenge and the prospects of developing a universal defense against coronavirus and the flu. This episode of Big Picture Sciences, Attack of the Mutants. This episode is brought to you by Indeed. When your computer breaks, you don't wait for it to magically start working again, you fix the problem. So why wait to hire the people your company desperately needs? Use Indeed Sponsored Jobs to hire top talent fast and even better, you only pay for results. There's no need to wait. Speed up your hiring with a $75 sponsor job credit at Indeed.com slash podcast. Terms and conditions apply. If you're able to be vaccinated and boostered, well, we hope you are, that and masking are among our best defenses to protect ourselves against Omicron. But we might be able to do better. Imagine doing away with double shots and boosters and giving your immune system a boost against all variants with a single shot. The appearance of the Omicron variant prompted scientists and vaccine manufacturers to assess current vaccines and discuss the possibility of tweaking them. But it also drew renewed attention to the ongoing effort to create a universal coronavirus vaccine. Exactly as it suggests, the vaccine would protect against all variants. Finally, something that can stop the attacking mutants. Kevin Saunders is the director of research for the Duke Human Vaccine Institute and a professor of surgery at Duke University whose team is working toward that holy grail. He says that after years of work, the efforts to develop a universal flu vaccine are finally bearing fruit and the work may show us the path for doing the same for coronavirus. But if we haven't yet made a vaccine for all types of influenza, why is it that we were able to make a vaccine for coronavirus so quickly? Well, Dr. Saunders says we targeted the coronavirus in its early days before the variants appeared. The flu has had ages to mutate into many variants or strains. And so for influenza, there's many different strains of influenza and those tended to circulate at different levels. And so it's hard to make one vaccine that's active against all those different forms of influenza. Whereas for the coronavirus, we were targeting one single sequence. And so that became a fairly easy target. And so just using that one target, you can make one vaccine. And if the vaccine does its job, it can be highly effective. So that's why I was a simpler task in the beginning. And then over the last two years or so, we've seen all these different variants of interest and the variants of concern that are coming up. And they each pose a different challenge for the vaccine. And so you're starting to see now this evolving problem that once the virus starts to diversify itself, it becomes a relatively hard problem to solve with the vaccine. Well, I got my COVID shots. I also got my flu shots. I've got my booster. Now I know that researchers are working developing a universal flu vaccine. One that would be effective, not just this year, but next year, I wouldn't have to go to the doctor again next year. And against all the flu variants. And that sounds like you need to find something about influenza that is common to all the varieties of influenza. No matter what the strain, they would present the same target to the vaccine, right? So you're getting at the heart of the question of how do you develop something that's universal. So you can develop a vaccine that trains the immune system to see the most conserved sites. And so by seeing those conserved sites, it's able to recognize many different, say, flavors or different variants of the flu that might be circulating. But that can usually only take you so far. And there'll be certain ones that you miss. And so you have to not only target conserved sites, but you also have to expose the immune system to enough diversity so that it's able to recognize conserved sites on many different flu strains. Okay. Now, would you say conserved sites? You mean parts of the virus that are the same from generation to generation of the virus, right? It's a target, not a fleeting target. It's a kind of semi permanent target. Correct. So if you took many different strains of the flu virus and you compare those either by sequence or by just how they look, you can find sites that are shared among those different sequences. And that's the target that you want the immune system to focus on. Now when we talk about what the vaccines recognize about the coronavirus, it's despite proteins, right? But are those protein molecules sort of unchanging? Right. So the virus has on its surface what people call spike and spike in the context of coronavirus is an actual protein. And so that's the part of the virus that attaches to this target cell. And if you can generate a immune response against it, you have the ability to try to block the virus from ever attaching to a cell. And so that's been the primary focus of most of the vaccines to try to generate an immune response against it. It's actually the site on the virus that changes the most. And it changes the most because the virus is trying to escape from your immune response. I just wonder, does the influence of virus also have spike proteins? So spike is a general term that a lot of people use to refer to the protein that's on the surface of the virus. And so in the sense of coronavirus, it's actually the name used for that protein. So depending on how you're using it and which virus you mean, spike can actually be specific for that protein or it can just be a general term for that protein. If I had an electron microscopic photo of these virus, do they all have a family resemblance? I mean, if you lined up photos of these things, would they all look like little balls with things sticking out that they can use as hooks to grab onto my cells? Essentially, yes. So you would see a sphere in the middle and then you would see different long protruding spikes that come off that surface. And in the case of influenza, there's the spike that comes off that's hemagglutinin. There's also a second protein called neurominidase that's on the surface of it as well. You mentioned two kinds of proteins, one beginning with age and another beginning with end. And that makes me think of things like H1 and one. I assume that's where the Hs and the Ns come from, right? That's exactly where they come from. Okay. All right. So it seems to me that the problem here when it comes to producing a universal vaccine is that you have a moving target. So you've designed a way to attack this protein, but that was two generations ago for the virus. To develop a universal vaccine, you said you'd look for conserved sites. Those are sites that are invariant or don't change. Have you identified those areas on the flu virus? Sure. So there's two main areas. So there's the area of the virus, spike protein, which is called hemagglutinin, that attaches to cells. And so that precise site where the attachment occurs with the hemagglutinin protein, that site can be targeted by antibodies and can be well conserved. And so if you can get antibodies against that receptor binding site on that spike protein, then you have a chance of coming up with an antibody that could be effective against multiple strains of influenza. There's also another site towards the base of that spike protein that a lot of vaccines are trying to target. And that's called the stem of the hemagglutinin protein. And so you could target either one of those sites, depending on which type of vaccine approach you're going to take. It sounds like you know where the targets are for these flu virus. Why is it so hard then to, I mean, you know, this is a very naive question, but why is it so hard then to produce something that will imitate them so that the body builds up immunity to them? Sure. I think it's a matter of getting the immune system to focus on a site. And that's not a simple thing to do, meaning that you can cover up the sites that are surrounding it that you don't want the immune system to focus on. And then leave that site that you really care about, accessible in hopes of trying to focus the antibodies to that particular site. And so that's really where the current research is. And so I think those concepts are just being tested now to see how well they work. And now we're just really getting to the stages of really finding out if they're going to be successful in humans. Okay. So, you know, they're beyond just being developed in the lab. They're being tested already. They are definitely plans to test some of these vaccines in humans. I think there is at least one safety trial that I know or two safety trials that have gone forward with some of these novel concepts. You know, we've lost 800,000 people to coronavirus in the United States. But how many people die of influenza every year in the United States? Do you have an idea of how big a number of... Somewhere around like 40,000 to 50,000 individuals are the typical numbers used, you know, as to who succumbs to influenza each year. And so it is still a deadly infection. And that's really, you know, the main emphasis for the vaccine development around it. Well, what about COVID, too? I mean, right? I mean, coronavirus is... There are various kinds of coronavirus is beyond COVID, what we call COVID now. And so, in any virus that kind of looks like a ball with a kind of a crown of thorns sticking out there, you know, we call it coronavirus. What other diseases are caused by coronavirus? So there is currently four endemic coronaviruses that people get on a normal basis. And that just causes like a cold or what we would call the common cold. And so those circulate and, you know, if you have a kid in daycare or have kids in school, they've probably at some point caught one of those because they cause about 30 to 40% of the common cold cases each year. And so those have been circulating. We've all seen those at some point. And so it's not until you actually get to some of these more deadly versions of the coronavirus, like SARS-CoV-1, or MERS-CoV-2, or SARS-CoV-2, where we've really become concerned about being infected with them. But for those other four, we haven't really been that concerned about those, because usually you can treat those and just treat the symptoms. Your body will fight it off eventually and you recover and go back to normal. Is that why we still don't have a, if you will, a vaccine for the common cold? Because, you know, it doesn't get the kind of priority that something like COVID has gotten? Well, I think there's a few, a few challenges to that. So for the common cold, only about 30% are so caused by those four coronaviruses. The other 70% are caused by a whole bunch of other viruses. And so to really have a vaccine against the common cold, you have to be able to target a whole lot of different viruses. And so it's a very challenging thing to do. If you're really going to stop the common cold, you have to be able to target not just coronaviruses, but rhinoviruses, dental viruses, you know, all of these really broad virus families. And that's a hard thing to develop one vaccine or one treatment that can work against all of those. Okay, well, we've been talking about, you know, universal vaccines here. What about a universal vaccine for the coronavirus? I mean, is that in the often, or maybe we already have them? I don't know. It's unclear whether these new variants like Omicron, you know, are sort of immune to the vaccines we already have or not. So I think so there's two parts to your question. So the first question is, you know, about the universal coronavirus vaccine. So the first thing is to make sure that it's clear what universal coronavirus vaccine means. To some people that means being able to stop SARS-related viruses. So anything that's like SARS-CoV-2 that might come along, being able to stop those types of viruses. And I think there's been a lot of progress made against those. We know a lot about the SARS-related viruses now. And we know that with some of the current vaccines that are being given, you generate immune responses against SARS-related viruses. And so there's good news there that if a future SARS-related virus comes along, we think that there would be some level of immunity just based on the vaccines that we currently have. Some people will say that a pan-coronavirus vaccine means being able to work against all of the variants of SARS-CoV-2. And maybe SARS-CoV-1. But they don't mean that it also will work against MERS-CoV-2 and then maybe some of the other viruses that circulate in animals. And so to the extent of universal, I think the field really uses it kind of in different ways. And so we've designed multiple different steps to this. So we have one where we're trying to cover alpha-coronavirus, beta-coronavirus, and gamma-coronavirus, delta-coronavirus. And then we have also paired that down some to where we're focused more on just beta-coronavirus. And those include SARS-CoV-1, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2. OK, well, I mean, that's clearly something that would be a boon. So the promise here, Kevin, is that at some point in the future, I go into my doctor. He gives me a shot against coronavirus. Maybe he gives me another shot against influenza viruses. And that's it. I don't have to come back the next year. I don't have to worry about a failure of the vaccine. Correct. That's the goal here. The goal is that you would be protected against coronaviruses, those that are circulated in humans now, and then those that might be circulated in other species that could cross over to humans. And that would be the same thing for influenza. To be protected against those that circulate now, as well as those that may spill over in the future. Kevin Saunders, thanks so very much for speaking with us. No problem. Kevin Saunders is Director of Research at the Duke Human Vaccine Institute and a Professor of Surgery at Duke University. His team is helping develop a universal vaccine for the flu. We're at that moment in the show, Seth, where I ask you, what is the big picture in this episode? Attack of the Mutants. Yeah, well, for me, the big picture is how, you know, a brute force can overwhelm an intelligent plan. I mean, these viruses don't do well on their SATs. And yet they can evade our body's defenses, even with vaccines they can win. It's really astounding. And what we learned is that we are watching evolution in real time. Of course, evolution is happening around us all the time at different timescales. But with viruses, with the evolution of viruses, you can actually observe the consequences of their rapidly mutating genomes. We are certainly feeling the effects of that. Yeah, it's true. And of course, that's something new. You know, I have to admire Charles Darwin for seeing the effects of mutation. You know, over the course of a few millions of years on the Galapagos Island, what we can see with the viruses, because we can sequence them, we can see how quickly they may mutate. And we can also see what the mutations actually are. And what we learned in this show is when it comes to those mutations, it's all about location, location, location. So the high number of mutations on the Omicron variant is one of the reasons why this variant is replicating so quickly. And it's not just that it has so many mutations, and it's not just that there has many mutations on its spike protein. It is specifically where those mutations are on that spike protein. And one of them is on this site called the fear and cleavage site that we learned allows the virus to actually get into the cell more easily. So it all comes down to those specific mutations, not just any mutations, but specific ones. Really, it's humanity that's the big petri dish here, because you've got billions of people, you know, containing probably easily, trillions of viruses, probably six orders of magnitude more than that. And they're all doing this ongoing experiment, as you note, to breed new variants that can escape our defenses. But it's interesting that you said it's humanity doing this, because really what we learned is it's not just humanity, it's all these different species. I mean, I was shocked to learn that the Omicron variant may have arisen in a rodent and then jumped back into us. So this coronavirus is described as a pan-tropic virus, which actually means it can, in fact, all different kinds of tissue. It is jumping around back and forth. And so if we, as humans, if we don't try to stop this, the virus is going to find a host in another species. We were talking about the promise of a universal coronavirus vaccine and the promise of a universal flu vaccine. What are the encouraging final notes on that front, says? So we can end this with a bit of a high note. Okay, I like your optimism, Molly. Well, it might take away here. Is that this is a very tough problem. But the people who are doing this have a strategy that sounds eminently reasonable. They're making progress. And, you know, a universal vaccine, whether it's for coronavirus or the flu or any other viral infection. I mean, it's not something that's 50 years in the future. You know, there's kind of zeroing in on this. I'm going to sleep better at night. This show is made possible thanks to the highly adaptive talents of senior producer Gary Neeterhoff. I am executive producer of Big Picture Science, Molly Bentley. Thanks also to financial support from renochelski David and Sammy David and to NASA. Big Picture Science has produced at the Stetty Institute a nonprofit education and research organization who scientists have been working on. The science has produced at the Stetty Institute a nonprofit education and research organization who scientists study among other things, the origin and evolution of life. I'm the institute senior astronomer, chef Chasek. Also a big thanks to our listeners and our Patreon supporters. This episode of Big Picture Science exploring the role of mutation in producing coronavirus variants such as Omicron and how we might stop them is called Attack of the Mutants. As a long time fine correspondent, I've worked in lots of places, but nowhere as important to the world as China. I'm Jane Perles, former Beijing Bureau Chief for the New York Times. On face-off, the US versus China will explore what's critical to this important global relationship. Trump, Ancizion Ping, AI, TikTok and even Hollywood. New episodes of Face-Off are available now, or if you get your podcasts. Science education is key to creating a successful future, but the challenges have never been greater. I'm Matt Kaplan, host of Safeguarding Sound Science, Climate Change Edition. Join us for outstanding conversations with the leading researchers, policy experts and teachers who are fighting to keep misinformation and pseudo science out of our classrooms and off our screens. Subscribe to Safeguarding Sound Science on Apple, Spotify, Amazon or wherever you like to listen.