This is the sun. This is our sun, not the real sun, just a picture of the sun. It's just a small arc of the sun, but it is to scale with these models that you see here to the right of the planets of our solar system. The planets are, you've seen here, you can see Mercury and Venus. The third planet from the sun is what everybody? Q. Earth. Mars. Jupiter. Saturn. Uranus. Neptune. Pluto, which of course has been demoted as no longer an official planet. Nevertheless, this is our neighborhood. These are the planets to scale, and we are here live at the City Institute Mountain View, California. I'm Bill Diamond, the CEO of the City Institute, and today I'll show you where we're going. We are going here to Mars. We're going to talk about a long 15-year mission to Mars, which just came to an end a couple of weeks ago. We're talking about the Mars exploration rovers spirit and opportunity. Actually, spirit was lost in 2010. Opportunity just was declared on mission ended on February 13th of this year. After an extraordinary extension to what was supposed to be a 90-day lifespan for these rovers, the first real science rover experiments put on Mars. We're going to be talking about and honoring that mission, and what's really interesting about these missions, like other NASA missions. For many people, these are not quite lifelong, but they are very often significant portions of research scientists, NASA engineers, and others careers. When you're talking about a science mission that lasts for 15 years, you're talking about an extensive portion of somebody's professional life. For the people working on the Mars exploration rovers, the termination of that mission is certainly a big deal, and it's like losing a member of the family. We're going to be talking today to our own Dr. Natalie Cabral, who is the head of the research of the Carl Sagan Center for Research here at the Sede Institute, because she was intimately involved in the Mars exploration rover project from the very beginning, including trying to figure out where those rovers should go on Mars. So let's sit down again with Nat, most of you who've watched us regularly are familiar with Dr. Cabral, so hello. Are you? Nice to see you. Come on back, and let's go down memory lane here and talk about spirit and opportunity. So I think you're over there driving. I'm in the passage you see, and you've got a big round, our entrant next to you, that you might be able to use as a point of reference to talk about someone that, well, the two places were small. Well, the two places were a spirit and opportunity went, but it was kind of fun because I was showing off our new scale model of the solar system, which of course is only to scale in size, not in distance. Those plants would be very far from each other, even in those tiny sizes, if we were to do this, the distance scale. But so there's that tiny Mars compared to the sun and even significantly smaller than Earth. But this mission, the Mars Exploration Rovers, is extraordinary. And I think you had such a connection to that mission from the very beginning. Why don't you do some storytelling and tell the folks out there in Facebook, and a little bit about that history and how much a part of your scientific professional life, those two missions, those two spacecraft with that one mission, really were. Yeah, it's interesting to think back because there was a connection even before I knew it. It goes back really to the end of May 1985, when I went to the observatory of Madom for the very first time, and I had to talk with the people who would be coming my advisors. And I didn't know anything about that day. In fact, that was close. And when I met that close, that was 24 hours from signing on a master project on a completely different subject in environmental sciences in the different university. But the first Viking mosaic map that I unfolded that day was of Madom Valley's at the end of which, because its creator was. We're talking about Mars now. This is a map of this. One of the earliest maps of... Oh yeah, the Viking was the top of what we had at the time, and very far away from the resolution we have about these days. So from that day on, Madom Valley's enduce of creator became part of my life every single day of my life. For a number of years, I worked on this, working on my master and then on my PhD thesis. And after the thesis, well, I was interested in the history of water on Mars. And at some point, after looking at channels, I became interested in understanding where that water was pounding. Because interestingly, in the end of there was a lot of discussion about water flowing on Mars, but nobody was really looking at where it was pounding and staying. So that became that. And in 1990, my advisor sent me for a month in the United States at the lab of Jim Head at Brown University in Providence, so that I could do more mapping and get access to more imagery. We didn't have that much access at the time in New France. So I stayed there, and that connected me with Russian colleagues of Jim Head. And the Russian at the time wanted to develop a rover program, Varsenani 496. And of course, Varsuko was the head of a space science that they wanted to learn in Gusev creator. They were in the studies. No, so just pause for a moment there and maybe explain why Gusev creator is so interesting and so poor. Why that has been such an important target for, you know, astrobiology and Mars have ability, et cetera. Well, Gusev was fascinating just looking at it morphologically. Can you show everybody on the love here with Gusev creators? Gusev would be 1000. So here is a girl creator that you have here. And Gusev is 1000 kilometer from Gusev creator. Yeah, from there it is. About 15 degrees self-linear to it's about 15 self. Yeah, and Gale where curiosity is right here right now. So when you look at Gusev and if you wanted to have something that you wanted to understand about habitability and changing conditions on Mars, we're not talking about life. Yeah, but we're talking about understanding if conditions were a good for life. Yeah, so you had this huge channel about 1000 kilometer long terminating ending in a 170 kilometer 110 miles wide in back creator. And why in back creator because at the time the topography with the Viking was so poor, so bad, we had plus or minus 1 kilometer of precision. So when you're doing astrology, this is really nothing. And the only way of knowing that you really had a base in the most two getting back creators and say, yeah, you have a value, you have a creator, something bonded. So the Russians were interested that that me a ticket to Moscow and was very, very impressed at the time. I was 26, 26 year old, the Academy of Science in Russia and Barsook of Stemning looking exactly like Peter the Great. Dark eyes and very somber look. But he listened to that and he's very happy with that. But the Russian program never took off literally Mars and then before 96, we all launched. So I went back to France a few years later. The idea that Gusev was interesting to grow. I was invited again to go back with this time in Arizona on the Greatest Lab. Jack Farmer and Rodney Houndheim, student of Earth, they were working on Lappi, Gusev, which I had been doing. So they invited me to support the work. Then I went back to France and things started to ramp up a year later because I was working in the Lexland Mars and I had nine months left of grant money in my pocket, postdoc. I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab. I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in the lab and I was in So long story short, number thing happened. It's really about getting involved, trying to get the idea across the community, and this was not obvious, that impact Criter Lake's where an important component of that history of potential history from biology on Mars. Then there were a number of missions that were scheduled, but finder was too small or an art site like Gusev, and you want to explore it, but I still went to those workshops and advocated for Gusev. Then there was a lender that was scheduled for 2001, but a nice steel one there with an advocate for Gusev, but NASA lost two mission Mars climate orbiter and deep space in 99. So that lender was canceled. Mars Odyssey was scheduled to recover some of the science that was planned for the climate orbiter. And then of course, the Mars expansion rover were all set in fast-tracked. So you have to imagine that 99. This is Q. This is Q. This is 99. So 99, no, 99, NASA lost two missions. They are fast-tracking Mars orbiter. 2001, the orbiter is sent to recover some of the climate science that was needed after the Mars Global Bar Surveyor of 1997 because we wanted to understand Mars climate for our activity. And then between 2000 and 2003, there is a concept of the Mars expansion rover that is being put together. The rovers are being put together and the landing site selection is happening. Everything happened three or seven years. These two rovers within two years. And so when we learned about the Mars expansion rover or certain, we said, okay, it's time now. Then already had that tag in my bag. Everybody was calling me Mrs. Gusef. And I think that they finally give up and they say, okay, give her a landing site. So we won't see her anymore. But it was an idea. Oh, I can't now, the Gusef has a nice ring to it. Yeah. I don't know. The thing is that Gusef had many, many problems. So many things like not the science of it, but the engineering part of it. The landing ellipse for the EMER mission for the Mars expansion rover that we're known as EMER. The landing ellipse to start with was 180 kilometer. So bigger than the gray? In diameter, just slightly bigger. But they say, okay, so we can reduce that. But the area that was really interesting for what we had in mind was the region just north. What we thought was a delta of maddened ellipse into the crater. But then if you were putting that ellipse in that place, then you were about against another impact crater and the Columbia hills and a lot of rough terrains. So this landing ellipse by the way that Nellie's referring to is the sort of projected accuracy of how accurately can we place this spacecraft? And that we were saying was about 180 miles. It cannot be here for long. So there was just a lot of error, a lot of error, yeah. And interestingly enough, so during all that time, I had gal craters. So this one, what Karyosi is, was my backup for Farkusem. So we didn't do too bad, that's regard. But came the first workshop and it was happening here at AMES on the other side of the highway here. And there were 126 candidates. And if I can remember. 126 candidates. That was the first round. We already had, and then and I, we had eight, I think, eight impact crater lakes. And gal was primary, Gusef was secondary just because of the ellipse. Gal fitted a little better, I think. So here we talk about it and we talk about Gusef, come on top to prison. And I stood up there and I showed the signs and then the engineers come and say, well, what would you think about taking the ellipse and taking it north? So it splattered, it's safer. And I think that day when I think back, that probably was the biggest worker, you know, and I did that day because I said, if you want to put it north, let's forget about Gusef. Let's forget about it because it's going to be lava. Lava, yeah. No, lava, you know. And we learned there and we're going to be studying lava planes forever, nothing interesting. And also, the Steve Squad really jumped out of his seat like a developer of the dogs and say, hold on a second. This ellipse is going to go down. Do you really think that this is so important to go there? I say, yeah, otherwise, you know, forget about Gusef. So that was the first round. Gusef survived, they were still about 30 or so candidates. Come the second one, we went from that more discussion, comes the third one, which was the one prior to getting, you know, the candidate two headquarters. And the first morning was just very, very wearing for us because there were wind problems, roughness problems, et cetera. So I listened to that the whole morning and it was not too optimistic in the afternoon. First round came and Gusef was there. So we had two candidates. We were more discussions, et cetera. Came the second round of votes and there was certain Gusef was second. So, you know, ultimately, the decision was made by a community as a whole by then, between the second round and the third round, we had lobby around in the community and we had a group, it was now a group effort by the LinuxI community to support Gusef and MaryD. So this is what Steve Squares and Pete Feisinger was the project manager at JPL at the time. They took those two sides and a backup because we still had concern. And the backup was somewhere in the Elysium region. Elysium is somewhere around here, and it was in the Elysium, is here. So there was a backup in a place that would be slider. Yeah. So a number of things unfolded after the AD 2000 to, I think that was February or March, then got a phone call from Steve Squares telling me that I was selected as part of the NER Science Team. I had been writing a proposal for that. And two months later, Gusef was selected. So and then the NER team here, you know. Now that was selected for which rover that was for? For both of that. We were selected for both of them. And the thing that was great with this mission was really that you could staff any of the rovers. We had schedules and you could go on one or the other. They learned that three weeks apart spirit was the first one. And I'm opposite sides of the planet. And opposite side of the planet, which meant that, you know, operationally, that was very interesting. This is also why we had two teams because they were coming pretty much 12 hours apart in the science operations room. Actually, we're just inconvenient. Yes, except if you want to staff both of them, then you have to spend a long time. And a few times we found some of our colleagues sleeping under the tables. But you know when we are part of it, you know this is an experience of a lifetime. You don't want to miss anything. So yeah, we landed with spirit on January the 4th, 2004. 2004? Yeah, they took off in August. Yeah. The whole land launch was a different experience altogether. And if, you know, for those of you who may remember, those of you who may not. So both of these landers were encased in like a big balloon, sort of a trapezoidal shape air vessel. Some pictures of it. Why don't you talk since we have this picture up. Maybe you can just cover what's in this picture. So what it shows is ultimately what happened with the mission. And they were twins. They are totally identical. They're completely twins. And my first few of spirit on the high bay, the very first visit we had as a team. We were invited at a GPL for the first team meeting. And we were in the high bay. And we were looking down and down below. You could see two to my left. They were engineers working at tiny knots around the heat shield. And I was so impressed because they were in bodhisheets, everything covered in cover, including their hair. And why was tiny knots? And it was the second one watching what it was doing and the third one. And they were going very slowly, very methodically around that. And I was so impressed by the care that they were putting into this. And they're on the table to the right. They were spirit of what was to become spirit. I think she was missing. We all definitely didn't have the pancam on yet. Was it fully assembled? No, no. She was still in the growing phases. But it dawned on me that the day that the next time I would see them would be. On Mars. So give everybody, if you can, just from the tabletop in your home, is a sense of how large spirit in opportunity is. So spirit would have been about opportunity. They were twin, as big as a table. Maybe a little bit less. But with the span of their sore panel, twice that table, just a little part. So spirit landed. She was a problem child right away. She let it pretty much fine, except that one of the issues in New South were really the wins. That they were modeled because it's an intact crater. You can expect, because of the thin atmosphere, of having a lot of thermally changed during a few minutes. And so they were models of wins that were around 18 meter per second. And that was really marginal to be acceptable. But the end of accepting that. So we are right on Mars entry and descent. We're like perfect. And descent, by the way, is this airbag bouncing along the surface finally coming from the rest? Well, that's the San Ancel. The parachute chitizen. And then you're on your own. Your airbags aren't flated. And you go kamikaze to the surface. And you go boy, boy, boy, boy, until there is no energy left. And then you finally rest. Well, everything. And the cocoon has to open up. So there were 200 explosive bolt events that needed to happen on the clock for this mission to succeed. And we couldn't miss one. The failure of one was the failure of the mission. So even before you get started, not to mention the years before, but even before you get started. So we are now bouncing at the surface. I guess what? The wind that we're recording on the data showed wind higher than 20 meters per second. So basically, one spirit bounced the first time. She bounced higher than when she was gentizen by the parachute. By the parachute, wow. And so she bounced back at the surface for five minutes. This is what the accelerometer is short. Because of the wind, it could like have movement. And the energy that she needed to get rid of that to release that energy. So then she stops and sends a, well, I'm OK. I'm fine. I'm fine. Hello. Hello. But then something happened. The airbags, and I can go some of these things. So you see the airbags deflating right here. But before they are completely deflated, they had to deflate. And what you see maybe on the other one, we see better with opportunity here in Mary Liani. You see that direct to earth, antenna. So what's happening now? Spirit is right there. But she's communicating right away as soon as the antenna is functioning. She's communicating. But then she's like that, the antenna. And we don't know it. Oh, she's not oriented. She's not yet oriented. And what we don't know is that there is a rock or something right there. And now she's defrating. So the antenna is going like that. And for five minutes, she talks. And also, then she disappears completely. She completely disappears. We don't hear for 15 minutes. So when everybody in the room is looking at each other, they say, oh, no. Because we think you've maybe came over already. Yeah. Yeah. And there is nothing you can do. And so we are looking everywhere with all the antennas we have. And guess who is fighting spirit ultimately? The Stanford Green Telescope. Really? That antenna. Right there. Oh, so there. No, no. Right down the road here in Palo Alto, Stanford has Stanford University, has a radio telescope. So what I'm saying is that was the instrument. The outcome would be found in the signal. OK. And by that time, by 15 minutes, I wasn't here to myself. We didn't even use you now. And by then, there she comes. And we are hearing the roomie sign and the nose. And we are hearing, we got her. We got her. And everybody goes to the bus. So to go back to the first slide that we had that show, I actually am going the wrong way, we're showing this number. So hard landing for spirit. We land in a very, I wouldn't say an interesting. We knew that we were going to land in the plane, because this is what we wanted. But it's very flat. And then we have to take a four days fight day to make sure the rover is OK on the platform, where it was sitting. And then cautious me. Try it off it. Drive off it. Oh, I didn't realize. So it stayed on that platform of this landing cocoon for five days. Yeah, here she is. And this is, so she stayed there. And here's the web. Yeah. So she had several ways she could go out depending. Right. There was an obstacle in one of them. So she took one of the ramps. And so we went very, very, very cautiously. And then she looked back into a particular under it. And then she looked back. And here it is. Yeah, so you can see in the bottom left of the screen, though, just a corner of her solar panel. And she's looking back at this. And so that's the surface of Mars. And the surface is just an extraordinary image. It's absolutely extraordinary. And for us, at that point, I remember being in the guest room with Edmund. That's not the first panorama. But at the time of the landing, because this image came back several days later, at the time of the landing, we had a black and white panorama, low resolution that came back. And we're seeing that guest room with Edmund. And we're looking at Kusev from the ground for the first time after studying it for 18 years, for more of it. Not for more of it, amazing. It was a special moment. Going back quickly to the numbers. So spirit got some issues with software, I think I remember, within the next three weeks, by the time that opportunity was coming in. So there were a number of things that happened at the time. Opportunity landed in a very spectacular site. And then they found the water right away. It took spirit six months before starting to find evidence of long-term water on Mars, whereas opportunity landed on it. So the attention shifted very, very quickly to opportunity. That spirit, but both of them achieved. These are like the statistics. So for spirit, it operated for six years, whereas opportunity for 14, more than 14 years. Oh, pretty much 15,000. Oh, yeah, basically 15 years. 125,000 raw images from spirit versus 218,000, almost from opportunity. Spirit travel 4.8 miles, while opportunity travel 28 miles. They both went to a 30 degree slope, which is pretty steep, actually. Look at that. Yeah, so they had to climb up that terrain. So this is what we're talking about. Wheels that are only about. Yeah, they were about. Yeah. Yeah. So one day we came in, oh, that might have been the middle of the night for all I know, because we were working with a Martian jet lag, which is pretty much an hour a day. And the first thing we just show up on our screen is that. And it was just because we first saw that. So it's OK. This is an obstacle. But what the heck is that? Is that behind? Yeah. So what it is, is the flat plane we just left, and that you have to understand that the sky is here, which means that. So the horizon is actually this way, because it's on the back. Spirit was 30 degrees, that it was climbing the Columbia hill. Wow. So going back to your statistics here, because you want to finish commenting on that. Yeah, well, no. And so I mean, I think it's extraordinary. But one thing I really want to highlight here was that while one was a six-year mission, and one was a 15-year mission, they were initially designed. I mean, the attempt was that they probably go, what wasn't it 90 days or something? 90 days? It was 300 meters was mission success. Yeah. And the idea was that the feeling was that the solar panels wouldn't stay clean enough long enough for solar energy to keep them going. Yeah, that was a bit concern, I guess. And then we didn't know exactly what we were going to in color. And it was a very big, first big rover at the surface of Mars. And we were, we are knowledgeable about the amount of dust that was happening yearly over those sites. And we thought that was what was going to actually set the scale for those rover, as I say. But that's nice here. On the other hand, well, I'm going to show you a few things here that relate to exactly that if I can find them. Here we go. So this is a view. This is actually spirit looking from the Pancam boom. The Pancam is the Panasperic camera looking down. And we were taking this kind of weird panoramas because we wanted to check the clintoness of the solar panel. So it's like a southern inspection. It's a central inspection. We're doing the underberry rover as well using the microscope picture. But here you can see that she's shiny. She's still on the plane. And you know, this is the first six months of that. But after the first spring, she was completely covered in dust. Completely covered in dust. And one morning, we were looking at the energy accumulated by the solar panel going down, down, down. And then basically, we had nothing left to do. We couldn't drive or we couldn't. So that was the first day you can imagine spirit completely that color, the solar panel. And then the morning after we have one of our colleagues was cheering the science operation working group saying something happened. And we don't understand what it is yet. But the energy is back to maximum. We're way close to zero. And we're looking at just all, of course, the joke about marving the Martian, you know, stunningly. Exactly. Yeah, exactly. So we were joking about that, but we still hadn't no clue. So you didn't? I mean, there wasn't an immediate realization that this was the wind. No, absolutely not. Except that while she was doing what she could in terms of operation spirit at taking one picture. And this is not the picture actually of that event, because I couldn't find it in the archive. But this is what happened. Uh-huh. OK. Every single, this is use of crater plane. So these are like the dust levels. These are dust levels. You can see on Earth. And on the farmland and in the desert. Except that they wouldn't have exactly the same morphology. Sure. This is the morphology of a thin air. Yes. Does it have a morphology? 100th the density of Earth atmosphere. So the air there is much, much thinner. But you still get wind and dust levels. And if you want to see the same, you go to the Alteplaner Nid. Yes. You are getting very high. When you go high up. The morphology is the same. So these dust levels, they were coming to Stolic Spring into summer. And it was just like the guards, the Queen in England. They were showing up from 10 o'clock to 3 o'clock in the afternoon. Very relaxed. Same scabled in the Alteplaner. Interesting. Exactly the same. And you would see them just roam the plane. And we had fantastic pictures and movies of those. And so what they did was to, well, they were really helping the mission. And on both sides of the plane and both sides. So this is why we... So we have the dust levels to vent for the mission having the lifetime that they did. Yeah. And not to forget how skillful the engineering team was. They got to climb. Spirit was the first rover to have a climb anything on any planet. Yes, amazing. So but then they did some climbing as well. On the other side, we got opportunity, 32 degrees sleep-age, rocky areas, working, spirit very, very early on last one wheel. Not losing the wheel, but losing the ability to go. So what happened, in fact, was very successful. Six wheel rovers? Yes, right. Yeah. So we could do a number of them. But what happened is that it was completely unexpected. That event turned out to be transformed by the rover itself into a new instrument for the rover. So this is actually what helped one of the most important discoveries at UCF Creator. And I'm going to show that with this image, if I have it here, let's see. Yes, we do have it here. So basically we're dragging a wheel behind us. She was not moving, so she was acting like a turtle. Like a shovel, almost like a trench digger. And so we had no idea what was going on because it was on the back except that one night we turned and we took a panorama, and then we discovered that behind us. Wow. So that, what looks like a little miniature canyon dug up, it's the wheel. It's a drill. It's a drill. That's the wheel. We were driving a wheel. And when we turned around, we saw that the tracks of the rover beyond spirit were completely white. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, this is phosphorus or is this? There is sulfur. There's also salt. But this was salt. And the salt would discover that they were the beginning of us finding what was an hydro thermal complex at Gusef Crater. And just the right. And fewer old deposits. And it was completely serendipitous. So the rover brought us out. We just didn't know it. Exactly. That was the source. So we have a few questions I want to get to. Before I get to those questions, could you describe very briefly just an overview of the instrument suite that was onboard the rover's? What kind of capabilities did they have on board for this habitability assessment? So what we did, obviously, we had the cameras for a number of reasons. The camera itself, this pan, can have filters. So we could use it was color. It had the same resolution as a human being, 2020, human being stereo. So we could already do a number of things with that. That was giving us some more logical ideas about what was going on, texture of sediments. So Panken was giving that the filters were giving a little bit of the composition as well. But then we had mini tests. Mini tests was a thermal emission spectrometer. So it was an IR image. For that image? Yeah. And that was giving us the vinerology of the terrain. Then we had APXS was giving us composition. We had a must-bower to look into more of the structure of the minerals that were there. And we had a rat, not a rat, although it actually made it to another real rat. But we had a rock abrasion tool. Rock abrasion tool. The rat. And as you can see, Mars is covered in dust. So before, for more of it, the only thing we could see was the composition of that dust. So Mars was looking very uniform, except for a few outcrops. So we decided to have this rat and a brush, which means that before we get to any surface here, we'll be brushing. No kidding. So a physical brush is going to us. That's amazing. And then we'll be writing, which means that we could give a few centimeters in two, the rock. And that was giving us a clean surface. So we could finally understand what was the composition of what we were seeing. So almost like a little drill head. It's just an abrasion tool. A little grinder. So this was the suite of instruments that we had on board. And of course, we had some atmospheric information that was obtained. We had sensors, that temperature, et cetera. But Pancam was used to do an atmospheric survey. And also give us some information about dust as it was coming in. And also we had all sorts of fun images. You see this one here looking like a little rodent skull. They were, and of course, the conspiracy theorist. They had full analysis. Some of the images we were seeing on our screen for the first time, we were looking at them and just laughing, knowing, predicting what was going to happen. Some of them looked like skulls of their look, what happens. I remember one, top aware on Mars. It was looking exactly like a turbo-work coming out, sticking out of us. So we had a bowl as well. Well, it's human nature. We can look at the clouds and we see a map of England or something like that. So people see all kinds of things that aren't really. Or little bones that you can see that point going with the wrong and ahead. Must have been dinosaurs on Mars, for sure. Well, anyway, let's pause here for a moment to give some hearts and thumbs up to spirit and opportunity. We bid farewell finally to opportunity on February 13th when Thomas Urbuchen and NASA headquarters with Jim Bridenstein standing beside him, formally announced the determination of that mission after 15 nearly extraordinary years. So unbelievable amount of science, imagery, data, and analysis. That of course was then followed on by curiosity. Amazing, because it would have never been predicted that here you had curiosity and opportunity operating at the same time on planet still, even though they were very different. In addition to all the data, et cetera, what we have to say is the number of people, scientists, and engineers that mission get to help becoming, you know, coming through. Starting their careers, yeah. Starting their career, some of them are now well-known scientists and on curiosity and they do that experience with them. The number of young people that we're, you know, taking through the whole process. Well, this is what I was talking about at the very beginning, as we were walking over here, is how, you know, these missions end up being, you know, a good portion of somebody's professional career. You know, it's extraordinary. All right, lots of questions. So let's jump through some of these quickly and don't forget to let us know where you are as you're watching us today here in Mountain View, because it's fun to find out how many different places on this planet. People are we've not yet had anybody. We're in coasts for more than planets. I was gonna say, we're open. We haven't heard anybody from Mars saying, you know, here, I'm in the Valorant Arras, but are there any plans to terraform Mars? Is that possible? This is a question from NASA. Yeah, that's such a huge question. And of course, there are plans. There are different possibilities. People have been presenting several ideas. They go from the slow one, you know, bringing in some, sanitary bacteria to actually do what happened on Earth. That will take a lot of time, obviously. And you have to protect them from the very beginning, because it's a little harsher on Mars than it was even on Earth at the very beginning. So this is the slow process. The very fast one, some people want to actually nuke the poles. The poles, right? Of Mars. Free the water. And just, free the water, create an atmosphere. The only issue with that is that you still have to maintain that atmosphere, because Mars didn't keep its natural atmosphere. So then there are plans now to have a sustainable way to maintain a medium sphere. I spoke with Jim Green, at NASA headquarters, about that plan to try to mitigate the resulting loss of magnetic field there to maintain that atmosphere. And there's notions that, at least in theory, you could get atmospheric pressure up to a point where you could perhaps get along without a space. You'd still need breathing apparatus, but you could potentially get it. The pressure would be to a point where you didn't need a pressurized suit. So big idea is bold ideas around territory. The idea is really interesting question. When will we see mining and 3D printing robots going to Mars, or the moon, or asteroids, is a question from PAD? Well, mining is, I think, that there are lots of dogs, asteroids. And personally, I think that the moon might be the best candidate to be first. Well, and we want to test things out there. As far as 3D printing is going, I would say that it's going to be a mandatory thing to have a board. Well, we're all doing 3D printing on the space station, so that we started doing that a couple of years ago. So I think it's very ending. Are there alternative energy concepts apart from solar and nuclear batteries to power robots and vehicles on Mars? Great question. That's from Stefan. Well, Curiosity goes within RTEG, which is nuclear power. That's nuclear power, yeah. Now, I think that if we have good cleaning solutions for the solar panels, and not just the wind to help us, solar panels obviously succeed. 15 years of operation with no way of cleaning yourself the solar panels. It's a great achievement. I think that for me, I would look for new ways of powering space prep to go from one planet to the next, once we are there. Well, this is what is a lot of the interest in what we call space resources or mining on places like the moon or on Mars is to create fuel, to generate fuel from hydrogen and oxygen that would allow you to fuel rockets to go further out to the next step. So that's a big part of what so-called space resources is all about. But it's still taking too long. So I think we have to have the revolution in power. In power? And I think you answered the question. There isn't really a good alternative. And if you go far enough away from the sun, if you're a mission like new horizons that went past Pluto and out to the Kuiper Belt, solar energy isn't going to do you any good. You're too far away from the sun. So that was also a neat and new power craft. So we've got some new technologies yet to invent this all the power issue. I mean, nuclear, we can say, works at last a long time, and is effective, but other things will probably need to be developed. OK, it says here paraphrase from Italians. Not sure who did the paraphrasing, but is it possible that conditions for human settlement on some part of Mars are closer than we think? I don't know. I guess what they mean in closer in time is it. What is the time horizon? Giovanni wants to know for settlements, human settlements, on Mars. I think we're talking at least 20 beyond 40. If you hear a number of things, I'm saying 10 years from now, you have to be very honest in the battle of sex. I, being on Mars is going to be a challenge in the first place, but going to Mars right now, we still have to solve a number of very, very important issues when it comes to the medical aspect of the travel for long duration space travel. They are not solved. And you don't want to have a cool arriving on Mars and being completely sick or being completely weak. And so we need to solve a number of those things. And then there is the realistic view of what it is to be on Mars. It's not going to be the moon. You cannot call home and be back in three days. That's right. When you have a lot of contingency planning that goes on. You are on your own. You are on your own. And you will never be able to just take a walk very easily. Definitely want to bring potato seats. You want to bring potato seats. What I'm saying is that, yes, it will happen. We have to be humble. And we have to be willing to be a stepping stone. You have to be patient. You can't brush in. Exactly. I think the other thing is, you think of just a raw payload issue of delivering material there to build habitats. You're probably talking about pre-delivering things on unmanned missions that deliver the hardware that allows them missions with men and women on board to subsequently go and erect housing habitats, et cetera. So it's complex. I don't think it's around the corner. But the problems and challenges are being worked on in this question. There are two visions. And the division is planting the fly. Yeah. Great planting the fly is good, but it's not the end. This stuff. I mean, what we really want to do is the science. Yeah, well, but then even if you want to live there, you better be prepared. Yeah. Let's see, give the Mars rovers measure any quakes. I think Stefan is asking this again. I think they had seismometers on the rovers. No, they didn't. And that's a very good question, because this is why we sent insight. Yeah. So insight is a mission that landed just last year. When did insight land? A few months ago. A few months ago, just before the end of last year. This is a land or not a rover. So the insight mission has these two rounded, unfolded, like butterfly wings in a way. And has two large circular solar panels. It's a stationary land. I think we talked about it in one of our Facebook lives. And it has a probe which will drill down deep to make thermal characteristic measurements down through the surface of Mars. I think it's going like 30 feet or even 30 meters. I can't remember. No, it's not 30 meters. I think it's not a feet. It will be the deepest hole dug on the planet. So we're developing that capability as well, right? And all the rovers, those two, they were just, you know, just centimeters. Mars, 20, and exo Mars could go between one and two meters, but insight is going deeper. And the insight of spacecraft or lander does have a seismometer. So it has a separate thing that sits on the surface and is designed exactly to measure quakes, which are interesting to understand the geology. We'll find some because there are signs of young organisms on Mars. Yeah. I'm going to come back to this one question because it's a good, kind of wrap up question that Emilio is asking. With new computer and miniaturization, what types of rovers are possible today? Dwayne wants to know. Well, we've got Mars 2020 coming up. Yeah, well, which is a- Curiosity-like rover. It's probably a counterpoint to that because, well, the Mars 2020 is a big flight. It's a size of an SUV. And same thing for exo Mars. You know what? Size, shape, mode of propulsion, and payload, all that depend on what you want to do. What is the goal of your mission? So it's not necessarily about smart. You might want to miniaturize things. And it's good because the more mass and the cost, the more cost. The lighter the mass, the lower the cost. Yeah, that's right. But the design depends on what you want to achieve. And I would say design vectors in instrumentation aren't necessarily the same as they are in semiconductors where you want to crowd more transistors and gates into smaller and smaller sizes. So it's really, as Nat says, you want small light instruments. You want to be able to pack more instruments on a given payload, on a given device. So from that point of view, certainly miniaturization is important. At the end of the day, there are certain fundamental things that we're talking about instruments and sensors to measure various parameters. You don't do have physical widths. And yeah, which will allow us to do a lot more on board than where we write nine terms of analysis and in terms of taking charge of the robot, actually taking charge of the mission instead of waiting for the science team. So a lot more autonomy, which will mean more productive and efficient missions as well. Yeah. That is actually one of the great ways to improve productivity is to have autonomous missions. You mentioned the, in terms of AI. Well, you mentioned in terms of habitability on Mars for human habitation on Mars, the whole issue of space medicine. And so the Canadian space agencies were closely with NASA Ames on the space medicine problem. We're hoping those of you who are regular followers, you know about our Frontier Development Lab program where we bring young scientists and machine learning and AI together with their counterparts in basic research areas. And one of the topics we're planning to get into this year is space medicine. What are the issues involved in providing medical support on these long term missions where, as that pointed out, you can't turn around and come back and get abandoned. So a lot of interesting technology there. Could astronauts generate wind power on Mars? Well, question is whether there's enough wind to really move a mass sufficiently to generate power. If that goes to this movie where you see this huge storm Mars in the movie, stuff around. So there is a lot of wind on Mars. And it goes very fast, but it blows into nothing. Yeah, it's just not enough. Yeah. Dense material. So if you watch the Martian, of course, there was a vehicle needed for the story to enable an astronaut getting or to provide for an astronaut. And by getting left behind, that was a wind storm that knocks things over. And as that points out, there really isn't enough density of the atmosphere, even though there are strong winds and fast winds, but there's not enough material density to move things to knock them over. And not sure whether wind power would be possible. Yeah, having said that, we had a very interesting movie. And I don't have it here. And people can find it online. Let's see if I can find it first. So when we get close to this guy here, which is the heat shield of opportunity, the spring. Yeah, we later spring everywhere. So we are littering other plants. But there were pieces of fabric that we are showing here and there. You see it's pretty beat up. It tells you how fast and how hard it is. But the piece of fabric we made a little video. And you could see it moving. It was moving in the wind. Oh, interesting. That's a cool that I'd like to see that one. OK, could rovers be designed with solar panels that can tilt vertically to 90 degrees to start working at sunrise? There was one that was developed by the current in the Leningrad Robotics Group that went around the pole and had exactly that. So it was not used. It hasn't been used yet on a planet, but it had a different planet than ours. But definitely this capability. Yeah, that's a great idea. It was a good question from Kevin. Could rovers incorporate some sort of ultrasonic vibration technology on solar panels to remove dust? That's an intro. That's the same. Vibrate them? Sure. As long as you know what you're doing with the electronics around. Yeah. And that's I guess that all of this is going to be progress. And this is another thing that those missions have taught us, the lessons learned and how we get it through. Now, of course, Mars 2020 is again a nuclear power device. So there's no solar panels on that. But great ideas. So you guys can send your applications into NASA. They're probably hiring still. And with new computer power and miniatures, are we asked that one, is there enough atmospheric pressure to operate drones? Answer? Yes. Well, in fact, there are new drones now that don't require any pressure. They are developing drones to work pretty much in the vacuum of space. And this is one of the reasons why Mars 2020 is going to have a drone. Now, by my understanding is that the Mars 2020 drone, at least the prototypes I saw in Jim Green's office, are conventional prototypes. But longer, I guess, bigger blades, because they have to work a lot harder with the surface of the atmosphere. But yeah, they're on Mars 2020, which again, is a curiosity like SUV-sized rover underneath will be a drone that they will deploy. And I guess do imaging and other things come back at recharge. Fantastic. And it's too old. Great. We're going to start in the air combined. The Arctic one, not too big. That's true. Absolutely. Absolutely. It gives you this integration between orbit to the ground that we don't have now. We are missing a lot of information that's so critical in terms of biocinatures. Yeah, you can't do the same kind of imaging from an orbiting satellite. Yeah, drones are very important. Great question from Stefan again. Could astronauts generate wind power on Mars? OK, we talked about that one. And so the one that I wanted to come back to, because I think it's a good way to begin wrapping things up, is what are your expectations for Mars missions for the next decade? So we know, of course, Mars 2020 is going to go. I don't know if there's other landers or rovers after Mars 2020 that are in the pipeline. No, right now there is something that is still being discussed is the Mars sample return. Oh, of course. Which in fact, Mars 2020 is supposed to meet behind. Yeah, it's catching some. Yeah, catching some. Catching materials and leaving behind a little chemistry that a subsequent mission is intended to go pick up to bring back to Earth to analyze it. But that return mission isn't really defined. There is a lot of debate. So we know for a fact that we will have more capabilities here on Earth, more time to do things the right way. So there is, of course, tendency to say, let's go get those products. And this has a number of problems that you need to solve. You need to land close. It's not that trivial. But you still have to catch those things and go back. So that's an issue. But if you want to do that, then you have to accept the fact that regardless of all the precautions that you're taking, you don't know how your sample is going to evolve inside that panoramic. That's their kind of structure. And so that's a big question, Mark. And we still have to figure this one out. On the other hand, sending the right capabilities a small lab on the Martian surface, where you have pin sectioning possible, where you have all the capabilities that you want to study samples at the surface of Mars, where they're autonomously. Once we have humans there, it will be different. Great question. And I guess it's fair to say that as these missions progress, we're getting closer to having to be deploying the technologies that really have the ability to detect the presence of at least primitive biology. Yes. And right now, a number of labs around the world are working on these DNA assays, where you can look for DNA. And I always see those comments people saying that what if life is not based on the same type of things? And that's a very common. Something completely different could have developed on Mars. But there is something we know too, is that if life is something we know of, it's energy and information. And one of the things that life wants to do is to transfer that information. So it might not be DNA. Exactly. So it will be something that we at least can recognize as a career of information. So people are working on this kind of capabilities This is where the miniaturization comes about. It's really that you can pack small labs now into very compact places. So but still so much more to understand. I think that also it's safe to say that Mars, although was not the same as the Earth, was very, very close to what the Earth was. And common prebiotic chemistry is possible. That's a little more than possible. It worked on Earth, the same ingredients were on Mars. Same raw materials there. Same raw materials. It cannot be that different. Especially for simple life. Fabulous. Well, thank you so much for sharing that. And I am going to show you a bittersweet image, which is this one here. That's opportunity in June of 2018, taking pictures of the incoming storm. Oh, that ended its mission. Yeah, wow. That was a dust storm that covered the entire planet for more or less a couple of months, or wasn't it? Oh, a lot more than that. Yeah, this is all the kind of storms that Mars and Earth nine, when it was sent to Mars, encountered when they were inserted the spacecraft into orbit. Or suddenly Mars was just completely covered. And that's why they couldn't see anything. And after a month of that, then it started opening and then they started discovering all of the smalls, the volcanoes and the canyons and the channels. Like the curtain was lifted. Well, it's funny. It's ironic that wind really extended these missions by, you know, serendipitously cleaning off the solar panels and wind to the end to the mission. And you know, when there was this planetary wide dust storm, I mean, imagine something like that on her planetary storm system, incredible to imagine that. Yeah. And as I was saying with some of my colleagues, there is a, there is sadness, but there is a lot more violence than this in seeing those missions. And we knew this time we'd come. The thing we couldn't imagine is that it would take 15 years and then we're about to come. But, you know, we learned so much. I think that Mars became a very familiar landscape, which is something that is now in a many-disconsciousness. So it's really the first baby step to take us towards becoming an interplanetary civilization. Yeah. I thought you had a great line in the story. So if you would like to read more about Spirit and Opportunity, there's a piece that Matt wrote on our website. It is, what's that? The link is on our website. OK, yes. And we're putting the link out to everybody. But it's on the homepage of our website, city.org. And it's an article in that wrote in honor of the Spirit and Opportunity Missions and the MER program. And one of the lines you had in there that I thought was particularly good was that, you know, for the duration of those missions, they essentially allowed everybody on Earth who wanted to be part of the mission. Because every day you could wake up and, you know, dial into the network where images and information were coming down and see new things about Mars. So it really enabled everybody on planet Earth to be explored, as along with the NASA scientists. I thought that was a very poignant message in the story. So wonderful. So lots of hearts and thumbs up for Spirit and Opportunity and for Nat and her role in the site selection of those missions, fantastic, and, you know, that long, long history. That, of course, continues with curiosity and Mars. I cannot do credit for what happened with opportunity because I really focused on Spirit. And I moved on as well when Spirit stopped. Sure. Sure. But end up past took me here. So here we are. All right. And speaking of here, we had lots of visitors. From all over the place from Gonzalez, Louisiana, Oklahoma City, Seattle, Israel, Phoenix, Albany, New York, Manhattan, Canada, Berlin, and Germany, Delaware, Transylvania, Wolfgang, Australia, Ireland, Nevada, Scotland, Costa Rica, Strasbourg, and France. Say hello. Simon Gabriel in California, Centralia, Washington. I don't even know what Centralia is. But it must be in the middle. Italy, from also Christian Sond in Norway, we've seen Christian Sond before. So greetings, Norway, Spain, Denmark, Arkansas, Iceland, Belgium, North, Elliman, England, a sailing vessel, white swan in San Francisco Bay. I think that's our first ship. That's pretty awesome. Maybe they're just, you know, they're C6 or everybody's down below watching things. What? I don't know. But anyway, big hello to the white swan in San Francisco Bay. Nicaragua, Lisbon, Portugal, San Antonio, Texas, Wales in the UK, and that's it. So anyway, wonderful to have everybody from the far corners of this planet with us today to talk about the fourth planet, Mars, and the MER mission spirit and opportunity. And that thanks so much once again for sharing those stories. Thanks to our globe. Thanks to our here for bringing you Facebook live. And we'll see you again next week. What we might do next week, I just had the opportunity. Week ago, I was attending a conference about the Arisee Boa Observatory, that great big huge 305 meter dish in the mountains of Puerto Rico. And we had the extraordinary opportunity to spend time with the director there and the staff there, getting up on top of that telescope inside the Gugorian dome where all the instruments are suspended in air by cables about 450 feet from the bottom of the dish. And I got underneath the dish, so I've got videos and photos that we'll be putting up on our website. We'll try to get some of those videos. You cannot do Facebook live from the place of a radio telescope for obvious reasons. But we'll put together some clips and get those out on Facebook so you can see them. And we'll talk about those next week and some of the scientists done at the Arisee Boa Observatory. So we'll see you then. And in the meantime, farewell from Mars, farewell from Mountain View, and the SETI Institute. We'll see you next week. Thanks, everybody.
