Hi everybody, welcome to the City Institute in Mountain View, California, where we study life in the universe, how it came about, how the universe operates as a place where it can flourish, and where we might find it, and where we explain and share what we learn. My name is Mantis Carino and I'm one of the scientists here at the Institute, and today we are talking about where we might find life, but it's actually thinking about ourselves, going to other worlds, specifically the Moon and Mars, of course someday hopefully beyond. My guest today is Pascal Lee, who has been one of the scientists here at the Institute for quite a long time, you were just telling me. Yeah, I started here in 2000, so it's been almost 20 years. So one of the institutions that we're very proud of here, and so welcome Pascal, thanks for being with us. The first thing that we want to talk about is in the news. The National Space Council had a meeting recently and came up with a new policy about humans in space. Why don't you tell us your views on that? Yes, this is big in the sense that NASA has a new formal directive, which is to get humans back to the Moon by 2024 and specifically to the South Pole of the Moon. And so this is a very specific mandate, and NASA of course is gearing up to sort of make this happen. Of course, there's through some hurdles, there are some budget approvals and things like that they need to happen, but to me this is an exciting opportunity because going beyond lower orbit, first of all, I've been working on trying to get humans to Mars for pretty much of my life, but the Moon is an exciting place. It's a very interesting place, and at this point I think it's a very good and critical step here in allowing us to do Mars properly, and in some sense faster if we go back to the Moon for us. So from my perspective, going back to the Moon thing is a very exciting new opportunity, there's going to be lots of new signs to be done on the surface of the Moon. And the fact that we're actually not just going into lower orbit, but actually targeting the surface is particularly exciting because there's lots to see on the Moon, and I've been particularly intrigued by these lava tubes. I should call them more specifically, these pits and crater pits that you see at the surface of the Moon, most of which probably are the reflection of a subterranean lava tube underneath. So in other words, a long cavern that runs along the surface of the Moon. In this particular location is collapsed, and so you see the interior of the cavern. But you can imagine sort of a cave system sometimes underneath the surface here in a place like this. These types of pits, we know of approximately 300 or so of them at this point, even more than that. The vast majority of them are at relatively low latitudes between the equator and about 50 degrees north. And this bias, if you will, this concentration of these things at low latitudes is an observation bias. On the software, folks at the University run software to automate the detection of these pits in images from the lunar reconnaissance over there, and it's actually a very clever process. They look at how the shadow and the lit area on the floor at the bottom of the pit moves across the bottom over time as the sun moves across the lunar sky. And you can map out the locations of these pits. So let's back up a minute and orient ourselves to what is being shown here in this image. So this is an image of the... This is an example. Yes, of course. This is the surface of the Moon. This is a high resolution image of the surface of the Moon. Taken by... Body of the lunar reconnaissance. By LRO. LRO. And what you're seeing is a pit that's approximately 80 meters across. So this big one is only 80 meters. So all of these... What look like craters here? This is the great thing about geology is that you can't tell the scale just by looking at the image. I mean, I could have believed you if you told me these craters reach a common across. Hope marks in the background are impact craters. This thing is not an impact crater. In fact, it has the shape of a funnel. If you were to approach and walking on the surface of the Moon, you would... You wouldn't see really a raised rim like you would around an impact crater. You would just start descending. And then the next thing you know, you would get to the edge of the pit. So it's like a sinkhole almost. Or at least that would be your experience of it. It might have a different... Physically, you call it a sinkhole, geologically, of course, as it size. It's not limestone. It's not limestone. Yeah. So this looks like the floor of it has been offsetters. That's just the lighting of the sun. The lighting of the sun comes from over here. It's right there. It's your to your right there. So we're looking down into the blackness to the unlit part. And then the lit part is just off to the sun. Exactly. Wow, I did not know that we had seen these. Yeah, so these are really remarkable. The first such pit was discovered by the Kaguya Japanese Holmer team. But many more were mapped out by Mark Robinson and Robin Wagner at the Arizona State University. But like I said, the software that they use to detect these automatically has found that most of these are recognizable only between 50 degrees north and south or south. Does that have to do with the lighting or do you think they do actually exist? It just has to do with the lighting. That's an obligation bias. So they could be in the polar regions. They're just harder to see. That's right. So what I, never to do last year, was to search for these guys in the polar regions. And of course, you have to do this manually. Of the movie. Because you have to do this manually. I think the reason, well, first of all, there's no particular reason why you would find them beyond 50 degrees north all the way to the pole. So they'll have the poles that would be some special thing going on either. But to me, they were interesting to find at the pole because if you have a cave at the pole, then all of a sudden, you might have an environment that is really extremely cold at the surface of the moon in addition to the permanently shadowed regions of the poles themselves. Right. We are super interested in science, but also in human exploration and the polar regions of the moon, the North Pole and the South Pole. Because there are these so-called permanently shadowed regions. That's right. G-S-Rs. And these permanently shadowed regions never see the light of day. And because they are in the permanent shadow of mountains and crater rims at the poles of the moon, these areas that are in perpetual darkness are extremely cold. And they're so cold that they associated sure enough with some water ice. Now know that there is water ice in the poles of the moon. Yes. Both the North Pole is. I mean, that's very exciting scientifically. That's exciting for exploration. But might there be places that are not at the poles or not quite at the poles where you might also have conditions that would be cold enough for you to cold trap ice. And so a cave that is in perpetual darkness would be such a place. So I could accommodate enormously more water than- Okay. I want to talk more about- You're saying that because when I say it, I sound like I'm selling this thing, but you're absolutely right. That's exactly your- Okay, to that. But first let's get into more detail about how exactly these caves form and how it is that these- When we correct to call it like a window or a skylight- Yeah. The answer to the cave is clear. So what kinds of caves are these? So let me get to that in a second. Okay. And I will just show you how the process we went through to find some of these near the North Pole of the moon. And I guess this again was- and I was just last year- this is just an introduction to what I'm going to talk about today. So I've been looking for some of these pits near the North Pole, the moon and the other South Pole. And the highest latitude ones, the ones closest to either pole, I found in this particular impact crater that you see here. So this is the moon, of course. This is the top here showing the North Pole region of the moon. There's a large crater that you can see up to the left a little bit near the top, which is cratered, filled with out. You can see from the earth. I think it's used the cursor. Oh, yeah, well, we're just sharing the screen for this. We can. Okay. So this is Philolous Crater. Philolous, named after the Greek philosopher, who was the first to propose this heretic idea that we might not be at the center of the universe. So I like Philolous quite a bit. Philolous Crater is 70 kilometers across. Okay. It's a relatively young, you know, who is a billion years or less impact structure on the moon. And if you look at Philolous, there's a patch of flat stuff here in the northeastern part of it. That's a sheet of once molten melted rock. And the rock was melted not because of volcanism in this case, because of the sheer heat that the impact dumped into the moon. And so it normally excavated a giant hole and created a crater that you see here. But it melted large amounts of rocks. So there was very briefly a lava lake in the crater just from the heat of the impact. Exactly. And so this is an example. And use the word lava, because precisely that's exactly what it is. It's molten rock. Now on Earth, the lava that we're familiar with is lava from volcanoes. But on the moon, there are volcanoes. And so there are volcanic lava as well, but there are also impact melt. Impact melt is perhaps more technically correct. And there are actually impact melt lava on the Earth as well. You find these at large, and you're going to be able to create those all over the Earth. For example, in many cratering quavec. It's a large impact. So it was zooming down onto the impact melt pond, if you will, inside Phil Laos crater. So you should give a successive series of pictures. You start seeing these, where it's zooming in. You start seeing these serious groups along the floor of the crater. You see these guys running across the floor of the crater. If you zoom into this area, this is what you see. And you notice that some of these things look like channels, essentially, at this point. But others look like discontinuous chains of pits or depressions. Like this here. So what these are, and this is now entering the realm of geologic interpretation, we don't know this for 100% sure that this is an interpretation of landscape. Is that what you see here is an uncollapsed or only a partially collapsed lava tube, whereas along here what you're seeing is a fully collapsed lava tube. So let's go into what a lava tube is. Yes. On Earth, we're very familiar with lava tubes. When you have a volcanic lava flow down the hill of a volcano, for example. Right. The surface of the lava flow tends to cool off relatively quickly, because it's in direct contact with the atmosphere. So it can shed its heat by radiating off the heat from the lava flow. And convecting it into the atmosphere as well. Underneath this solidifying upper layer of the lava flow. Basically. Yeah. Underneath this, the lava can still be much hotter and molten and continue to flow. You can end up in this situation where the top surface of the lava flow becomes rigid, because it has cooled off enough. Meanwhile, the lava underneath is still streaming downhill from whatever source the lava is coming out of uphill. And in some cases, the uphill source turns off. And the lava might drain out entirely from underneath the solidified lava crust. In that case, you end up with a tunnel, essentially, a tunnel that has a solid roof above it. So, solidified, former surface of the lava flow. And this tunnel is where there was one still flowing lava. Now the lava's gone. It's all just drained away down here. So this is how a typical lava to forms on Earth. You end up with a winding, you know, subway tunnel, so to speak, that usually goes downhill generally, but it winds down the hillside of a volcano that is covered by rigid lava. So, usually, you don't see them. Except when they start getting old, whether they start collapsing, and sometimes they start collapsing with little pits first, which is a very small section collapses. And that's what you call a skylight, when a little beam of light can actually enter the cave, you just, because now the roof has a little hole in it, hole in it. So that's, in this case, we're looking at the moon, and in this particular instance, this is not called candy clop, this is impact lava. So, how might this form well? And can I ask a question about that? Oh, maybe you're getting here. Maybe you're at the Ants Mechler. Here's an interpretation of how this forms. You have here a profile, if you will, of half of the diamond or no to the radius of the impact crater. So this is what's in gray down here, is the impact crater with the raised rim. Immediately after the impact, in phase one, all of this is molten. All of this should be orange. All of this should be orange. But then eventually, the top layer of this melted material cools off and becomes rigid. Yes. But it can crack here and there, it can split open, and allow lava to ooze up towards the surface. And this lava then flows at this point, just like a volcanic lava flow. And it oozes up to the surface because this crust that becomes cooler and more dense pushes down onto this impact melt that is less dense. And the magma rises to the surface. And it flows. And you have exactly the situation of a classical volcanic lava flow and a lava tube formation process. And to the lava flows, it eats and burns its way into the top part of the crust. Eventually, the top part of the lava flow becomes rigid. The lava underneath continues to drain until the drain's off. The pit starts to collapse a little bit and eventually it can be away entirely. So you end up in this final stage with at the surface, a little window that's cracked open into a tunnel underground with more solid material and shallows have to be. OK. So I was going to say that lava tubes that I'm familiar with, I've been to one in Hawaii or here in California, and they're all over the world. But they're generally places where you have lava that has come out of a source and then is flowing downhill. It's going to be going from one place to another in order to create a lava tube. So what you're saying here, because if you just have a crater full of lava, the lava is not going anywhere. But you're saying here then that cracks in the tube can then kind of honest crush the crust. So the smaller scale act like a volcano on earth and then you have the lava flowing away from the source of this crack. And that's how you end up with a lava tube. The key thing is if this material becomes more dense, it starts sinking into the solidified rock. Exactly. It's as if you were pouring something that was more dense than the water of your bathtub so something heavier than ice. That's going to sink down. Yes. And of course. Right. So you think about the ice in your drink's floats, but water is quite unusual in that quality. But when you solidify ice, it actually floats hardly anything does that. So and rock, when you solidify it, it sinks. And so that's how you end up with this. That's how you end up with a pressure, if you will, a hydraulic pressure, to ooze out more lava and then it flows onto the surface. Got it. And it doesn't take much to make it flow because this material is extremely hot. It has very low viscosity. It's just going to run down any slope that you want. And for one thing, that's why it winds around. It's because there's not much slope going on there on the floor. Okay. So we have lava tubes on the moon. And I wanted to give back and emphasize your fact that permanently shadowed craters are really a very kind of on the edge sort of thing. Like, you know, you have to be way up at the pole so that the crater, the floor of a crater doesn't quite ever get the sun because the sun is so glancing. It's like a whole bunch of things have to come together just right. And yet if you have lava tubes, you could have enormous volumes that can be collecting water ice. And it could. Okay, I'll be the non-expert who will say this, but it could blow the permanently shadowed crater floors out of the water. So, I could. But we don't know what it does. But we don't know how many lava tubes there are. Right. And at this stage, at this minute, if you wanted to go to a place where you know that it would be ice, I would still go to the polar regions themselves because, well, we know that there's ice there, whereas this is more speculative. If you absolutely right, this potentially could have, first of all, it's a less high latitude. It could have more easy to access and more massive ice. And let me just show you, this is the best resolution image we have so far, some of these pits along one of these semi-collapse sections of a lava flow or the floor fill a lousy frame. So these pits are about 15 to 30 meters across. And the lighting is such that we think that we're looking at this situation here that's shown on the far right. We're near the poles, so sunlight is coming in at a graze in the middle. It goes into the skylight area and that was this pit just enough to light up the vertical wall of the pit, which accounts for some of the brightening that you see right there at the very edge of the pit. But it does not enter the cave itself. It does not heat up the rocks inside the cave. The cave stays extremely cold. And when you think about what's happening with this pile of debris here, it is exposed to open space above it with no sunlight hitting on it. It is exactly the situation you have in the Parmolish Harbour region of the poles. And if anything, even colder, because you potentially colder, although it depends on what you're going to say. I was going to say that I think about cold air, but I stopped myself because there's no air on the moon. So to me, these things are no matter what, whether or not they contain ice, they're still going to be very exciting places to explore. This is perhaps the vision for astronauts returning to the moon and checking out some of these lava tubes. And I think now I should show you what we did and ice. So after this was reported last year, I felt a need to understand better not just lava tubes, which of course I'm very well understood and well studied. But under what conditions do you find ice in a lava tube? How does it occur? Is it just matted on the walls of your lava tube or is it actually building up masses of ice on the floor? Does the ice flow? Is it just static? Does it form glaciers? In what form and shape does ice occur inside a lava tube? And so I needed a lava tube that was young so they're not a lot of weathering has taken place. I needed a lava tube that had not been open for a very long time. And I needed a lava tube that was known to have not just a bit of ice but mass of ice. And the best solution I found, also an affordable one, and it became affordable actually thanks to a sea grant from the Dubai Future Foundation. The lava tube that was our best candidate for this first recon was loft-hallear ice cave in Iceland. And so to get a little trip for myself and the students, we invited AstroBotic, which is a space startup that does a lot of things including lunar landers. But they actually have a drone that carries a light R, which is a laser radar, if you will, that sends a beam around and maps out cavities and the surroundings. So they have a drone that carries this type of instrument all integrated. And the drone in fact can, is spot enough to sort of build a map of its surroundings as it flies through it. So we invited AstroBotic to join us. And we went to loft-hallear lava tube in Iceland. So I'm going to show you this short video of some of the things we see in this ice-switch lava tube. And a couple of, you know, tantalizing implications that it has for the moon. So you can watch this on YouTube. Here we are in Iceland. I just wanted to show here that, well, Iceland's capital is down for those of you who want to know exactly what this is. Since capital is down here, we went to the far northeastern end of Iceland to get to this cave. And it turns out that this cave is in almost the middle of the area that was used by the Apollo astronauts 50 years ago for their field geology training and preparation for going to the moon. At the time, the cave was not even known yet. And so they never visited it. But my guess is that the next generation of astronauts will return to the moon. First of all, we'll have a good reason to go back to Iceland because, along with Hawaii and a few other places, it's a very good place to train for the moon. But on top of that, you'll have the option of checking out lava tubes like this ice cave in preparation for exploring similar caves on the moon. You figure, Iceland must be chock full of lava tubes. It has a lot of lava tubes. As it turns out, not many have ice in them because the ground is actually still pretty warm. And then some of these ice field lava tubes are pretty old, relatively old. Okay, see the freshness. So I'm just going to keep running this. Lots of interesting analogues. So this is the skylight. You know, it's the pit that we see in the wild flow and the entrance to this lava tube. I actually mapped out the cave and we would deeper into it. And I'll just pause here because this is showing you how we were in awe and we'll be able to see and map. The ice is not coating the walls uniformly. It's dangling from the ceiling, the static tides. It builds up mounds, the form of static mites of ice. But there are also glaciers. The ice actually flows. There are feeding zones and population zones, even a flow front. Okay. And I need a scale check here. You need a scale check. Well, this is about the size of half a person. This drone is about... Okay, but they're drones in the foreground. And I was going to trust that. It's a drone is about 70 centimeters across. Okay, so that's still like my... This is about the height of a human being. You see humans here, it's okay. Okay, in the scene. But anyway, so we've been reporting the fact that, first of all, that you have microglaciers on the ground, which have not been really described in the context of any lava tube before. The other thing is... The implication here is that since there is... What is moving the ice is gravity? And the rate at which the ice moves depends on the temperature of the ice. The ice is very cold. It moves more slowly, but it still moves. If the ice is warmer, the ice flows faster and moves faster. So the expectation here is that if there is ice in lava tubes, in massive amounts like this, on the moon or Mars, it too will flow under the effect of gravity. Even the weak gravity of the moon or the weak gravity of Mars. And even though we will slow at a flow, probably at a much slower rate, because it's much colder than on the Earth, it has a lot more time. Some of these lava tubes on the moon that we're talking about in Finland, while it's clear it might be close to a billion years old. And so we might expect to see not just ice coating walls if there is ice in them, but ice that has somehow moved and accumulated and oozed around inside the cave over time. So this is an analog prediction of what ice might do if we're found inside lava tubes on the moon or Mars. The other thing is that ice actually is very bad news in terms of the stability of these lava tubes. We're looking at lava tubes on the moon in particular, but also on Mars. You often hear that they might be useful for human settlements. They are like ready-made habitats for you underground shelters, if you will, to move into. And indeed, they would protect you from dramatic swings in daylight, day night temperature, both on the moon and on Mars. And they would protect you from space radiation, ionizing space radiation from deep space and the sun. They would provide protection from the UV of the sun. They would provide you protective from my crubineritic bombardment as well. But caves have not been on the bombardments. They have that prone to collapse, insured off. That's how you even have an entrance to a cave. And when ice is involved, it's even worse news because the ice can fracture at the rock. When you have water entering a crack or a joint in the rocks, when it freezes, it will expand and that will fracture the rock. So as anybody knows, who has lived in a cold climate, we have rock collapses here. This pile here, and that pile over there are actually collapses from the rock ceiling. And it's like the interstate after a hard winter. And this is actually not a giant pile of rock. This is just a coating of rock because underneath this pile of rock there is clean ice like that. So it's just rock that is draping out of the ice and protecting it. So anyway, we think that if we do encounter ice and caves on the moon and Mars, we might actually want to look out as well for the fact that they might be prone to ice, ice fracturing. It's called jelly fraction and therefore collapse. So we should probably move into the actual mappings and that we will still also have time to go to Canada. Yeah. So I want to show you how drone flights astrobotic has this amazing drone. I'll just let this run. Position. Position. You're ready for it. Now, this is impressive only to the particular because, first of all, the mapping of the cable will be done within minutes, as you'll see. But also the flying of this drone is done completely without reliance on GPS for the drone to know where it is and where it can go. So we think drones are one way to go to explore caves on the moon and Mars. People have talked about rovers and waters. All kinds of things that have to somehow interact with terrain that you don't know. And also stay in the cave for a long time where there's no power from the sun and no comms back to the earth. So that's actually very challenging. Temperatures are very cold. So there you go. That's the skylight. Here's the map. In fact, we pause this because I think this is probably one of the coolest pictures. Again, this is the skylight seen from a regular drone flying above the entrance of this lava tube. And with the drone, we've mapped out now the underground tunnel, if you will. And we've projected it against this picture. So this is one direction in which the lava tube continues. And this is the upstream direction where it goes. And this actually gets choked here. So we're going to go further at this point on this direction. This here actually leads to a passage down there. You have to call crawl through it. But that's when you have a much longer distance to explore. And we went all the way to the end that we could, which is about 150 meters further in. The diamond of the entrance here is about 20 meters only. And so this is a map of the, this is the map of the big chamber of the 50 meters away from the entrance. Now there could be little side passages that could be missed if you don't get close enough to them. And you missed the fact that for sure. And normally that, there's some sections of this lava tube completely filled with ice almost. So you have essentially crawling on ice against the ceiling. Just in a little gap there. But then lava tubes, they tend to be much less branchy than limestone case. Exactly. So we were able to map out the geologic features that we recognized with this light. And the advantage of the light is it gives you really a very detailed size and volume and shape of your lava tube. So the thinking here is that we might use drones just like this astrobotic drone with that kind of technology to do reconnaissance exploration of lava tubes on the moon and Mars. And of course, because there's no atmosphere on the moon or Mars, you're not talking about drones that like this one would use propellers or rotors. You're talking about drones that would be thruster and being rocket engines or coal gas engines. And so you go, and fly into your cave not long enough to get too cold. They would fly back out. The land on a land or a rover that's carrying them, send the data back to the earth. We charge their batteries, possibly refuel, warm up, and then go and explore the cave a little further. And then we're using the map that they've created during their previous passing. And these would not be copter drones. Exactly. These would be thruster drones. And the whole idea here is that you have a touchless approach to exploring the lava tube. You might stir up some dust with your little rocket engine heat. It would be added by the rocket engines. Yeah, although they might be coal gas thrusters, so they don't have to involve combustion. Yeah, so you don't want to disrupt the environment either. But the point here is that you know they might stir up some dust. Any approach actually might anyway. But here at least you would have a touchless approach and you could zip through this and map it very quickly. So we could find out once the technology is mature what these caves on Mars and on the moon have to offer. I want to point out just one thing. We know lava tubes, volcanic lava tubes, in this case now on Mars. All the flanks of the giant volcanoes on Mars. They have been seen. They have been seen for more than fact. This video ends with a couple of pictures of these guys. So we just saw the lunar example. There are lava tube caves on the moon. We have a drone on my tune in the lava tube. But then on Mars, although giant volcanoes on Mars, there are hits that are likely to go there. And this is of course just a vision for the future. But the point here is that you would like footage. These lava tubes on Mars are relatively high altitude. So unlike that little helicopter that JPL is now designing for the Mars 2020 rover, which will be flying in relatively low altitude on Mars where the atmosphere is dense enough for you to fly with rotors. These lava tubes are such high altitude on the flanks of the giant volcanoes of Mars. It's 10-20 kilometers up above the mean level of Mars. That the air is too thin there now to fly anything like a helicopter or a drone. So again, you need propellant drones. So you need a thruster system. So this is an example of how exploring the lava tubes of the moon with thrusted drones will actually open the door to exploring lava tubes on Mars on the flanks of its giant volcanoes. Are they likely to be lava tubes at lower altitude or lower altitudes on Mars? There must be, I mean, there are lava flows galore on Mars. In fact, an interesting paper proposes recently that the entire noctis-labourintis maze is actually a maze of collapsed giant lava tubes. And I actually find that I get very intriguing and interesting. So they may be some of the low altitudes. So we should definitely move on to Canada. Part dirt, okay. Do we have any questions about this so far? So we do have two questions that I can read from our contents of bar. One is, I think about our first brief segment. If risk was no factor, asks Evan, where would you choose to send astronauts or rovers on the moon? What is the dream place to explore? Wow. The moon has a lot of interesting places that are still on touch. I think the polar regions are high on mine, these are places I'm likely to check out. There's a whole general area called South Pole Aiken Basin, which has been on the far side of the moon, but it's the other south pole of the giant ancient impact basin on the moon. I of course would like to go check out these lava tubes that we talked about. These are all the lava tubes, you know, that water all the moon. So lots of real estate to explore. Absolutely. No single one would do it. Could skylight lava tubes, as Ron, be used for human structures for habitation? Could they enable subsurface habitation or protection for meteorites of the sun's damaging rays? Yeah, address this, all right. They could. We just don't know enough yet. And so hence the need to understand the really well on the Earth and then keep doing the same on the moon before we can tell for sure. All right, let's talk about your research base in the universe. So I'm seeing my little battery. So okay. We've been going up to Devon Island in the Arctic for 22 years now. It's coming somewhere we have 23rd fuel season. Devon Island is the largest uninhabited island on Earth. And on Devon, of course, the star of the show is this giant meteorite impact crater called Halton Crater. And I have a charger and there's some more to that. So Halton Crater is 20 kilometers across 23 million years old. This is a view of the crater from 10,000 feet of altitude looking towards the north. And we've established a permanent base on the northwestern river of the crater at Halton Sea. It's called the Halton Mars Project Research Station or the HMPRS. Thank you. So this is an aerial view that we've actually mapped out on our own, the drone of our camp. You can see our base camp that has its star formation here. This is our landing strip. The scale is giving you the little ride that's 100 meters. This is an ancient coral refaction that's called the Fortress. It's got three beautiful fossils of corals. And this main trail that we used to go from our camp to the helipad or to the air strip and on into the crater is called NASA Road 1. This famous road at Houston that takes you to NASA's Johnson Space Center. So this is another perspective view of our camp and the air strip here now to be up there. That's the helipad area here. That's the map of it. So the reason why I'm showing this is because we now have the ability with Google Earth to explore this place through Google Earth. And Google became a partner of our project in a big way this past summer. And we just announced this partnership in a news release. And Google has actually created three products, so to speak, around our project. One is a guided tour of the camp and surrounding areas that you can go check out on Google Earth. It's called the Google Earth guided tour. Another is a series of street views. So you can now click on our camp or some of the surrounding sites and have a sort of a first-person panoramic view of your surroundings and see it for yourself. So street view now is available, although it's spotty on Devon Island. And then the third thing is Google created this video that will run at the end after we sign off for people who might not have seen it yet. It's just a 10-minute video made by Google about our project and it will take you around the sites of this incredible place. To show the spacesuits in the rivers. Yes, it shows the spacesuits in the rivers. So this is our base camp, typical star formation. So this is actually interesting because even though this camp is designed to be effective for the Arctic, we are... Look who's here. Oh my goodness. Somebody to see us. We can have the Arctic. You took a lot. Okay. So I guess it's time for me to introduce... Time to introduce the Polar Guard Dog. Thank you, Bill. Yeah, David. Bill Diamond, I see you. Hey guys. Hi everybody. Matt Good to see you. Thanks for coming and talking to Pascal. Today was a great time. Helping with your insights. Good to see you, Pascal and me to follow. Thank you. Yes. For the past 20 years, I've been taking my dog, I guess, up to the Arctic in the summer. He helps us as a Polar Guard Dog. And the latest dog that I had even last summer, which you've seen in the Google video, was King Kong passed away in October. Yeah, we missed it. I just... Oh yeah. That's it. Okay. So I just got a... So I just got a... It's a family show. I just got Apollo, named after, of course, his middle name is Program. And so just to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Apollo program. Very original. But anyway, Apollo will be a new Polar Guard Dog at camp in the Arctic. He does know what he's up against. He hasn't been there yet. So... Does he go in this year? Yes. All right. And will he get the jacket? The official jacket? You get the jacket, yeah. So he's a Catal Dog and Australian Catal Dog. Very nice. It's scary these parts. But anyway, good boy. Yeah. All right. I'll bring him back so you can keep going. All right. I'll just keep going for a bit here and then we're going to go back. Has Apollo or any of your other dogs actually come into close proximity with the Polar Bear? No, but you will see them sniff actually the air very intently sometimes. And of course, the role of the dog, as I explained even in the video, is not to attack a Polar Bear. No. That's not going to go well. To give us a heads up. To the person going on. And so we do run for the guns when we see that the dog is sniffing the air or barking even. So, yep. So you're going to... I'm going to take Apollo back to his base camp from now. Okay. You're going to talk about the video and we'll wrap it up. Yeah. Fantastic. So, I'm going to leave this video and have an opportunity yourselves to join Pascal and his team thanks to Google on Devon Island and experience this absolutely otherworldly landscape. It's beautiful and spectacular and a beautiful video. So, yeah. I'm trying to get Bill to come up this year. I'll bring this up. I'll bring this up. All right. Come on. Yeah, sounds like you're getting along. We're doing it. All right. See you guys. Bye. Thank you, Bill. You bet. Thanks, Matt. Yeah, our camp is designed with the Arctic in mind. It's not emulating in moon base or Mars base. This is how we feel a good functional research base in a polar region should be configured. And as it turns out, it's actually helping NASA and other space companies think through how you might design layout functionally. Sure. And this might do good places. This might be a good place to bring up the concept of planetary analog, which I've heard you talk about before, right? So Devon Island has some aspects of it that are like Mars, but in other aspects, for example, oxygen that you can breathe and it's actually even though it's the arch-high Arctic, it's quite a bit too warm. So you have to think about what are the parts that are serving your analog and what are the parts that are working against your animal. You want to say a little about that? Yeah, I mean, just like the Apollo astronauts, we're much better prepared when they went to the moon by having done field work, not just to learn about geology, but to actually practice their exploration skills to mature their tools, to work out their exploration strategies. It is actually very useful to analyze how we do field work optimally here on Earth and see what needs to be changed or how it might be transposed to Mars. So you bring up a good point. Analogs are a way to compare what we do here on Earth versus how we might do them on Mars, but the implication is not necessarily that we do this thing the same way. It's more that we use the Earth as a reference point. We analyze it very carefully. Sure. Then we extrapolate that to the Martian environmental and the lunar environment with the modification that it requires. So for example, these habitats are not connected because they are not pressurized. We can just walk and open air from one building to another. All the lunar Mars you want them to be connected and of course fully pressurized. But these are technical details that don't necessarily change the function of these habitats. So how each lab is used or what types of instrument it has. So there's a number of things you can still learn that are going to be directly valid for what you want on the lunar Mars, even though other aspects of the analog are sort of lower in fidelity. So anyway, this is our layout. You can watch this in your own time. I just want to present the some of the landscape that we have. This is Devon Island, the ancient lake bed on the floor of Halton crater. This large impact crater that is the centerpiece of this site compared to the terrain that we have on the floor of Rusev crater on Mars which is believed or was believed to be an ancient lake bed as well. Okay. Here's an example that's more dramatic of a giant, this is at the same scale actually, a giant canyon on Devon Island and similar looking winding V-shaped canyons on Mars. These guys are still a big mystery on Mars. In fact, the only theory that had been proposed so far is that they result from water seeping out at a trickle. So these are the valleys that would be growing headwards into the highlands of Mars. But we think that instead they might have formed the same way as this canyon has formed. When the terrain surrounding the canyon seems to be almost untouched by erosion compared to the canyon itself where you have a deep groove there in the landscape. This canyon here on Devon Island was formed by ice. By streaming ice, ice moving very fast, off of a nice cap which otherwise was extremely cold and just matted against the landscape and not doing much to it elsewhere. So the landscape here is protected by ice. The landscape here is deeply insized by an ice stream in other words a glacier coming off of the ice cap. So we think that this might be what we are looking at here on Mars. These could be ancient glacial valleys with an ancient ice sheet that is now long gone from the highlands around. This is the view that we have of this place that we call Asteroch Canyon. So this is Asteroch Canyon on Devon Island on the left. That's what it looks like when you're standing here. I'm standing here looking down to this lake in the foreground and then the long lake in the distance. Okay. And then up to the sea. Out to the sea the other time. So this is essentially a fjord that is not filled with seawater. It's a glacial valley. And it does look ushaped like a proper glacial valley. These are talus slopes and so on. Yes. So I would say the shape changed to more you shaped before the tailless. But originally it was actually V-shape and in place where you don't have so much talus accumulation you actually see the V-shape very well. For example here you see the V-shape very well here as well. It's all V-shape. Here you have infilling and other things going on that have changed the shape a little bit. So anyway the site is relevant of course for planning Mars exploration but I'm excited by the fact that since we've heard NASA announced that we're going back to the moon now to the lunar south pole our research slide might actually become super relevant again because at the lunar south pole which is shown here you have a large 20 km under impact crater called Shackleton. Inside Shackleton you have a permanently shattered region where you might actually have ice where ice has been reported. And even in the previous plan under the Bush administration to go to the moon even in the previous plan there were already ideas of having an outpost or base near the south pole of the moon on the rim of Shackleton crater and at this particular location normally I mean near the south pole and near the Shackleton crater but you are in an area of permanent sunlight. As much as the bottom of the pit is permanently shadowed the crest here of this ridge of the rim of the crater is in permanent sunlight. So as the moon rotates throughout its day when you're up there on top of that hill you never see the sun go down to the end. So that's permanent solar power that's very interesting. Anyway Halton offers a very similar configuration. It's also 20 km across. The bottom of course is not in permanent darkness but for communication with our for example unisonous situation the sunlight dishes are grazing the ground and those of you who are into cames you will know that if you interact with the ground there are all kinds of interferences that sort of multiple scattering effects that are issues in communication so you can learn how to mitigate this by doing similar horizontal looking satellite cames from our polar site. This is showing Halton crater superimposed on Shackleton crater without base camp here. Simulating for example this outpost that you might have on the rim of Shackleton crater on the moon and we are learning for example that on our project how to plan these long distance traverses around the crater you don't want to cut across the permanently shadow region of the moon where you lose power you want to stay on the rim and in sunlight. So you can learn how to plan these road trips if you will on the moon with astronaut crews by doing things at Halton crater gives you a sense of the scale of your operations and what it would take to carry this out. So I am going to wrap up. So before we go to the 10 minute video we need to properly sign off the broadcast. Yeah. So we will see in the video what you are doing at the site including testing equipment that astronauts will use on the surface of Mars or possibly the moon. I am just looking at this because I have my PowerPoint froze. So I am going to have to see me. So we are just having a technical glitch here. No problem. We work on that. I still have to do restart on this. Do we have any more questions Rebecca? Someone was wondering if methane detected on Mars comes from underground lava tubes containing water. We don't know yet. So this is very intriguing. What the person is referring to is curiosity, the rover at the surface of Mars, NASA's rover, recently detected some methane in the environment around the rover and simultaneously an orbiter from the European Space Agency detected methane from orbit at that location at the same time. So this is a correlated measurement of detection of methane. And as to the origin we don't know yet. So there are two general categories and implications for methane. One is the fact that methane can be a mineral origin and does not imply biology. But you also have methane that could be a biological origin. And so to know that you'd have to do things that we're not equipped to do yet on Mars. You know, I said to you for the methane. But by understanding better where this methane comes from, so by tracking over time, when curiosity will run into this again and also whether or not you see it from orbit, we might get a sense of where it's coming from exactly. So at this stage, it could be coming from surface rocks or it could be coming from deeper down. We don't know. And while you bring your computer back up, I also have our list of locations where people are joining us from. We are joined as usual by viewers from around the world and some of the places that have signed in are the following. The first place to stand. Christian Stodd, Christian Saund Norway, Istanbul Turkey, Brazil, Prince Edward Island Canada, Tokyo Japan, Florida, Louisiana, Lake Havasu City, Arizona, Vancouver Canada, Almada Portugal, Lima, Peru, Cracow Poland, Munich, Germany, Tucson, Arizona, XMORE in the UK, South Tyrol Italy, Provence France, Germany, Fredericksburg, Virginia, France, Yorkshire, Vanita, Oregon, South Africa, Montreal Canada, Jensen Beach, Florida, Ohio, Fuerze Ventura, Canary Islands, Melbourne, Australia, Texas, Pensacola, Florida, Olympia, Washington, Orlando, Florida, Albany, New York, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada, Portland, Maine, Stockholm, Sweden, Dunkirk, France, and North Coping, Sweden. We are very grateful for our global network of supporters and we couldn't do it without you. Thank you all for being with us today. Thank you, Matt. So let me launch this real quick. I can't, yeah, so I've unplugged it. Because I'm on the right here. I'll get my drive here. Okay. Yeah, and if anybody has more questions, I guess feel free to send me an email. Ask me through Facebook. Let's go. So we're just going to launch a 10 minute video that was filmed by Google. Worth pointing out, it was filmed entirely using just their smartphone, the new smartphone in Pixel 3. And Google actually is really an interesting partner for our project because of their expertise and information technologies. And so this past summer, the scope of their involvement was limited to helping us so without outreach effort. But we're anticipating a more tactical work together in the future here. The video has a kind of end credits. So thank you all for listening. Once more, this is the same institute in Mountain View, California. And we will close with this video of Pascal's base and the new partnership with Google. Thank you, Pascal, for being with us. Thank you, Matt. This is a lot of fun. Bye, everybody.
