 You're listening to an AirWave Media Podcast. This episode is brought to you by Indeed. When your computer breaks, you don't wait for it to magically start working again. You fix the problem, so why wait to hire the people your company desperately needs? Use Indeed Sponsored Jobs to hire top talent fast, and even better, you only pay for results. There's no need to wait. Speed up your hiring with a $75 Sponsored Job Credit at Indeed.com slash podcast. Terms and conditions apply. Today at T-Mobile, I'm joined by a special co-actor. What up everybody, it's your boy, big Snoke Deal, double-j. Snoke, where can people go to find great deals? Head to T-Mobile.com to get four iPhone 16s with Apple and Tele just on us. Plus four lines for 25 bucks. That's quite a deal, Snoke. If you switch to T-Mobile, you can save versus the other big guys comparable plans plus streaming. Respect. Only a body hit. See how you can save on wireless and streaming versus the other big guys at T-Mobile.com slash switch. Apple Adulges requires iOS 18.1 or later. I'm happy. Well, I've appeared to tuck into this burger, garnished with a lovely slice of portabello mushroom. I know that I survived by putting food into my body, but this mushroom, a fungus, survives by putting its body into food. That's one of the many surprising things I learned about mushrooms. They're beyond tasty and they're just about everywhere. And I ask you, how well do you know you're fungi? I'm Seth Shawstag. I'm Molly Bentley. Welcome to Big Picture Science, produced at the SETI Institute. In this episode, we go beyond the fruiting bit, the mushroom, down to the dense, mycelial networks that grow like a giant cobweb below our feet. Their complexity and adaptability may astound you. So, taking our cue from fungi, which include mold and yeast, remember, we're going to cover as much as we can. It's mycology education. We appreciate the bits of a fungus that we can see, that bag of mushrooms I bought yesterday, well, it's destined to be fried and butter and served up as part of dinner. But fungi aren't confined to bags or even frying pans. In fact, in the wild, they aren't confined period. Mold is a kind of fungus, of course. It's invisible spores are everywhere. And sure, mold can be bad for us. I wouldn't recommend eating that chocolate pudding with a white fuzz on it. But mold can also convert a block of curd into delicious blue cheese or clear an infection. Even the mold on an orange, while it makes it unsuitable for breakfast, is a good thing. Because where would the world be if nothing decomposed? Well, we'd be up to our eyeballs in rotting everything. The story of fungi is literally one of, there's more than meets the eye. A mushroom is like an iceberg. The bulk of this ubiquitous life form, the part that transforms our world, lies below ground. And a tangle of filaments called a mycelial network. Mycelium is a generic term that describes the growth habit of most fungi. And mycelial networks are branching, fusing networks of tubular cells. He's a biologist with a degree in tropical ecology and years of research studying underground fungal networks. He's also the author of, in tangled life, how fungi make our worlds change our minds and shape our futures. And he regards the object of his study life itself. My name is Merlin Sheldrake, and I study fungi because they are ecological connective tissue, the seam by which much of life is stitched into relation. We think you'll find the world of fungi and the mycelial networks that give rise to them so interesting, so surprising, that we've asked Dr. Sheldrake to join us for the full hour. So let's get down to it. Merlin, take us on a jewel's verne like journey beneath our feet. If we could look out through our tiny submarine window at everything that's below us, what would we see? If you could drop down into the soil, first of all, you wouldn't see much because it's dark. But if you mentioned that the soil was somehow transparent to your gaze, you would see this endlessly knotting, twisting, fusing networks of fungi, fungi, different types of fungi, different types of network. You would see bacteria sliding along the slimy film on the outside of these fungal networks, using them as highways to navigate the cluttered obstacle course of the soil. You'd see small animals grazing. You'd see all sorts of strange microbial creatures that you didn't recognize. You'd see these hot spots of decay where some rotting root or a rotting piece of wood had attracted to it. Swarms of microbes joined in for the feast. If you could smell the chemical weather systems of the soil, you'd be overwhelmed by these different fumes given off by other organisms, fungi giving off fumes to attract or repel other fungi or bacteria. You'd smell rotting roots, rotting bits of wood. If I was down in the soil in this way, I think I'd get quite dizzy quite fast. You know, Marlon, the nature writer Robert McFarlin, has a phrase that is stayed with me, which is, height is celebrated, but depth is despised. Do you think that is true? Do you think that we hesitate to dig in and explore and appreciate the world beneath our feet? I think it might bring up some fear and resistance. I also think we explore it less because we just have not got the tools quite so readily to explore these underground worlds, especially on a microbial level. When we explore the microbial worlds in the soil, much of the time we have to kill those microbes to grind them up to extract their DNA, it's very hard to pay attention to what's happening without extracting different parts of these organisms. So even today, the best we can do is still very limited compared to our ability to fly up in the air to climb. So I think there's a big part of these underground worlds which are just unknown to us, and still many parts of these underground worlds which are unknowable to us. Well, let's get to know some of these organisms and let's get to know fungi. When we think of fungi, we often think of mushrooms, perhaps because that's what's above ground. But mushrooms are just the fruit of the fungi, and you say it's like imagining an apple on a tree there's the apple, and then there's the whole tree. So what's below the mushroom? So there we find these mycelium networks, these branching, fusing networks of atubial cells. Mycelium is a generic term like the word tree. When we think of an apple tree or a redwood tree, these are very different trees, they're both called trees. And same with mycelium, you have very different fungi. There are lots of ways to be a fungus. There are lots of ways to be a mycelium network. Some of them are just ephemeral puffs that live on specks of house dust. Others can range over kilometers. And in fact some of the largest organisms in the world are mycelium networks that range over kilometers. There's one in Oregon that sprawls over 10 square kilometers and is somewhere between 2000 and 8,000 years old. Same more about what a mycelium network is. Is it like roots? Should we think of it like roots or antennae or what is it exactly? So mycelium is how fungi feed. So animals put food in their bodies, fungi put their bodies in the food, and to do so, to have as much of themselves in contact with their surroundings as possible. They form these networks which have a very high surface area relative to their volume. So it allows them to explore and digest as much of their surroundings as possible. So of course if you're exploring your environment, if you're putting yourself into your source of food, your food source is going to vary. And so you have to be able to change your shape, your shape shifting. And so these mycelium networks have very fluid boundaries. They can grow in one direction and prune themselves back in another direction. So they're these exploratory networks of tubes. And so if you see a mycelium network, you might think it's a bit like a cobweb, but it's not really like a cobweb because cobweb is made of threads. And mycelium is there's space within these fungal cells through which material can pass. So what's important in these mycelium networks are not just the material, the substance itself, but the space in between it is that what you said because of what's being transmitted between those spaces. Well it's like if you have a transport network. So from mycelium network to digest its surroundings, it has to be able to produce enzymes, acids, all sorts of compounds which it releases, which digest say a block of wood that it finds itself buried in. And then it must absorb those nutrients and transport those nutrients around itself. So these networks are kind of transport networks. Because they transport networks, it's all about what flows through the network. So you can think of these tubes. But then you also need to think about what's flowing through these tubes. I think that's why they call it the the why they call it the wood wide web. So it's transporting all this information but it also sounds like it's a circulatory system. Yeah so within a given mycelium network nutrients and other signaling compounds circulate. This organism has to remain in touch with itself. It has to coordinate its behavior without having a centralized place to do so. And so the circulation of material within these networks is very important. And so when you have these a say a fungal network connecting two plants together which can happen, then you can have material passing between those plants through the fungal network. And that's broadly speaking this idea of the wood wide web. Now it went by kind of fast but you said that mycelium networks can grow to be quite large. Many, many kilometers. I think you mentioned Oregon had one of a few kilometers. Can you say that again Merlin why would a network need to spread so far? Well the fungi that formed these really enormous networks are these are known as honey fungi. And they live on trees. They kill trees and they feed on trees. And so they just spread because they grow, they forage, they maintain connections to places where they had been before. And the lifestyle of this network is to grow and to continue to expand. And so it's like why does some trees grow particularly large while others remain as small bushes. It just depends different types of fungus behaving in different ways. But if a tree were to grow nine miles straight up, we might ask why does it need to grow so tall? It is intriguing that a mycelial network isn't satisfied with your backyard or a square mile or a square kilometer. But it needs to roam over many, many kilometers and miles. At least some of them do. Well I think they need to run. They'd be quite happy to know a honey fungus, an armilaria fungus, would be able to live in a smaller area as well. I think these ones grow large because they can. Because there's space and resources enough for them to expand in this way. So it sounds like what's below ground is this whole network, a circulatory system, passing nutrients and passing information. The mushroom that we see above ground, what we really focus on most of the time, that's the way that the fungus spreads its spores. But it's a fleeting moment in its life, unlike what's happening below ground. It's right, mushrooms, they have a raw biological role at sport dispersal. And when they've played that role, then they decompose, they rot. And so it's very much analogous to the fruit, the role of fruit for plants. One of the things that intrigues you about fungi is that unlike us, unlike animals that have a bilateral body plan, and it's pretty predictable, you know, central body and legs and arms, there is nothing like that in the Mycelial Network. No, there's no center of operation, there's no head, no brain, there's no heart. We're such centralized bodies that this can be hard for us to understand. But Mycelial Networks stay, coordinate themselves, somehow, everywhere at once, and nowhere in particular. And they do so in ways that we are still trying to understand. They're able to, Mycelial Networks live in their environment, they live bathed in a rich field of sensory information. And somehow they've got to integrate these data streams, you know, they're sensitive to light, to chemicals, to temperature, acidity, pressure. All these different data streams, somehow the fungus can integrate these different data streams. And decide on a suitable course of action, to grow in a direction, or to change direction of growth, or to branch, or to fuse. And so in our bodies, we look for brains because brains are where we integrate perceptions, and where we connect perception and action. So yeah, so fungi live bathed in this rich field of information, and somehow they're able to integrate this information and make decisions about the suitable course of growth, or whether to branch, or whether to fuse, or whether to produce this type of enzyme, or whether to fruit. Well, you know, that's incredibly fascinating. Who would have thought I'd be fascinated by fungi, and I really can't wait to hear more. I have to say one thing that struck me is the amazing range of their behaviors. It's incredible. Say more. What did you find amazing about it? Well, look, imagine you're a fungus, and the things you have to do is find your food, get to your food, digest your food, react to, I don't know, danger. I'm not sure what danger they have there, but it's, you know, a nematode might try and eat you, and they can do all that, even though they don't have any organs. Right? They don't have the ears, eyes, noses, sense organs, and yet they do all the things required of them. I think it's incredible that some of these networks range many kilometers, and that the one in Oregon that extends many kilometers is also 2000 to 8000 years old. That's ancient. It is. You know, there aren't many things that are older than that. They tend to be trees, which also have root networks. I suppose the point is that, you know, if you're underground, there isn't really terribly much limitation on how big you can become. I mean, it isn't like a tree. A tree can become 50, 100, 200 feet high, but not much higher than that simply because of the strength of wood. I mean, they just fall over. But if you're a Mycelium network, I guess you can just go on and on and on as long as there's food. Seth, do you realize that when you're eating your Port of Alabama mushroom, or any mushrooms, you're eating spore dispersals? According to Merlin? Yeah, well, I really never thought about it before. Ollie, and now I am thinking about it, and I'm not sure I'm happy about it. Well, we'll continue our deep conversation with biologist Merlin Sheldrake. Up next is the complex behavior displayed by fungi evidence of intelligence. It's myology education on Big Picture Science. I can say to my new Samsung Galaxy S25 Ultra, hey, find a keto-friendly restaurant nearby and text it to Beth and Steve. And it does without me lifting a finger, so I can get in more squats anywhere I can. One, two, three. Well, that'd be cash or credit. Credit for. Galaxy S25 Ultra, the AI companion that does the heavy lifting so you can do you. Get yours at Samsung.com. Compatible Select Attraparse Google Gemini account results may very based on input check responses for accuracy. Now, when I stroll outdoors, I'll be aware of the vast mycelial networks beneath my feet. And I also might be reminded of them when I occasionally spot their fruiting bodies above ground. And those often appear suddenly. I don't know if you've had this experience, but you know, you go into your garden or you look at your compost heap or something, and find that the mushrooms have sprouted overnight. Scientists are learning just how responsive and adaptive fungi and their mycelial networks are. These underworld denizens are clearly capable of some truly astounding behavior. But does this behavior actually qualify as intelligence? We continue our conversation with biologist Merlin Sheldrake. You describe these networks as making decisions and it's not a brain, but it is making very adaptive decisions. And how does a fungal network or a mycelial network decide which way to grow? And is it actually reaching for things? Does it know what's around and is it trying to move toward a tree branch or toward a particularly nutrient-rich part of soil? Yes, so different fungaly, different things. If you were a fungus that wanted to form, to want to strike up a symbiotic relationship with a tree root, then you would be able to detect chemicals being emitted by that tree root. These chemicals would ribbon out through the soil, these volatile chemicals, these signals. And then you would respond by maybe branching more, by growing towards this signal as a kind of chemical summon. So at the same time, you might produce chemicals which would cause the tree roots to branch more, to grow more rapidly, which would facilitate the relationship that you were about to form. So there are many examples of this. It's great chemical sensitivity, chemical adeptness that fungi have, some fungi hunt nematode worms, and they summon nematodes with nematodes, summoning chemicals that again travel through the soil, attract the nematodes. Once the nematodes are close, then the fungus can ensnare them in a noose or poison them with a toxic droplet. But if they snare these nematodes with a noose, that noose has to come out pretty quickly, if it's anything like a lasso, do they have those kind of instant reflexes? In these cases of these snares, maybe a snare is a better term than a noose, but once the nematode is growing through this loop in the fungal network, then it can inflate in the tenth of a second, trapping the nematode, and then it paralyzes the nematode and then digest it. So yeah, this fungi can do fast movements for sure. And this is all happening below our feet. Absolutely. I wonder if you could describe some of the symbiotic relationships that fungi have with the other plants and the roots that are down there, because they're really extraordinary. So the Mycelial Network is passing information, as you said, but it's also communicating with other plant roots, maybe other organisms. What are they connecting with down there, and can you give us an example? So this is what I've done most of my work on is the relationships that form between fungi called micro-risal fungi, micro from fungus riser, meaning root. And the relationship between plants and their root fungi is very ancient, and actually allowed the ancestors of land plants to move from fresh water out onto the land sometime around 500 million years ago. And so about 90% of land plants formed these relationships. And back in the day, bank, when land was scorched and desolate, there was nothing that we would recognize, known to rest your life forms that we would recognize. And the ancestors of land plants started to wash up on the soggy shores of lakes and rivers, where they started to form relationships with these fungi, which were able to explore these soils, this solid medium that they found themselves needing to extract nutrients from. When they would be in the water, they were floating in a nutrient broth, and were never presented with this kind of challenge. So for the first 60 million years or so of the life of plants life on land, fungi behaved as their root systems, and roots followed fungi into being. And to this day, this is something that almost all plants depend on. These root fungi which can scavenge in the soil, give them nutrients, give them water, in exchange for energy containing carbon compounds like sugars that plants produce in photosynthesis. So it's a very ancient alliance, which has shaped the whole of life on land, and makes the land animal land life like ours, possible, underpins these great. At the lies of the bottom of these food webs. And so whenever you're touching a plant, you're touching the outcome of a plant and fungus relationship. Plants have fungi that live inside their leaves and inside their shoots. No plant ever examined has been found without these fungi. So you can think about plants as algae which have evolved to farm fungi and fungi which have evolved to farm algae. And so the example is all around us. When you're looking at plants, you're looking at what happens when organisms evolve together in a very intimate way over hundreds of millions of years. And you said that the Mycelial Network was a kind of proto-root network for early plants and allowed them, gave them the stability that they needed to grow their own roots. Rather that they could forage into rocky, young soils that the impiles of decomposing matter. Fungi were really good at exploring this kind of medium, whereas algae were used to floating in this nutrient blossom and didn't have the means to do so and had to spend some time evolving disability. So it was more about nutrition. And to be clear, the development of algae led to the development of plants with root systems. That's right. So plants develop root systems in response to the challenges that they faced in their new lives on land. I've seen the videos that you've made of these dense Mycelial Networks and as they intertwine with plants and plant roots. And one is almost indistinguishable from the other meaning they are so densely intertwined with each other. And that they, indeed, they become one organism. It's hard to separate one from the other. Yes, so you could, if you look at a microscope, you can definitely distinguish fungal tissue from plant tissue. And if you cut open those plant cells and fungal cells, you would be able to find fungal DNA and plant DNA in those respected places. But their embrace is amazingly intimate. Their class beats each other. And it's as if they're each prosthetic organs of the other. And so Edlyn Margles, the great visionary evolutionary biologist, she described the history of life as the long-lasting intimacy of strangers. And you really get this impression when you look at plants and their fungal partners entwined under a microscope. This is really the long-lasting intimacy of strangers, except they're hardly strangers anymore. And fungi also live in us. We are also intertwined with these strangers, strangers that you hope become friends that we become more acquainted with. But we have these relationships too. Yes, we have trillions of bacteria that live in our guts. We have fungi, we have yeasts, which live in and on us in our orifices, coat our skin. And so we are ecosystems. You write that the maceleon networks have a call in response. Is that more than what you've already described to us? I think I talk about that in relation to when some types of fungi find each other, and they home. They have a homing response, and they use pheromones to find each other. And that's this chemical call in response. Where they do this to allow each other to attract each other, grow toward each other and fuse to expand their network. So say more about that. Can you give us an example of a fungus that does that, and why? Why they reach out to each other that way? These elongating fungal cells, which could call hyphae, they grow into their environment. And they have many things they can do. They can grow towards other fungi. They can grow towards themselves, other parts of their own network. They can grow away from themselves, from their own network. And all these different behaviors will create different types of network, some denser than others, some more exploratory. And how these growing tips behave with regards to other growing tips is something that can change in different circumstances. For example, when a truffle fungus, for a truffle fungus to produce a truffle, it has to engage in a sexual encounter with a compatible fungus of a different mating type to itself. And to do that, it has to find this compatible fungus. It has to find it using pheromones, and it has to engage in a sexual act, which will then give rise to this truffle. So it's another way that fungi use these chemical signals, these chemical cues to organize so much of their life. When you say call and response, it's really sending out these pheromones is, I'm over here, I'm over here, come toward me. Is that what it is? Yes, you can think about it like that. These chemical beacons, which invite a response. And so there are many ways this happens in the natural world. When a truffle, for example, a ripe truffle signals its readiness to be eaten by producing these pungent smells, which travel through the soil, enter the air in a forest and attract nearby animals, whether dog, pig, shrew, squirrel, human. To drop what it's doing, to go towards the truffle, to dig it up, to eat it, and then to carry its spores off somewhere else and deposit them in its feces. So you can think about the response as the animal coming towards the truffle and being incited to consume it. And you can think about the call as this pungent plume of delicious volatile compounds that fungus is producing. Very much like the way that plants attract animals using brightly colored fruits or delicious smelling flowers. Merlin, you also write that mycelion networks can solve spatial problems really well. And I wonder if you could give an example of just how extraordinary this ability is. And whether, I don't know if calculate is the right word, but they're able to calculate the most efficient route between places. Can you give us an example? Yes, so you can make microscopic labyrinths and release a fungal mycelium into this labyrinths and it will grow. It will explore the labyrinths. It will branch if faced with a forked path. We'd have to choose one or the other. And over time it will work out the shortest path between the entrance and the exit. It's very much like the behavior of slime molds, which are the poster organisms for brainless puzzle solving. But fungi do this as well. And so this is maybe a surprise to us because we're used to thinking of intelligent behavior as something that occurs in animals with brains. Animals that strange enough often look rather like us. But fungi, of course, are maze dwelling organisms. They live their life confined in cluttered micro environments, exploring constantly changing shape and needing to solve the problem of how to distribute their bodies efficiently effectively. On a moment-to-moment basis. And so when we challenge them with our neat little laboratory mazes, we are under testing them. But it does help us to understand more what they capable of doing. I know you have a story that you tell about a friend of yours that is used fungal networks to figure out the best and most efficient route out of an IKEA store. And if anyone's been into an IKEA store, one of these furniture stores, they are sprawling. And you can go in and feel like you will never find your way out. Yes, he actually used a slime mold to do that. Slime molds are also network based organisms. They grow more quickly than fungal networks do. And so they've become these poster organisms. They're easier to study. But he always got lost in his local IKEA. So he made a map over the IKEA. And he made a maze, a small maze of the ground plan of the IKEA store. And he unleashed his slime molds into this maze. And they found the shortest path to the exit. And he joked that they're cleverer than him because they could do this without asking any attendance for assistance. So to be clear, we're asking fungi to solve human problems in this case. Are there other examples where we're asking them to come up with solutions for us? Yes, another example is testing fungi for their ability to break down certain compounds that we might want broken down. We have a long history of recruiting fungi to break things down for us. Alcohol, for example, we invite a yeast, which is a fungus, to break down the sugar and to produce alcohol. And so today there are questions of can fungi help us break down certain pollutants or dangerous compounds that we have released into the environment or that we just need to decompose before we can dispose of this stuff safely. And so this is a kind of invitation to these fungi to use their metabolic ingenuity to disassemble these compounds. And fungi are astonishingly creative, metabolically speaking, and can decompose most stubborn substances on the planet. So this is another way that humans are entering into relationships with fungi in a problem-solving sense. You use the word intelligence among back. And it is true that our notion of intelligence is very human-centered. And I wonder if the complexity, the symbiosis, the symbiotic nature, the adaptiveness of fungi, if it challenges our notion of intelligence, or whether it should challenge our human-centered notion of intelligence. So traditional classical conceptions of intelligence used humans as a yardstick by which all other organisms could be judged. It's a very human-centric view. And it makes sense in a way, you know, as humans we naturally put our own minds, the center of our inquiry. But it's a very narcissistic view, really, and it can lead us to pass over or simply misunderstand other organisms. And so fungi press hard on questions of intelligence as do many other organisms. And now the concept of intelligence has a deepened and expanded. And there are a number of definitions of intelligence. Most involve an organism's ability to adapt to new situations, to make decisions between alternative courses of action, to solve problems associated with its existence. Charles Darwin, sort of intelligence as the ability of an organism to do what it needed to do in order to survive, which I think is a lovely pragmatic way of thinking about it, and also puts the question of intelligence firmly into the terms of that organism. We wouldn't expect a plant to get up and run. We'd be using human standards to assess this plant's ability to do what it needed to do. But in many ways we're starting to see that that is a biased and human-centric perspective. Incredibly interesting, Molly. And the fact that these things exhibit behavior that in any other organism, you would say, well, clearly their intelligent makes me wonder whether maybe they are. Right. And Merlin says that the definition of intelligence is moving away from a human-centric one to one that embraces the complexity and the resourcefulness of many living organisms. It's kind of a behavioral definition of intelligence. If you can do this that and the other, you know, have sort of a laundry list of the kinds of behaviors that you're going to associate with intelligence, then, you know, how it's structured, what it looks like, whether it's above ground, below ground, or flying in the air, you know, I guess you're compelled to call it intelligence. But I think as astounding are the symbiotic relationships that mycelia networks have with trees, for example, and other plants, that the roots and the mycelial filaments are so intertwined that unless you're looking carefully at them and looking at their cells, it's very hard to tell where one begins and the other ends, and that they depend on each other. And as Merlin said, it was the mycelial networks that allowed algae to find food on land, and that allowed the first land plants to take root, as it were, literally. Yes, that's right. I mean, you know, these funky, they went up onto the land, and it was a tough environment, and they made it easier for everybody that followed behind. It's just like Daniel Boone. We continue our deep conversation with biologist Merlin Shell Drake, up next from penicillin to psilocybin, the way fungi change our minds in our bodies. It's myology education on big picture science. This episode is brought to you by Audi. The road is calling. Embrace the thrill of the drive with the all new fully electric Audi Q6 e-tron featuring effortless power, serious acceleration, an advanced Audi tech. It's not just a new EV. It's a new way to experience driving. The all new fully electric Audi Q6 e-tron is here. The next chapter of Audi starts now. We've been talking about all that fungi due to make the world a livable biosphere. They also make it tasty. And as I think about that moldy cheese, I found in the back of the fridge yesterday, that brings to mind the many faces of fungi. Mold and yeast are fungi as are, of course, mushrooms, and they not only feed us, but the chemicals they produce save lives. Penicillin for one, the first real antibiotic, while the compound psilocybin found in so-called magic mushrooms, may also have a future in the treatment of disease. We continue our conversation with biologist Merlin Shell Drake, author of Entangled Life, How fungi make our worlds, change our minds, and shape our futures. Here's the thing. I mean, they have fruiting bodies, but they're not plants. And yes, they can digest worms and other things, but they're not animals. So what are fungi? They're all related to each other, so they all form part of a certain wing of the tree of life. And so they share common descent. And that's one of the most important things. Aside from that, they share the need to find food in the world and digest it, a bit like animals do. Unlike plants, they can't make their own energy from sunlight. They are eukaryotes, which means they have internally divided cells, like animals, but they make their cell walls using chitin, a certain type of compound, which they share. And so it's a mixture of their metabolic tendencies, their structural tendencies. What the most important thing is that they are a related group that they share common descent. You make the case that fungi in your book, that fungi change our lives, and the way that we use yeast is an example how they literally do that. And we may not think that. When we use yeast, for example, to produce fermentation, but they are changing our brains. Can you describe that? So humans have been working with yeast for a very long time. There are the oldest unequivocal evidence of human brewing practices, goes back about 9,000 years. But it's almost certain that humans have been working with yeast for a long before that. We have a mutation in our body, a gene which codes for an efficient enzyme that allows us to break down alcohol and use it as a source of energy. And this gene was upgraded at a certain time by a mutation about 10 million years ago, and it suggests that we were eating overright fruit that we had a need to break down alcohol. Naturally, fermenting fruit, producing alcohol, perhaps fruit that had fallen onto the floor of the forest as we explored a new dietary niche. And so our affiliation with yeast and alcohol is in some sense written into our genomes. And it is the fermentation, the product of that fermentation that has an effect on our brains, when we feel intoxicated, for example, after drinking beer. Exactly. Yes, so the alcohol that we drink and are altered by, this is produced by the yeast as it breaks down sugar. Another way that fungi help us or that change us are through the medicinal uses of fungi. Panicillin, of course, comes from mold. But I understand that we are not the only ones interested in antibiotics that the fungi have to fight off infections too. Do they produce their own antibiotics and do they also produce their own antivirals? Yes, so fungi live their lives in meshed in their surroundings. And so in this very close contact with their surroundings. And so just as they are maximizing their surface area so that they can digest efficiently, they are also making themselves vulnerable because bacteria and viruses that want to infect the fungi have a lot of opportunities to do so. So fungi have to have immune systems, they have to be able to defend themselves. And using their metabolic ingenuity, they do. And so when Alexander Fleming noticed that this mold, this penicillin mold seemed to be killing these patches of bacteria on the dishiest in his lab, what was going on was that the fungus was defending itself by producing this antibiotic. We now know it's called penicillin. And so when we use these antibiotics, we are rehousing a fungal solution in our own bodies. We are applying a fungal cure evolved by fungi for their own purposes. We are rehousing that and using it to serve our purposes. And antibiotics that kill bacteria, it doesn't stop there. Fungi produce all sorts of antiviral compounds. And many of these are in use in human medicine and show great promise in treating various viral infections. Berlin, when we hear about people taking mushrooms, we think about them doing it for recreation, not therapeutic reasons. But here in the US, the FDA has designated psilocybin a breakthrough therapy for the treatment of all sorts of things, depression and other serious disorders, including Alzheimer's. Why psilocybin? What is it? Well, the psilocybin is a what we call a psychedelic compound produced by certain species of fungus. And it slips into the workings of our nervous system and binds to receptors that normally receive serotonin, which is a common neurotransmitter in our brains and in our bodies. And so it changes the way that we experience our bodies, changes the way that our bodies are behaved. So what this recent wave of research into the effects of psilocybin are showing is that psilocybin relaxes the rigid habits of our minds and of our thoughts, allows us to think and experience in new ways. And that can be really helpful for people suffering with depression, for example, or new connections in the mind open up, new pathways of sought and experience become possible. The grip of our expectations, the grip of our habitual patterns of sought is loosened and we're able to feel perceived in new ways. And that can be really an important thing. Psilocybin is produced naturally, of course, by more than 200 species of mushrooms. The mushrooms aren't going on mushroom trips. Maybe they are going on mushroom trips. Why do they produce psilocybin? What's what use is it to them? This is a question which has been poured over for years by mushroom enthusiasts, ecologists and biologists of all sorts. And the short answer is that no one is sure. It's thought that the first magic mushroom evolved about 75 million years ago or so, so long before humans arose. And what it did for these mushrooms is hard to say. It's clear that it served some purpose because the ability to produce psilocybin passed between different species of mushroom by what's called horizontal gene transfer. And the suite of genes needed to produce psilocybin stayed intact as it passed between these different species, suggesting that it served a purpose. It wasn't just some chemical byproduct accumulating in some metabolic backwater. But what it did for these mushrooms is unclear. One possibility is that it served as a deterrent to insect pests that insects who ate these mushrooms would become distracted or maybe have their minds taken off their next meal. This is a possibility, but there are many species of insect that live quite happily on magic mushrooms. And so if it's deterrent, it doesn't seem to be very effective. Another possibility is that it served as a lure, somehow changing insect behavior in a way that benefited the fungus, perhaps that helped it spread its spores. But we're not sure. It could of course be both. And insects that develop resistance to psilocybin are able to eat it with no problems. So the answer is that we're not sure, but it's something to do with the changing of insect behavior seems like the most likely option. Well, another example of the remarkable adaptiveness of fungi is that fungi have lived through a number of extinction events. In fact, I think all five extinction events, the Permian extinction, the KT extinction that did away with the dinosaurs. And you write that they not only survive these cataclysmic events that kill off 80 or 90% of living creatures, they thrive on these cataclysm. Why is that? Some fungi thrive. So for example, in the KT extinction, the one that killed off the dinosaurs, when this asteroid hit the earth and spat trillions of tons of material out into the atmosphere, it caused acid rain, clouds of dust to block out the sun. This is a really awful time to be a large organism like a dinosaur. It doesn't have the ability to hide or take shelter. But what this meant was that much of the forest on the planet died off. And so there were all of these dead plant bodies to decompose. And for any fungus that liked to decompose dead plant bodies, this was a massive opportunity. So this kind of global compost heap arose. And so decompose of fungi thrived in this new environment. Other types of fungus would have thrived less, those perhaps that depended on living plants rather than dead plants. So it's not that all fungi survived, all fungi thrived, but a number of them did. You know, Merlin, over the course of this conversation, I've come to feel very appreciative of fungi and grateful to them. That's good. Of course, fungi do cause trouble. They can, you know, fungi cause billions of dollars of damage to crops every year and have transformed landscapes by killing off certain trees, like chestnut blight, for example. So fungi aren't necessarily good or bad, but they just are so involved with the way that the planet works, that we can't live our lives without them. We can't really move forwards from here without thinking about them, without finding ways to work with them. And so, yeah, I'm glad you're appreciating them. Although humans also can cause damage and they also transform their landscape and they cause species to go extinct, but unlike fungi, if we were to disappear, life would go on. Absolutely. Yeah. So if humans were made extinct in a single instant, then life would go on. If fungi were to disappear, then maybe life would go on, but we'd be hard to recognize it. Plants would cease to survive. The bodies of animals and plants would pile up on the surface of the earth, und decomposed, kilometers deep. The great biogeochemical cycles that govern the behavior of many of the organisms on the planet and in turn, accords by many of the organisms on the planet, which shift and change. And so, without fungi, life as we know it would be impossible. Merlin's shell Drake, what a pleasure it is to speak with you. Thank you for taking the time. Thanks for having me. Merlin's shell Drake is a biologist and the author of Entangled Life, How Fungi Make Our Worlds Change Our Minds and Shape Our Futures. Well Seth, so the big picture here is the big picture of mycelial networks. They are everywhere. And they and other kinds of fungi are indispensable to life itself. And yet, much of what they do goes unappreciated because it's done below ground. Yeah, it's amazing how many strings they're pulling. And yet, as you say, we generally don't notice it. It's sort of like the man behind the curtain and the wizard of odds. You know, they're in charge of many things. The other thing, of course, that was truly astounding to me, is how much behavior they're able to master behavior that's very complex. I mean, like solving mazes, or I saw a TV show where they actually sort of solve the traveling salesman problem, whereas massive computers have trouble with that. So I don't know, this is a kind of intelligence we're not used to because it doesn't involve brains. It doesn't involve neurons. And there's no spinal column. Right. And I think it calls upon some humility on our part that is the part of humans who for a long time considered intelligence to be only in the realm of humans. In other words, we have a human centered model for intelligence and the behavior of fungi really challenged that. Well, I learned a lot about fungi. And I want to thank Merlin Shell Drake again for staying with us for an extended interview. We couldn't do this show without the far reaching abilities of producers behind the scenes, senior producer Gary Neeterhoff and assistant producer Sarah Durwin. Thanks to both of them, I am executive producer of Big Picture Science, Molly Bentley. Thanks also to financial support from rena Shulski David and Sammy David and to the William K. Bose Jr Foundation. Big Picture Science has produced at the SETI Institute, a nonprofit education and research organization that investigates among other things, life and extreme environments. I'm the institute senior astronomer Seth Schostek. Also big thanks to our listeners and to our Patreon supporters. This episode of Big Picture Science was an extended interview with the biologist Merlin Shell Drake. It's called mycology education. Science education is key to creating a successful future, but the challenges have never been greater. I'm Matt Kaplan, host of safeguarding sound science climate change edition. Join us for outstanding conversations with the leading researchers, policy experts and teachers who are fighting to keep misinformation and pseudo science out of our classrooms and off our screens. Subscribe to safeguarding sound science on Apple, Spotify, Amazon or wherever you like to listen. As a long time fine correspondent, I've worked in lots of places, but nowhere is important to the world as China. I'm Jane Perles, former Beijing Bureau Chief for the New York Times. On Face Off, the US vs China will explore what's critical to this important global relationship. Trump, Ancestion Ping, AI, TikTok and even Hollywood. New episodes of Face Off are available now, wherever you get your podcasts.