All right, good afternoon everybody and greetings from sunny California and Mountain View in the home of the city institute and I'm joined here by my friend and colleague James par the CEO of Trillium technologies and we're going to tell you an interesting story today about a fantastic program we've been running in partnership with NASA and private industry over the last several years called the Frontier Development Lab and it starts with the story sometime in October. Sometime in October of 2015 when I was sitting in my office at the institute and got a phone call from the office of the chief technologist at NASA headquarters, which was interesting enough I was really only a few months into my new position at the city institute. So I took this call and the gentleman on the other end of the line said hey we'd like to talk to you about a really interesting idea we have. We've got a few questions we want to explore and we want to talk to you about partnering together to explore these questions and the first question was we're interested in whether machine learning and artificial intelligence tools and techniques can be applied to support and enhance NASA science and NASA research. We have another question is to whether or not we can put together interdisciplinary teams of experts in the machine learning and artificial intelligence area paired off with domain scientists in particular areas of scientific research relevant to NASA and do meaningful interdisciplinary team based programs and a very intense research sprint over the summertime. And third we're kind of interested to know if we could engage private industry in a public private partnership to pursue this program and have private industry bring in technology and subject matter experts and algorithms state of the art capabilities and machine learning and artificial intelligence. And in what I still consider to be the shortest decision of my career about three nanoseconds I said yes that sounds like a great idea how can we help you. And the question was whether or not the city institute could basically manage and host this program for NASA and with NASA and also be a place where we engage private industry to bring this program to life. And in the following summer of 2016 the what is now known as the frontier development lab or FTL was launched and the first ever set of research challenges bringing AI and machine learning tools and techniques to planetary planetary defense and the study of asteroids was launched and a principle protagonist if you will in this whole endeavor was James who you see here today was really in the working with NASA from a design and architecting point of view conceptualizing the whole program from the very beginning. And so we partnered with James and his team at Trillium Technologies to put together what is now the frontier development lab. So I'm going to show you a few pictures that help us tell this story. And by the way I haven't seen many of you in a long time you haven't seen me in a long time on the city live event so my name is Bill Diamond I'm the CEO of the city institute in Mountain View and it's my distinct pleasure to be back with you today and I know there's been lots and lots of city lives since my last appearance and hope you've enjoyed them and found them interesting and and and informative and I do want to remind you that we bring these programs to you for your you know enhancement and inspiration and enjoyment and we do so at of course no cost we are however a nonprofit research and education institution so we do of course appreciate when people come forward and help us out including people like you so if you're so inclined and would like to make a contribution to help the city institute continue to bring this kind of programming to life please reach out and do so you can do that right on the Facebook platform now. And of course on our website at city.org alright so with that let me jump ahead and share my screen here. Okay and by now what you should see is some of our early FDL researchers at the NASA Ames Research Center in Mountain View posing in front of the model of the space shuttle and again this is the the FDL program this is one of the early teams I think maybe James this was the 2018 or 2019 team. Yeah 2018 right and so again this was a program conceived by the office of the chief technologist at NASA. Back in 2015 and they they had these things they want to explore applying AI and ML to the necessary research priorities exploring the efficacy of interdisciplinary teams working on short time horizons and also whether or not we could get public private partners involved in this program. To help deliver NASA objectives of better faster and cheaper so the frontier development lab was born and it really involves early career PhDs and machine learning and artificial intelligence as well as early career PhDs and a wide range of relevant space research science domains. We also have AI and deep science subject matter experts and mentors or faculty that support the program there are NASA stakeholders from various NASA centers and NASA science divisions and directorates we have industry partners and academic partners and again what started as a partnership with the city institute and NASA. NASA. Then became supported by Google cloud who have been absolutely transformative and bringing massive compute resources to bear on the FDL program which is really enabled and facilitated the program so that our research why they let it go is the biggest here that's why the logo and it should be the program just really wouldn't be possible without Google because there there's the teams have real time access to super compute resources that they can iterate and problem solve. And that's really quite extraordinary and we also have partners with the program overseas now assistive program that James and his colleagues manage with Oxford University and the European space agency and we have a wide range of partners including some new ones not on this list but like IBM and the Luxembourg space agency Lockheed Martin Intel in video the Mayo clinic and others so it's really a program that has grown and expanded over many years and we're going to tell you a little bit about that the science and the kind of research programs that the teams have been involved in but essentially what it's all about if we look at just going to move something up my screen here if we look at FDL a little bit by the numbers and get this to work again. So this is our formula two plus two plus one plus one equals success so we have two domain scientists with two AI ML researchers a domain mentor for the science and an AI ML mentor to support the compute and these are the math the math we do is really tricky and this is not built. Yeah, it's usually a tricker than this is this is our simpler formula for I think James will enlighten us into some of the more tricky stuff that gets going on but this is already a year old we're now in our sixth year as of last year we had gone five years with eight research sprints on two continents 192 research or alumni 47 projects 47 relief machine learning workflows got almost 30% winning and 33% I think we're now pushing those numbers we now 33% see even better that's why it's important to update these it's in 36% minorities which is what in 36% minorities that looks as awesome. Absolutely that's excellent so we're making progress and as you can see it's kind of a 50 50 split between international and US participants we have more than 17 partners now and and more than almost two million dollars and don't donate and compute resources so really a transformative bit of numbers here and this was last year this was last year's program where we explore can I can I give you another step yeah by all means I got the scale scale of the compute and yeah so when I'm in this is again thanks to our colleagues at Google so you know a press release worthy level of compute is sort of above 50,000 nodes in you know when this is 50,000 computers linked together our record in the moment is 260,000 that's that's a really big so like a few five times a news for me you need a city block for that many. Yeah and I think another statistic we've talked about James is you know the compute resources that have been were applied last year compared to the first year it was something like a 400 x increase increase over the 500 times more 700 times increase absolutely extraordinary and and you know yet even in the early years of the program the teams were doing extraordinary work and truly groundbreaking breaking AI and machine learning techniques but it the you know the explosion in this area is well in excess of Moore's law and and it's really been been yeah in the first year which is you know our first partner is Nvidia which of course they still are and we love them and so do our researchers in fact our researchers normally managed to squeeze in Nvidia logo somewhere on the presentation right on data scientists love video for obvious reasons because they you know invented the GPU which powers the official intelligence but the box we had which was still very powerful by the standards of time we only had one and the teams had to take turns to use it that's right it's quite a question right now it's you know it's cloud based compute but that first year it was hardware was a physical computer at the city institute that was delivered by our partners had a crank on it a mouse inside I think you know so I'm not going to spend too much time here because I want James to go into a little bit more about what's happening this year but in 2020 we had two teams tackling challenges in helio physics looking at the solar storms looking at star spots and in terms of understanding stellar surface features of other star systems we had four projects in earth science mapping the water ways of the United States through satellite imagery looking at predictive models for lightning and extreme weather events also the earth intelligence engine which was really about I think this was the one James of the coastal challenge or this is the yeah this was satellite images from the future so this was this is really exciting yeah it's the one that's not possible yeah environments would change as a result of climate change so basically generating future forecasted satellite imagery based on computer modeling and applied to existing satellite imagery and plugging in variable data from from new climate parameters we also had a project in a long duration missions for astronaut health looking at something called causal influence inference in in cancer research in particular this was colorectal cancer so this was a sort of a medical challenge and it was it was it was it was it was it was it was it was it casual inference this morning so so actual inference causal inference but and so you know this this brought the Mayo clinic into the ecosystem of the FDL program and was again truly extraordinary so it shows the breadth not only of what we do at the set the institute in terms of the types of science that is undertaken here but also the FDL program itself and we also had a challenge looking at lunar resources where the metals are on on the moon which will be of course an important thing going forward as we bring humans back to the moon and and potentially build longer term encampments on on a lunar surface so with that I'm going to stop sharing my screen and want to talk to James and talk about what's going on this year so James we have well you know something else about last year for the first several years of the program on their first four years of the program it was all in person researchers from all around the world came to the city institute the trillion team and our partners were all here and of course you know having all of the many of the industrial partners bringing in the technology and the AI MLX and the expertise being in Silicon Valley in the Bay Area you know made that really quite a dynamic environment but last year of course because of COVID we had to go virtual and we were all concerned that you know how could these teams working across nine time zones and all kinds of different countries never meeting together in person possibly be expected to do the same kind of work that had been done in the previous four years and yet you know once again they blew it out of the water this year we are hopefully for the last time in the foreseeable future virtual once again we are in the future of the future virtual once again but already seeing extraordinary results so James maybe you could tell the audience what kind of science has been done this year. Yeah it's super exciting and over the last few years we've started to kind of branch the work so we're always looking for an opportunity to sort of build on what we've already done so we're sort of building a portfolio of capacity and I can show a bit of slide that actually shows us perhaps I might bring it up as I'm talking but we've been we started with planished defense and we're always also looking for projects that are interrelated so actually the the plan of defense stuff is quite interesting because you know if you're trying to deflect an asteroid which I know a lot of this work is done at the set institute of course you know it's useful know what sort of rocket or if you should use a kinetic impact or should use a gravity tractor when we started using machine learning to figure out essentially what could be the best method but of course if you're going to shift the nestroid you need to know what is made out of and you also know you need to know it's tumble and it's it's some shape and so we use machine learning to do shape modeling and we use machine what machine learning to figure out as tumble and it's access of rotation and all that stuff. But one of the projects which we were really proud of which is wanting to start sharing off right now is using machine learning to really tackle a complex workflow something which takes a lot of work by scientists in this case pyridgenestines at CETN and he used to do the job of tracking meteor shooting stars at night by hand which was. This was. The time that also mean driving up to the various locations with the cemetery was getting getting the cameras and usually the Boris this entire workflow has now been replaced by machine learning and it's a very high TRL. Result and when we had this working at the text from Peter and he said you won't believe this but it's the there's a meteor shower happened tonight I'm already getting the evidence of the media shower on the system and so this is what I'm going to show you now just share this spring. And just as an explanation that the system that Peter runs called cans consists of hundreds of small individual cameras located in strategic locations around around the world aimed at the sky and looking for meteorites coming in from from space as many of you may know meteorites tend to be the dust remnants of comments so that the long tail if you will have comments. And because comments have orbits around the sun that are usually quite elliptical but different than Earth's orbit what happens is the Earth's orbit and the orbit of the comment intersect and when they do you get a meteor shower and a program like Peter's can be used to trace back using these multi camera observations mathematically where the meteorite came from what originating orbit does it come from and in some cases we can use this to identify. New comments that we've not yet otherwise directly observed before so James tell them tell them what we're seeing here. Yeah, so this is what we're looking at so again imagine the hard work the laborers effort all of these dots are media showers because the ones that are plus the colors here. These are ones that belong to the ancient trails of of comments and of course what's fascinating is that because the Earth is passing through these ancient trails these are comments which are out beyond the odd clouds of these have or in the these have really long duration orbits. So it's really cool to see how know all these meteorites cluster and of course this would be impossible without machine learning workflow this is just far too laborious to be done by hand. So the things I wanted to mention is this workflow has also been continuing continually updated it has to look for false positives aircraft, fireflies, all of those random things remove them and then map it onto a 360 degree globe the night sky. This isn't now being reworked so there's going to be a new cams going to be really spring soon but we're really proud of this this is the most mature machine learning pipeline we've done and it's great to see it being used at this. Another project which I think you mentioned bill was the fact that we do a lot of work on lunar exploration and so this is super cool. You may have wondered so what looks like inside a permanently shadow region of the moon. This is the creators of the lima poles and they get virtually no light like they get a few few photons just the bounce off the earth or perhaps a bit of starlight. But these are immensely cold immensely dark regions of the moon but of course because of that we have a pretty good indication this is where there's likely to be water possibly sort of frozen tundra in the in the lima poles and no this is probably where we'll be sending exploration in the next decade also and of course the Viper mission from NASA is going to go into one of these creators in the next year or so. So what you're looking at is the application machine learning to essentially make this crazy like daylight and so what it's doing is removing all the instrument noise it's moving all the moving all the noise from from from the data and creating a pretty crisp image of what it actually looks like inside these permanently shadow regions and of course this is crucial for traverse planning for figuring out exactly where to go. And this is really again super exciting application machine learning in terms of the ability to remove noise and make make imagery which is useful for NASA missions. And again, almost an impossible task if you think about it in terms of conventional computer or human based compute analysis of images like this. You also mentioned the star spots I love this project because it just it just sort of it's so exciting, it reminds you of how exciting space sciences at the moment and this is data from. And of course we'll be able to do this for tests as well, which is the two missions which are looking at exoplanets and of course we've seen this incredible. I guess the revolution in understanding the population of planets around stars and that's super exciting, but the same data set also gives us star spots. And so this is what you're looking at, we're actually looking at the star spots of a distance star unfortunately don't know exactly which one we're looking at here. But why it's exciting is of course because we can map the rotation of these star spots we can actually figure out the stellar rotation of stars. And this is really difficult in fact, I think the number of stars that had been mapped and we had a sense of what the rotation rate was less than a hundred. And so now we can do this we have this workflow we can essentially build out the rotation of all the stars that kept our tests are looking at this is projects that we're doing this is an ongoing data set that we could be producing. But again it's a sort of example of how machine learning can take some of the human beings can do like Peter and his you know our meteor analysis but scaled up massively and all to make that. And so it's very, very useful for social science because it's just taken a lot of the effort away and mean we can sort of ask questions in a much bigger scale and it could fall. And I think it's you know that's an important perspective is AI machine learning are not about replacing humans in many instances except where we're talking about doing wrote things over and over again simply faster than humans could but more importantly I think they allow us to analyze. Data and analyze and understand phenomena in ways that would simply not otherwise be possible so it's really about enabling new science and new understandings that conventional methodologies just wouldn't allow so it really is about enhancing not replacing you know human scientific universe. Yeah and I think you know the a lot of the anxiety people have about machine learning is this idea of humans being out of the loop. Of course when you're applying machine learning and AI to science there's still uncertainty and so that's why we always encourage human loops at some point where there's active learning. Learning some sort of system where there's also human guidance but those human capabilities are amplified massively by using technology. Another one you want to start my candy I'm not sure if this is yeah, unfortunately this isn't animated but it's again really exciting and this is work that we did for our colleagues at USGS and what you're asking me to ask you. I really want to survey for those of you unfamiliar but they're there you know kind of the American geologist that we want the government's geologists who understand the geology and topography of the US and its water systems if it's mountains etc so go ahead James. Yeah and and so what you're looking at is a what's called a low flow stream so this is approximately one meter to two meters wide it's. You know in the Colorado mountain somewhere and these are mapped by hand or by foot that's a bit away describing it and perhaps every 20 years 25 years this is when these backs would be created. The reason why that difficult to map is that sometimes they dry and so no we don't know if there's water there or not but because of the sort of external if you like dendrites of of the network it's actually a vast amount of volume in fact it's about 50% of all of the volume in the US water network there's actually these low flight though these low flow dendritic sort of strings of the edge of the of the web if you like. And so it's really useful for drought prediction and just water stewardship for in the case of the Colorado based here this is servicing Las Vegas and California and all of the agriculture that happens in those regions so it's really useful to know the volume of water in the system but we don't have a way of doing this and so what you're looking on the right hand side is essentially a machine learning model of the different colors are essentially showing the rates of the water. And so we can say well yeah at the moment this river has water we can calculate the volume in the system and so we've improved the rate of of data gathering from once every 25 years to once every day and this is using data from our colleagues at planet they have daily cadence and we can see that the data is going to be in the system. They have daily cadence from their doubts constellation but because we're using that data from planet we can get a daily measure of the of the hydrogen networks and in the US so this is super exciting and when we showed this to folks in in the water business the institutional management organization they were like this is the Holy Grail this is we can't quite believe this is possible. That's one of the exciting things about AI is you know we know when it works it's like magic and it can be such a massive amplify for the work of organizations like that. And when you talk about data the data the James mentions when he talks about planet this is a company previously known as planet labs there a company that has earth observing satellites orbiting all the time so the data we're talking about is earth observation so image data and then using machine learning to interpret that data and and learn from it in this case extracting the water network and interestingly when we first talk to us gs about this project. They told us that much of the American waterway mostly you know the small little streams like this the feeder network that feed into the larger Brooks and streams that ultimately become rivers and are really the hydrology network. Well the country were quite unknown and not very well mapped and understood at all so getting this higher resolution understanding of the fine little streams and Brooks that feed the water system and in particular looking at the dynamics of this system in the context of things like climate change and global warming is hugely important so it's been a fantastic project. Yes so John stock you was the mastermind behind the challenge definition in the USGS when we originally wrote it he was like we should call it where droughts come from because it's true like if you if you know how much water is in the system you can you know you get a good idea of you know the likelihood of drought so it's really extremely powerful this work. So we're at the bottom of the hour now so we're not going to go on too much longer here but I did want to pick out a few things in the chat and then I'll have James talk about one of their project here what's going on in Europe but quickly want to acknowledge some of our audience from all over the world that are joining us today we have Liverpool in the UK we have a desa Texas and folks in Washington State Montreal Canada. We have a lot of people from the county in Texas and Kentucky people watching from Romania from Vancouver Canada from Germany from London, Atlanta Georgia. We have a donation from Sabina so I want to stop and and thank you Sabina very much for being so kind to to think of us and and help us out here so that's very much appreciated. I have a lot of aotearoa from New Zealand that are being probably my family. Okay I was going to say speaking of New Zealand I wanted to give a shout out to James's mom who's we think is watching and if she is watching she's watching a day ahead of us and so as is typical of moms they're always you know one step ahead of us so a big hello to James's mom and that will be these big fans fans sitting here we here we are. James's there too so wonderful to have your dad mom joining us and we have niche from Serbia we have other folks from Canada I do want to acknowledge a question that came in an interesting question about if said he doesn't think the moon contains life why is it a research subject for said he. It's a great question and I will start by saying that you know the city institute is of course looking for intelligent evidence of intelligent life beyond earth. Essentially on this on the thesis that if we're talking about intelligent and or technological life that is a life form that in theory at least can be detected or observed from great distances because it's technology can be detected whether that might be laser pulses or radio transmissions etc. But it's not the only work of the city institute our broader mission is understanding life in the universe at its most basic how does it happen where does it happen under what conditions what are the conditions of habitability that that make life possible and does it exist elsewhere. And while it's fair to say that the moon is from our perspective doesn't contain life of course the moon is also a stepping stone from a technology point of view to Mars and Mars as you know is a planet where we feel very strongly life could have at one point existed because what Mars we knew was a warm and wet world at one point and at one point earlier on in its existence it had a heavier atmosphere in a magnetic field which it no longer does. But there may also still be life on Mars and so by going to the moon we're prepping ourselves for putting you know boots on the surface of Mars if you will and we'd like to see the human presence on Mars doing science and doing exploration around the possibility that there's extinct or extent life on Mars and so these are all connected. The title hypothesis to right. What's that there's the title hypothesis to about the fact we've got a relatively large moon and how it's created the title pools which yeah this is the yes yeah I mean one of the things that we begin to understand when you start looking at how complex the notion of habitability is is that everything matters you know moon that creates tides that shifts the oceans tectonic activity volcanic activity. Wins that distribute you know biology or prebiotic material or nutrients you know all of these things matter and they all make a difference so you know understanding the earth moon system understanding the moon as as an individual object all of these you know feed our broader science of astrobiology planetary science and of course setting different so that's that's a reason and and the moon is the is the fascinating place and the moon is the fascinating place and you know even we might have said some years ago that nobody thought there was water on the moon of course now we know there is so you know you can't rule anything out until you really go and investigate so the will will come back and talk about this east of project in just a moment but all of this in today's episode if you will have said he lied with the James and I is a precursor to what's going to happen over the next four weeks. So our setting live series over the next four weeks is going to be a series of discussions with the actual researchers from the FTL 2021 program and you'll meet members of each of the teams over those that four week period and have an opportunity to learn from and hear about their work in greater detail and I think you'll be both amazed and impressed by by the work that's being done and by the science that's being achieved and and the new understanding and discoveries that are being enabled. So we're going to be able to learn from the science that's being enabled by applying you know the latest tools and technologies around mission learning and the eyes so stay tuned for that of course we'll be updating you all through our normal social media channels about these events when they are and you know what teams are speaking and what topics are being explored so do come and join us for that and James did you want to say something a little bit about what's going on in Europe this year. And this is the last bit of I can be unfortunately. Lots more I can't you to come. That's one of the one everybody. Yeah exactly. And the company. So this is and this is really exciting because. As well as doing you know the stuff we've just seen you know really enhancing worker scientists. Machine learning starting to become a tool for prediction and integrating with numerical model. And so you know when you think about where the forecast which is done with big supercomputers and this is numerical modeling. It sort of hits a threshold point where it just gets to two complex and too big for those methodologies. And so the idea is that can we essentially replace numerical modeling with machine learning methods and this is what you're looking at. And this is a precipitation forecast for the entire world so you imagine how big that compute task would be three days in advance. So this is the ability to predict if it's going to rain or not. Three days into the future. And this is on parity with the faster suit computers in in meteorology. So we can now with machine learning with much smaller levels of of GPUs match the capabilities of supercomputers. Now should qualify this because the numerical model still beats this model when it comes to light rain or drizzle. But certainly in terms of whether it's going to rain or not. So basically yes, no. We can replicate those capabilities with machine learning. And this is really exciting because it shows that in the future there will be the potential for this shift from sort of big scale numerical model to to this sort of prediction which is done with machine learning. So watch the space. It's still a very nice and area, but it's gathering momentum. I think things that if we roll the clock forward far enough, we can get to the point where FDL is not just predicting the weather three days in advance, but maybe helping modify it. I mean, we could use a bit more rain in California. They could use a bit more. That would be a dream. But certainly it's really exciting moment. And of course, then there's the idea that you can have numerical modeling, which is then formed by machine learning and they start becoming these sort of symbiotic systems. And we're doing a little bit of that this year. In fact, I had, I don't know if you just before we wrap up, I guess it'll take us through the teams that will be covering over the next few weeks. Yeah. And so here we have upgrading the solar wind. And so again, this is a great application of machine learning because we have the parker probe, which is now between Mercury and the Sun. We're getting really pristine, higher resolution readings of the solar wind. And because we have that data, we can then go back through all the historical data sets of the solar wind up scale and to that same resolution that the parker probe is getting. And so this is a really, again, another cool thing that machine learning can do. It can be used to enhance data sets. The second project is solar drag. So this is the, you know, a very, very important challenge of, you know, the very important challenge of the space craft is that the space craft is going to be orbiting the earth, particularly lower for, but because of the drag, which is caused by the bloating of the atmosphere, which is, of course, affected by the Sun. And so this project is looking at that and seeing if we can better predict the position of space craft, which of course has implications for de-alphaging space craft management of the ISS, but also for managing the space traffic management. And then there's the astronaut health project and this is one we're calling casual inference causal inference, which is essentially a machine learning to do. And then there's the same thing that we're calling a causal inference, which is essentially a machine learning technique where you can start looking at all the different actors in a complex system. And you can then determine which of the most, if you like, active variables in that complex system. And so we can look at a problem, for example, cancer and say, well, of these, you know, 10 or 15, complex interlinked factors, these are scallions that are actually causing this issue with health. And so we're applying the same methodology to looking at the health of astronauts on long duration missions. And then lunar resources, we're using a methodology could super resolution to look at the areas where Artemis is going to, where the mission is going to land. And the next decade, hopefully, we're super resolving that data. So you get much crisper and clearer maps for the next generation of exploration. Learning upgrade, this is looking at data coming off a geostationary satellite and saying, can we upgrade the quality of that data set? And why that's important is if we can get a higher quality level of flash rate, net is flash rate, on the frequency of lightning. And this means we can better predict tornadoes and hail. Automated reporting, this is the ability to use natural language to look at an image and turn that into text. And so if you like looking at the picture of the coral reef, it'll say this is a coral reef and the water is blue because of algae. Or, you know, it's got white caps because it's the windy or whatever, but basically getting the ability of a machine to look at an image and write the text. Digital twin of the coasts is essentially trying to understand storm surge and how water behaves in different conditions. And then in Europe, we're looking at super resolution and embeddings for tools for the world food program. And lastly, Jean learning payloads is looking at the ability to use machine learning on board spacecraft that hopefully will turn insight back to the record. So that's the portfolio. Again, as Bill said, we'll be going, meeting all the teams over the next few weeks and then we a chance for everyone listening to really dive into the science and there's always good conversations. And also I think if you're interested in machine learning, there's no better way of learning than listening to our researchers as they grappling with these problems. Yeah, absolutely. That's great. Well, that's so stay tuned. These are the subjects that are the teams will be talking about over the next couple of weeks. And James, if you can stop your share, I'll do one last bit of I can't do that brings us back to the cams project because it's just kind of amazing what can be done with data visualization techniques. So what you should now see are you seeing the cams model. Yeah, yeah. So this is showing you the colored rings in the middle of the screen, the bright dot is the sun and the colored rings of the inner planets, the white dots are all individual meteorite observations by the cams system. And which has traced them back to their originating orbit on a we can zoom out of the solar system here and see the actual orbit of the of this particular comment we can rotate to see that it is on a different plane, a different angle. Then the plane of the ecliptic or the plane in which all the planets are located. And you can see how far out into the solar system it extends and there's a data set like this in a visualization of the data sets for each of the major. Um, media right events that are in the database. So this is how data visualization is also so impactful and can be so beautiful as well as informative. To the that part of the the cams project that James mentioned, you can see more about that at cams.setty.org. So that I'm going to stop my share. We're going to wrap it up for today. Thank you James. I want to thank you again for staying up late in the UK and trying to. Thank you for talking about space and. Geek out. Yeah, no, really. And you also build my sister. My sister's watching. Yeah, we're joining us as well. So hello to them. And with that again, a reminder that this program. Setty live is brought to you by the city institute. You can learn more about our work at setty.org. You can sign up for our monthly emails letter called journey, which takes you on a journey of all the kind of science and exploration that our researchers endeavor to do day in and day out. And and you can support us if you are so inclined. We're always grateful to help that allows us to continue bringing this program to you. So our crack communications team. I want to thank Jasmine and Beth and Rebecca for bringing this together today and you'll be hearing from them. In next week and beyond about the programming upcoming. So we're going to do a four week series of deep dive into FTL and we look forward to seeing you all on those future events. And I think you'll be amazing and inspired by what you see. There's one other group I should have mentioned. So all of the researchers who did the work that we showed today just like to say, thank you. As ever for the incredible work and and then if people watching interested, we open source everything it's all on FTL.ai. And they can also go to space and L.org, which is where we host the data sets. But again, just thank you so much to the researchers and the faculty and of course, apartments. Yeah, they're they're all extraordinary. We couldn't do the program that out the bomb. And in fact, you can also learn more about the frontier development lab program itself at frontier development lab.org. So lots of sources of information. It's an amazing program. We hope you'll tune in next week and over the series and learn more about it. And in the meantime, thanks very much and goodbye from Mountain View, California and James. Thanks to you and good night to you in London. And we'll look forward to seeing all of you in a future episode. Take care everybody. Thanks Bill. Thanks everybody. Thanks James.
