Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host, Don Conegas, and joining me to introduce today's podcast is Man Behind the Curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that selects all the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Hi, Don. Great to be here. So today's guest is our colleague, Dr. Dominic Dagestino, who we previously interviewed on episode 14 of Stem Talk. Back in 2016, when Don appeared on the show to talk about the physiological benefits of nutritional ketosis, the search term ketogenic diet didn't even show up on a list of the top 10 diets that were Googled. Now, just three years later, ketogenic diet has risen to number one on Google's list. So we've invited Don back to talk about what he has learned over the past three years. For those of you who don't know him, and that might only be eight of you, Don is a researcher and a professor with a diverse background in neuroscience, molecular pharmacology, nutrition and physiology. He is a tenured associate professor in the Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology at the University of South Florida's Morseini College of Medicine. He is also a research scientist here at IHMC. But before we get to today's interview with Don, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Slexand Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher and other podcast apps for the widest and most lavishly praiseful reviews to read on Stem Talk. As always, if you hear you review Read on Stem Talk, just contact us at Stem Talk at IHMC.us to claim your official Stem Talk t-shirt. Today our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker Hudson 59 Text. The review is titled Wonderful for the Auto-Didact, and it reads, I am no scientist, in fact I only barely received a bachelor's after six years, but as a latent life convert to the Auto-Didact way, I absolutely love this show. Stem Talk interviews with highly authoritative people keep up the great work. Well thank you Hudson 59 Text for the fine review, and thank you to all the other Stem Talk listeners who have helped Stem Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now onto today's interview with Dr. Dominic Dagostino. Stem Talk, Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Hi, welcome to Stem Talk. I'm your host Don Crenegus, and joining us today is Dom Diagostino. And Dom, welcome to Stem Talk again. Great to be on Don, thank you for having me. Yeah, absolutely, and also joining us today is Ken Ford. Hello Don and hello Don. Hey Ken. So Dom, roughly three years ago when Ken and I did the first episodes of Stem Talk, the ketogenic diet didn't register as one of the 10 most Google diets. Three years later the ketogenic diet has become the number one search term. Did you foresee this kind of mass interest in ketogenic diets coming? You know, at that time I didn't really think about it much, but I knew kind of in the background that a lot of people that I had connected with early on were doing a lot of science and aiming to publish a lot of the work that was completed or in the process of being completed. I knew that the science was going to search and was hoping that the science would help validate and maybe get the ketogenic diet out into recognized for its emerging applications which we were studying at the time. But in 2008, really the only application for it was pediatric epilepsy. And then Eric Kassoff at Johns Hopkins had published on the modified ketogenic diet and that was something that could be used for adults. And that was a new thing in 2008. And then Dr. Pavel Klein, a friend and collaborator published one of the first studies in 2010. And on the use of the modified ketogenic diet for adult epilepsy. And then I think things just kind of took off after that. Yeah, the epilepsy application has been around for close to forever. It's been interesting as you noted to see it move from quite obscure to suddenly a household word almost. You know, if you were on the ketogenic diet in the 70s or 80s, you didn't mention it. You'd get the nerd hat. You know, what keto, what beta hydroxy, who? And you were definitely not fun at parties. Other than the science, what do you think is driving the sudden increase in popularity? Yeah, I think it's multifactorial. You know, I think from a mainstream perspective, the efficacy that the ketogenic diet and not even ketogenic diet, just carbohydrate restriction has is pretty profound in people who try it and also known people who study it. So I think it's a combination really of that the diet works. So the efficacy, maybe various influencers like celebrities, astronauts, some scientists even to are kind of promoting it and media is picking up on that. And I think, I mean, hopefully from my perspective as a scientist that the science is laying a pretty firm foundation of the diet, not only for epilepsy, but also for many of these emerging applications that we're studying, including things like cancer and type 2 diabetes and of course weight loss. People, you know, the food and body image are a big thing. And the ketogenic diet kind of creates a lot of controversy around those two things. People use it to improve their body image and body composition. And the types of food that you eat on the ketogenic diet tends to cause some controversy with the high saturated fat. And that tends to create a lot of buzz. And I think controversy kind of creates a lot of public interest and they want to find out about it. Yeah. There's also, it's really a great story if you think about it from an evolutionary perspective and how our ancestors were no doubt going in and out of ketosis based on the availability of food. So it's unique in that respect. And then I think the other unique respect is there's a measure for whether you're doing it or not. This is not true. You know, if you say, well, I'm eating a Mediterranean diet. What does that mean? Yeah. That's a really good point. I think it's the only diet that has an objective biomarker that you can kind of validate. If someone says they're on a ketogenic diet and they're not testing ketones just by definition, they don't know if they're on a ketogenic diet. And I think really from an anti-seizure neuroprotective point of view, what we're very interested in, that elevation of ketones is very fundamental and necessary for getting some of the effects that we're studying. So Dom, with all of its popularity, there's still a great deal of cynicism about the diet, especially from nutritionists. And I'm going to emphasize the word cynicism here as opposed to skepticism. And this is just an example. There's nutritionists who wrote a piece for the US News and World Report and said that much to Hershey Grin, the keto diet came in at number one. And she went on to write, and this is her quote, there's a lot of research being conducted on the keto diet. And even though there are success stories being shared in the scientific community is still controversial, a diet very high in saturated fat remains associated with an increased risk of heart disease and putting your body into a ketogenic state, which is caused by cutting way back on carbs, is not something you should take lightly. Side effects, including increased urination, bad breath, fatigue, vomiting, and confusion are common. Gee, she must be right, because after listening to that, I now feel nauseous and confused. So Dom, how do you respond to viewpoints like this? I know this is just one of many examples of things that you hear and read when it comes to the ketogenic diet. Yeah, well, I don't know the particular context of that statement. And maybe it was applied to weight loss, which is kind of driving a lot of the public interest in this. So I would ask the question, what was she referring to specifically when it comes to increase urination, bad breath, fatigue, vomiting, and confusion? Where are legitimate side effects to the ketogenic diet? And from a medical perspective, that's why a patient will work very closely with a registered dietitian or a team of people really to help calculate the ratios of the diet. And in some cases, the people need to be eased into the diet because their fat tolerance may not be high enough. But if it's for weight loss, I would suggest if someone's interested in the ketogenic diet, you are calorie restricting. So typically, the amount of fat that's consumed on the ketogenic diet is proportionally very high, right? But if you are restricting calories, which a lot of people need to do for a weight loss or type 2 diabetes, especially initially, that would be the way to kind of start the diet. And then the things that are mentioned up front or mentioned in that statement are not really an issue. So I think there's controversy here. And I think that's what that kind of statement refers to in a lot of public debate as to what is there's two things. What can help you achieve your goal, maybe in this case, that it's weight loss and what is sustainable? And there's a lot of debate and argument about what is sustainable from an implementation point of view and also from a long term health point of view. And I think the de-minification of saturated fat is on the minds of many doctors and conventionally trained nutritionists. I went through a nutrition science program, dietetics program, when I was an undergrad and really the kid jagged diet was something that was kind of scary if it was to be implemented for weight loss and that was back, you know, in the early to mid-90s. And a lot of what we know about saturated fat has changed since then. The controversy is still there. But I think really that's kind of the focus of the cynicism or the skepticism. Dom, it seems that some fields are essentially resistant to new science. And nutrition is one of them. It brings this big emotional component like a fervor. You see it in every community. You see it in the ketogenic community. You see it in the vegans particularly new data or new science doesn't shift people's viewpoints. Yeah, that's again, it's like multifactorial, right? Because there's the farmers who are growing some of the crops that we're depending on. There's a lot of policy that was kind of put into place. And then people just get accustomed to eating a certain way and changing those viewpoints and changing the doctors who have been trained not in nutrition, but into just like very general guidelines. Fat is bad. You know, carbohydrates are good, fiber is good, healthy, old grains are good. These things sort of just kind of float around on a superficial level without anyone really digging into the science. So hopefully I think that's changing though. I see that changing from my standpoint. A lot more sort of public interest in dealing with a big problem we have on our hands, which is obesity and type 2 diabetes, especially. So Dom, with all his public interest and media coverage, what are some of the most common misconceptions or even over representations of the diet? And you've already covered some of these, but just if there are any additional ones that you'd like to talk about while we're on this podcast. Misconceptions. So the diet does have side effects. The low carbon and ketogenic diets do have side effects, but many of these are very manageable. Even from a classical ketogenic diet perspective with treating epilepsy. One of the probably the biggest concern was something physiological like kidney stones. So early studies showed that the ketogenic diet, the classical ketogenic diet, did cause kidney stones and the more we learned about calculating the ketogenic diet and formulating it and then adding supplements, potassium citrate is out of the supplement now. That pretty much is now a non-issue when it comes to the diet. And we also know that the modified forms of the diet, which are not as extreme, so that are more like 60 or 70% fat instead of 90% fat. That's a pretty big change in regards to ease of implementation there. And also the stress that it has on your body as it needs to transition its metabolism from essentially glucose carbohydrate-based metabolism to a fat and ketone metabolism. Implementing a less restrictive ketogenic diet can mitigate some of the problems. But the misconceptions I think the main one being is that the ketogenic diet is a high protein diet and it really is not. I think maybe people confuse that with the Atkins diet or just terms that get thrown around in the public. Yeah, I think part of the problem is the term ketogenic diet itself is really unfortunate. And it misdirects people into thinking that as a diet that prescribes the consumption of specific food items like for example the banana diet or the Mediterranean diet. Even like these, it has as we discussed earlier a measurable test or measurable outcome. Either one is or is not in ketosis. And if you're not in ketosis, you are not consuming a ketogenic diet by definition. I don't care what your macros are. So it seems to me that it's not a useful term in many ways. It certainly be easy to eat an unhealthy ketogenic diet like a giant can of crystal oil. And you just sit down with some crystal oil and your kale chips and go to town. You'll be in ketosis but you'll be sick. Diet is a strange use of the word there. I'm not sure what the right term would be. But for example, you're in ketosis if you eat nothing. So it could be the eating nothing diet. There's something lacking in our terminology there that I think spins people up. Neutrogenic nutrition. There are many there's an unlimited infinite amount of ways that you can formulate a ketogenic diet. Even our clinical understanding and opinions on how to do that have changed radically over just the last 10 years. And I think from the perspective of yeah, clinical and then from the perspective of just the everyday person following this nutrition approach, they have so many different ways that they can implement it from a vegetarian to infinite amount of food sources that you can choose from. It's not just the original sort of ketogenic diet was heavily dairy based, right? And really heavy cream, butter and very, very calculated in its implementation. That wasn't the original ketogenic diet. That was the Hopkins one. The original one was when Dom and Ken went out hunting and the hunting was bad. That was the original one. Yeah, that would be like time restricted eating too, right? Because there are big gaps between food availability and we were always transitioning in an adicutosis in what would be a natural carbohydrate restricted environment or whatever we can forage, which is a very minimal amount of gluconeogenic or glucose precursors. Yeah, that's the kind of the point I was making earlier. A time restricted eating is a ketogenic nutrition. It's an example of ketogenic nutrition. I like your word nutrition better than diet. So Dom, as you know, when you do a pub med search now, a peer review paper is on the ketogenic diet. It absolutely explodes with a huge number of recent papers, typically reporting exciting results. So we're going to discuss several of these today. As we've discussed on previous episodes of STEM talk, recent research suggests that ketogenic diet may extend both longevity and health span, at least in mice. In particular, we have found Megan Roberts paper. A ketogenic diet extends longevity and health span in adult mice, particularly intriguing. The diet appears to have extended average lifespan, 13%, which is really substantial. But to me, more interestingly, health span was remarkably improved. And these mice, these lucky mice maintained a youthful phenotype until quite an advanced age equivalent, I think to like 74 or something like that in human years. What can we take from all of this? Not just that paper, which I particularly like, but in general from the research showing extensions to health span. Yeah, that paper and several others came up in a discussion, I was in recently. I think these rodent model studies, rodent model studies tend to get criticized a lot. We do quite a bit of rodent model studies are extremely informative, but not necessarily always predictive. Right? I mean, they are getting a lot of information from this particular study. Their study is being done. That one was continuous. And also, there's a study in parallel to that that gave an alternate day, ketogenic diet, with some improvements in health biomarkers. The improvements that were observed were things like increased motor function performance, increased memory, muscle mass, and the mechanisms that they were kind of looking into were associated with things that were classically associated with calorie restriction. But the animals didn't necessarily lose weight. I don't think they did lose weight in that particular study. So we know, we've known for many years that calorie restriction creates an enormous amount of health benefits, but also has some, it's very difficult for humans to implement. In rodent models, especially, you get so many health benefits from calorie restriction. And that could, one could argue that in rodent model studies, they're given an adlibitum diet, so they are chronically overfed. So creating a little bit of calorie restriction restores their normal health. That could as well come up. But regardless, with that particular ketogenic diet study, there was an increase in fatty acid oxidation and increase in beta hydroxybutyrate, which is associated with the benefits of calorie restriction and increase in protein and steadilyation. And this was without, I think, with this study, if I remember right, there were a few studies, but there was no weight loss. So that's the debate that, well, the ketogenic diet produces all these effects, right, because the meals are so difficult to eat that you inadvertently cause calorie restriction. And then, of course, you know, your glucose levels will go down. Your beta hydroxybutyrate will go up. You'll start metabolizing more fat. Your insulin levels will get lower. But that really was not the case because I think weight was sustained. And essentially what the authors reported was that the ketogenic diet without calorie restriction mimicked many of the benefits of these classical calorie restriction studies. You know, most importantly was the lifespan and also the health span. So you could take away from it what you want, but this is, it definitely doesn't look like it's having a negative effect, which many people will vehemently try to, you know, advance this idea that the high fat diets, but in particular saturated fat diets are very unhealthy. And this definitely not the case here. For me, the main takeaway in that paper was the maintenance of functionality and strength into old age with these mice. The control mice went through a normal diminution of health span, weakness, grip strength, etc. And the ketogenic mice did much better. And you wouldn't expect that with calorie restricted mice. There's something interesting going on there. And in particular, they showed a tissue specific activation of mTOR, where mTOR was strongly activated in muscle and not in liver, for example. And I find that really interesting. People need to look at sort of the organ specific effects of metabolism in particular, what you just mentioned, mTOR, you know, and insulin sensitivity. Agreed. Things like that. Yeah. And we're going to take that in larger animal models, including humans, where they really designed this study well and look at some of these variables, which I don't think has been sort of even attempted yet in humans. So we're listeners appreciate that blood glucose regulation is very important, especially in the context of type 2 diabetes and pre-diabetes. And we know that diet and exercise and lifestyle as well as some drugs such as metformin can be helpful. However, exogenous ketones have widely been reported to lower blood glucose. And this has been our experience as well, both personally and also in research studies that we've been doing here at IHMC. Can you share your thoughts on the potential of exogenous ketones in the context of blood glucose regulation? Yeah. This is something that we've been really interested in. We didn't really set out to study this, but it kept showing up in pretty much all of our studies. It does depend on the type of exogenous ketone that's delivered and how it's delivered. And I think it's pretty fair to say that there's an inverse relationship of blood glucose with ketone levels. So as we stimulate the elevation of blood ketones with exogenous ketones, we see a proportional drop in blood glucose, but that does vary depending upon the type of exogenous ketone or formulation of exogenous ketone that we use. And going back 10 years ago, I was tinkering with a molecule that's actually used to make a ketone ester. And that's one three butane dial. And one three butane dial is combined with various precursors with a transestrification reaction to make a ketone monolester or a ketone diester, a beta hydroxybutyrate or acetyl acetate. So there's ways to sort of do that with simple chemistry. And one three butane dial itself is a ketogenic agent and a simple search will classify it, you know, and in the first sentence or two as a hypoglycemic agent. So I became 10 years ago, very interested in why is this ketogenic agent, in particular, one three butane dial, a hypoglycemic agent, because we were using it gearing up to use it in some cancer studies too. Alcohol is actually a hypoglycemic agent and butane dial is a die, alcohol, a dial. And it causes acute administration causes a fairly large decline in blood glucose if the dosage is high. And that's due to primarily a redox shift in the liver where gluconeogenesis is sort of tightly regulated by a number of enzymatic systems that are dependent upon the redox state of the liver. And it's essentially turning down gluconeogenesis. And there's something called alcoholic ketoacidosis or Aka, not to be confused with DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis. So alcohol at ketoacid, if you drink a lot of alcohol, hard alcohol on a fasted state, you could be hospitalized for alcohol at ketoacidosis. So essentially what's happening is you're dramatically reducing hepatic glucose output by shifting the redox state of the liver. And this is kind of observed early on and ketone esters that are a derivative of one three butane dial have this glucose lowering effect. I don't think it's completely a result of reducing hepatic gluconeogenesis. I think as other papers have shown or theories have been put out there, there's an increase in insulin sensitivity with ketone production in particular beta hydroxybutyrate. And also if you elevate ketone levels and I've experimented on myself and seen some data above to millimolar, you start to get the pancreas to release insulin. And if the pancreas release insulin, that will turn down your own sort of ketone production too. So on a ketogenic diet, that's how we naturally fine tune through a feedback mechanism regularly our own ketone production. As fatty acid oxidation occurs in the liver, we produce ketones, they spill into the blood stream, they go to peripheral tissues, we have ketone urea, we eliminate some ketones through our urine and various mechanisms. The elevation in ketone will stimulate the liver or pancreatic release of insulin, which turns down hepatic ketogenesis. So administering exogenous ketones may cause an increase in insulin and that increase in insulin, even though it's very small, can facilitate glucose disposal just by insulin mediated glucose uptake in cells. So there's a lot of things going on. So with exogenous ketones, you have a redox potential redox state shift in the liver, which is controlling your liver really does control much of your blood glucose levels. Glucagan and glucocorticoids, too, can control your blood glucose levels. So the kidneys and the intestines actually have gluconeogenesis, right? And they're under control of glucagan and glucocorticoids. So do some experiments done in classical where they basically inhibited all of liver gluconeogenesis. And it didn't actually impact blood glucose that much, surprisingly because of the compensatory mechanisms through glucagan and glucocorticoids of kidney and intestine gluconeogenesis. So a lot of people don't think about that, too. So there's a lot of different things that are happening, but I think when it comes to exogenous ketones lowering blood glucose, there's an increase in insulin sensitivity, a decrease in gluconeogenesis. And potentially, if you administer a large dose of the ketone ester, which I have done, and if my level gets above 2 or 2.5 millimolar, I release insulin. So if I elevated up to 1 or 1.5 millimolar, my body's not releasing insulin, suggesting that I could get the benefits of exogenous ketones and not be turning down my own sort of ketone production or even fatty acid oxidation. If I moderately or modestly elevate my... But if I take a whopping dose of a ketone ester and shoot it up to 4 or 5 millimolures, I am undoubtedly releasing some insulin, and that insulin will probably be stimulating glucose uptake and peripheral tissues. So a lot of kind of a long-witted question, but I think there's... And that's just some of the things that I'm aware of that are resulting in lowering a blood glucose. But I do think it's probably one of the most significant metabolic physiological effects of exogenous ketones because the effect is above and beyond what could be done with metformin. You know, I've experimented with metformin and we do metformin studies in the lab, and we don't see, especially in acute decrease in blood glucose with metformin as we do with exogenous ketones. So I think they're therapeutic potential for type 2 diabetes is very high. Just based upon some of the work that we've done and other labs have done too. I think you know of type 2 diabetes, Jeff Volic, and others founded a company, Verda Health, and we interviewed Jeff in STEM talk episode 43. Verda has published impressive results in their goal of helping people reverse type 2 diabetes through the application of what Jeff likes to call a well-formulated ketogenic diet. Have you been tracking Verda and it's rather a surprising outcome, so I'm it. You know, you think well, they shouldn't be surprising for us, but they're very strong outcomes. Yeah, I've been really impressed with what Verda is doing and well, honestly, not surprised with the results. You know, I think their model of continuous care intervention using an app-based system is very innovative. And I think these things are going to be very, very important for not only, you know, getting glucose and body weight under control, but for maintenance of that. Because I think once people sort of are engaged in using this technology, then it becomes over a period of time. It becomes sort of a habit. They understand what's involved in calculating a well-formulated ketogenic diet, and ultimately they'll do it automatically. But they have amazing results, Verda does with weight loss and type 2 diabetes, even more recently non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. So really moving the needle on that. And that has been a bit of a mystery. I was talking with some interventional radiologists here, and they just, they see it as epidemic. And they didn't, they have not been successful in managing it in their patients. And one of the things that they tried without, maybe even with some resistance was just low carb, a ketogenic, you know, to the point of being ketogenic, and they've had amazing results. So there's populations of medical doctors here who are not particularly interested in the ketogenic diet, but had a few patients that tried it, and it worked for this non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, which is really interesting to them and gotten more acceptance of using it for that application. Verda has reported numbers like 60 or 70% of folks that they're working with either greatly reducing their insulin or going completely off insulin. Those are amazing numbers. If you had a drug that did that, it would be a blockbuster. Yeah, it would be a huge blockbuster. It would probably be very expensive too. For reasons, I don't know, the cost of insulin is when, like, tremendously over the years, I remember I had a friend that was type 1 diabetic maybe like 20 years ago. I think you could go to like Walmart or just CVS and get a bottle for like 10, 15 bucks. But I heard, you know, my student, Andrew Kooten, type 1 diabetic and I've just read that the cost of insulin is tremendously high. So implementing, you know, we really shouldn't be using drugs to treat a dietary disease. And that's what I believe type 2 diabetes really is. It's a dietary disease and it's not a drug solution, it's not the way to do it. And there's reasons why glucose, I mean, part of it might be calorie restrictions. Some people argue that. Say, it's nothing novel's happening here. You're just ultimately what's happening is that you're restricting the patient's total calorie intake and you could do that with a high carb calorie restricted diet. But there's, you know, people are observing that independent of weight loss, their glucose numbers go down, even though they're not losing weight, which suggests they're not calorie restricting, which would really suggest that you are correcting the underlying metabolic derangement. And then just by shifting metabolism to, you know, increased fat utilization and enhancing insulin sensitivity, you know, it might not work for every person, but it seems to work for the majority of people. So Dom, I'm going to jump off track for just a second and talk about Nemo. So right after your previous appearance on Stem Talk episode 14, you went underwater for 10 days to participate in a NASA Nemo missions, it's something you and I both had the pleasure of sharing. So what did that entail? And can you give us some insight on that journey, both from your personal experience, but also from your background as a hyperbaric physiologist? Yeah, well, as you could probably probably have the same opinion, Nemo was one of the Nemo's amazing experiences of my life, just from a personal standpoint and even from a research standpoint, you know, type of research we're doing with NASA on space relevant mission objectives. It really, I mean, being in saturation is a very unique experience and it gave me sort of an appreciation of the team effort and the logistics and everything involved that's necessary in making such a space analog mission safe and kind of worth doing from a training standpoint and working with NASA and I would say working with astronauts has been, you know, a really an amazing experience and really kind of made me step up my game. So Dom, in addition to the extensive preclinical research that your lab does on nutritional ketosis, your group also recently published work, replicating the experimental design of your original oxygen toxicity work and aged in obese rats. So can you tell us a little bit more about the results of this research? Sure, yeah. Well, the original study used three month old sprag daily rats, which are really juvenile rats. So they're pretty young and they probably represent more like a person in their late teens. Whereas the 18 month old sprag daily rats we used in the last experiment would be representative of someone who's a human that's 50 years old, maybe give or take like 10 years and we demonstrated also that there was a significant delay in the latency to seizure. So we did behavioral seizures and these are very powerful tonic, clonic seizures that result from oxygen toxicity and we tested a variety of different compounds or formulations. And essentially what we saw is that a ketone ester mixed with medium chain triglyceride MCT, that combination was the most efficacious in this model system and really did depend on the elevation of both beta hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate. We really do need to elevate acetoacetate to get the anti-seizure benefits of exogenous ketones in particular in the oxygen toxicity model but also in other models that were studying. Yeah, it's really interesting. But just for listeners, oxygen toxicity is a syndrome that divers can experience or at risk for when they're breathing high pressure oxygen and so it's a really serious condition that we're always tracking in the undersea medicine community. So in addition to similar studies being conducted in larger animals for oxygen toxicity risk, we're pretty excited because the first studies in humans are also concurrently being conducted at Duke University to assess the effect of nutritional ketosis on oxygen toxicity seizure risk. And these studies are being run by Dr. Bruce Derek and you're a consultant on those studies dom. So can you expand on this research that's being done at Duke? Yeah, sure. I just had the pleasure of meeting with Candy Richardson at our metabolic health symposium or summit. We had an LA and she was kind of going over the blood data with me. So in this particular study, subjects are recruited into the study and they are put on a ketogenic diet and I think maybe a few people may already be on a low carb diet but it's really ketosis for just a few days, like three days prior to getting inside the hyperbaric chamber and the morning of, they also take a ketone supplement which is a commercially available sort of form of supplement that's out there at ketone salt with a medium chain triglyceride mixed in. And there were some people who just didn't even following a modified ketogenic diet which is a 1.5 to 1 I think which would fit into that modified ketogenic diet not the 90% fat ketogenic diet that was used clinically but this type of diet actually is used for adult epilepsy. They would get ketone levels between 0.6 and 1.2. So not very high. The study is blinded so I don't actually know where they're at with looking determining the efficacy of this level of ketosis but I'm under the understanding that there are changes between subjects that are not on a ketogenic in a ketogenic state and subjects that are in a ketogenic state. But I haven't seen the sum of the data yet but I think it's very interesting and I was very encouraged that a study like this was able to be approved for one thing and it really helps the undersea medicine field sort of understand what's involved in the implementation of nutritional ketosis and the potential benefits that can be seen in human subjects. So yeah, very excited to be part of this study that's ongoing and I know the registered dietitian working on this is very busy, calculating and getting all the numbers from the subjects that are being recruited and in the study. Stem Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research lab pioneering groundbreaking technologies aimed at leveraging and extending human cognition, perception, locomotion and resilience. Your group and others have done work on seizures as we've just discussed and the ability of ketom bodies to modulate brain energy metabolism. What insights have you learned about brain energy metabolism and also cerebral metabolism and specifically in the context of ketone bodies? Yeah, we did a number of studies where we subject the animals to dietary ketone supplementation either by giving an oral gavage or we integrated into the food and in some of the studies we've captured the brain and analyzed the brain tissue and we see not only in elevation and blood ketone levels beta hydroxybutyrate and acetate but also medium chain triglyceride. So MCT for example is elevated in the hippocampus and it's interesting that I kind of learned early on or thought that fatty acids did not cross the blood brain barrier but it's interesting to know that if you take orally medium chain triglycerides that they are actually crossing into the blood brain barrier and getting to brain tissue, some of them convert to ketone bodies but we see an elevation of the ketones beta hydroxybutyrate, acetate and MCT. The interesting probably from an anti-seusure point of view that we see big changes in the GABA to glutamate ratio and that's driven by a number of enzymes, glutamic acid, decarboxyl is 65 and 67. I think are enzymes that convert the excitatory amino acid transporter or transmitter glutamate to GABA and GABA is responsible for stabilizing hyper excitability so it has hyperpolarized the membrane potential cells and helps to reduce glutamate hyper excitability. So that's a pretty big effect that they saw with the ketogenic diet and I was really excited to see that this GABA to glutamate ratio is increased with supplemental ketones too. We are seeing a decrease in oxygen free radicals in the brain so also known as reactive oxygen species and I've done some work in the hippocampus and also we have studies going on in the brain stem right now. The brain stem being sort of the hub of the neural control of autonomic regulation. So respiration and heart rate and autonomic function so it's interesting to see that we can moderate or reduce oxidative stress in that area. Adenosine A1 receptor modulates the anti-seusure effect and also the anxiolytic effect or the anti-anxiety effect that we see with supplemental ketosis is mediated through adenosine specifically the adenosine A1 receptor. So that's some of the new research we've published in the last two years and also an increase in memory learning and synaptic plasticity we observed in our mouse model of in the mouse model of angelic syndrome. So all these different things are impacting. So Dom your group is exploring the kabuki syndrome a epigenetic disorder that causes altered growth and cognitive function in children. What sparked your interest in exploring this disease and looking for treatments? Well I did, I have a, I get emails every day about what new publications kind of hit PubMed and a few years back in 2016 I got an email with a new publication that showed the ketogenic diet rescues the hippocampal defects in a kabuki mouse model syndrome. The syndrome is a genetic disease and the gene KMT2D is defective and there's a deficiency in the methylation of a particular histone and that got me interested in this idea that ketones may be having a therapeutic effect not by virtue of changing the neuropharmacology of the brain or even impacting brain energy metabolism but by epigenetic regulation. So that really interested me and then there was a medical doctor at University of South Florida and another at Moffitt Cancer Center that reached out to me both at the same time because they had children with kabuki syndrome and the only drug that was out there that was sort of this experimental drug was AR42 and it was a histone deacetylase inhibitor and essentially what this HDAQ inhibitor was doing was opening the chromatin to allow expression of this particular gene and it was stimulating sort of methylation. So beta hydroxybutyrate, this one study that I mentioned showed a number of things that it normalizes histone acetylation and in particular normalizes histone acetylation in the granule cell layer and also the dentate gyros and that bait essentially silenced the neuro neurological defects in this mouse model of kabuki syndrome. You know the ketogenic diet is very difficult to follow especially for kids with kabuki syndrome. So the idea behind sort of contacting RLAB and us connecting with Johns Hopkins who did the study and in this mouse model of kabuki syndrome was to partner with them, get the mouse model and observe whether different types of ketone supplements can also reverse the hippocampal defects in kabuki syndrome but probably more importantly is to really focus on the behavioral effects and we have a variety of behavioral studies that we're gearing up to do now. We're breeding up the kabuki mice and gearing up to do a wide variety of behavioral studies. Really interesting. Yeah, it's really interesting, Dom. So coming back to exogenous ketones, can you take a moment and share with our listeners the difference between ketone esters and ketone salts? So a ketone ester was probably in the compound that we've spent probably 80% of our time in effort on and even publications on. A ketone ester, there's an infinite number of ketone esters that could be potentially synthesized. The two ones that are sort of out there now with most of the research behind them are maybe three would be one three butane dial. I talked about earlier combined with beta hydroxybutyrate in a monolester. The ketone that we've spent a lot of time in effort on in particular because it has anti-seizure effects is one three butane dial acetoacetate diester and administration of this compound elevates beta hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate. More or less than like a one to one ratio. When you go out and want to buy ketone esters, the commercially available products on the market would be salts of the ketone body beta hydroxybutyrate where beta hydroxybutyrate is ionically bound to monovalent or divalent cations. This is sodium, potassium, calcium and magnesium. It could potentially bind beta hydroxybutyrate to other things like amino acids but it's a little more tricky to synthesize those and the elevations would be kind of limited based upon sort of the stoichiometry of that. Then medium chain triglyceride, oil too, a ketogenic fats are available. You have sort of like a toolbox of agents from ketone esters, ketone salts, which could be a variety of salts and medium chain triglycerides. We think that the sort of true potential of supplemental ketosis will be combining these things sort of together and what we observe that some ketogenic agents work for some applications but not others. I think we're just at the cusp of understanding how to formulate these things and how to dose them. Some people think ketone esters are particularly dangerous. Is there any evidence of people experiencing serious medical issues with the use of ketone salts or ketone esters? I'm not aware of any published information that's out there to show that ketone esters or ketone mineral salts are even dangerous in any way. I think when it comes to the ketone salts, which are usually sodium, potassium, calcium magnesium, combined with beta hydroxybutyrate, they will be self-limiting, meaning that your ability to absorb the ketone salts will be limited by gastrointestinal tolerance. In particular, the osmotic shift that occurs with the mineral load ingestion will pull water into the gut and you'll have diarrhea or loose stools. You just simply won't absorb it. Cetan esters on the other hand can be rapidly de-sterefied in the liver or hydrolyzed and you could get a very sharp and pronounced elevation in ketones, beta hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate, which we've observed in animal models in particular rats that are gavage fed that you can create signs of ketoacidosis. For humans to enter a state of ketoacidosis from a ketone ester, they would have to consume on order about a half a liter. I think would really get into the danger zone, potential danger zone, and it would depend kind of what state they're in. It's either dehydrated or fasted. You might have more of a potential danger of situation. I do think that ketone esters, there needs to be regulation in part, but they kind of taste really bad in their undeluted forms. These things would probably, acetoacetone ester would be diluted to make it palatable and a consumption of a diluted ketone ester would have to be really high to get levels. If you could neutralize the taste of a ketone ester completely where it could be ingested in its neat state or undeluted state, you could potentially get into dangerous levels of ketosis. I would imagine you would get a big insulin response though and pull that down some. Yeah. That could be sort of the situation too. I think there's different ways that they could be administered acutely or sort of integrate it into food itself. I'm thinking that may be the way to go for some applications, but when it comes to things like athletics or other applications for performance, I'm also of the opinion that higher is not better. Everything levels up to four, five, and six is may actually do more harm than good because your body has to deal with that metabolic acidosis. I think most importantly from a performance standpoint, it's going to be really important to do graded levels of ketosis and titrate the levels so you achieve one, two, three, four, five millimolar and then to assess the potential of these things based on the dose response because I just know personally and even in our animal models, the animals start to look like they're drunk when you get levels at rat in the four to five, six range and that can't be good. Yeah, anti-dotally and also in personal experience for physical performance, I'm finding two to three somewhere in that range to be optimal, but there's probably a lot of individual variation as well. Yeah, for sure. I think that's why it's probably important to do with human studies to do quite a few individuals at a time and to assess it more. We even see variability in in-bred strains of rats and mice. So I can imagine humans are even going to have more variability where the sample size needs to be greater. Absolutely. The dose response is going to be important for anything you do when you talk about exogenous supplementation. I think there's all really good points down. So the transition into ketosis appears to be more difficult for women who try a ketogenic diet. Can you talk about that and also whether the use of exogenous ketones would be a good option for women? Yeah, I think what I'd want to know why they're using it, the ketogenic diet, if it was for weight loss or just general health reasons, I think the best approach would be to probably two things that I found as helpful is not to jump right into a ketogenic diet but just to do maybe a higher protein lower carb diet and then titrate the fat in from there. And also to maybe even do that in combination with time restricted feeding, eating within an eight hour window. Women tend to be kind of reactive. They're physiology, I would say. I'll rephrase that. What are you saying, though? Physiology. Kidney. I think women's physiology are reactive to hypoglycemia, meaning if their blood glucose goes low, that can change their physiological and even psychological state. So dips in blood glucose. And I think mitigating that with a more gradual transition into a ketogenic diet would be more ideal. Women do not tolerate fasting often as well too. And they tend to go more hypoglycemic, maybe without the compensatory ketosis. Exogenous ketones may be able to restore and maybe fill that energetic gap that could be happening with a carbohydrate restricted ketogenic diet or low carb. So I think there's a combination of things that women can do, maybe ease into the ketogenic diet. As I mentioned, just by going a little bit more low carb and maybe doing some time restricted feeding and using exogenous ketones, I think could be helpful. So Dom, in a previous STEM talk, you and I discussed the possibility of a vegetarian ketodiet. Are there more resources now that have been generated since our last talk for vegetarians that are interested in pursuing ketosis? Yeah, I think there's a lot of resources out there right now for people who want to implement a ketogenic diet. From the standpoint of there's got to be about two dozen recipe books out there now. And I think two or three of them are vegetarian. And we have a blog on keto nutrition website, my assistant Christy really helped with that, create a blog that sort of compiled the resources on how to implement a vegetarian ketogenic diet. And I'm in contact with a number of people that are doing it and really finding no major problems with doing it. And even in combination or even in contact with parents that have children who they prefer them to be on a vegetarian based ketogenic diet are doing really well with it. Dom, I understand that you are actually a pretty good ketone burner and that you know this because you regularly do a ketone tolerance test. Can you talk about the difference between a glucose tolerance test and a ketone tolerance test? Sure. You know, ketone tolerance test, I don't think you'll find that in the medical literature anyway, really. But it's something that you observe when much like when you do a glucose tolerance test and you ingest a predetermined amount of glucose and then you look at the rise and the fall of your blood glucose over time. And that gives you a good insight into the body's utilization and uptake of glucose where a type 2 diabetic will have sort of this super physiological elevation of glucose that will be protracted over a period of time and this elevation of glucose could be damaging and it sort of reflects what happens post-prandially if you eat a high carbohydrate meal. Interestingly, when you look at when you ingest ketones you also see a rise in blood ketone levels beta hydroxypeterate and maybe to a lesser extent acetal acetate depending on the molecule ingested. And then you see it quickly sort of disappear depending if it's a ketone salt for example, the levels of ketones may spike up in 30 minutes and be almost gone 60 to 90 minutes after. Whereas, and that may happen with a ketone ester too. And if you combine exogenous ketones with medium chain triglycerides of fat, you are delivering exogenous ketones to the blood and stimulating your own production of ketones in the liver with something like MCT. So athletes tend to already be good ketone utilizers. There's a phenomenon called post-exercise ketosis so their bodies are kind of set up metabolically to transport and break down ketones as energy and they tend to do very well on the ketone tolerance test, right? If you ingest ketones. So I think much like glucose, getting high levels of glucose is not a good thing. There's a lot of people out there trying to get high levels of ketones and that's probably not a good thing. I think if you're on a ketogenic diet and your ketones are high in the beginning and over a period of months, they are lower, that's probably an indication that you are increasing the upregulation of things like the ketone transporters, the monocarboxyl acid transporters, and also upregulating ketolate againzimes and probably fatty acid oxidation enzymes too are being upregulated. I don't know if that answers your question between the ketone tongue. But I think our tolerance and ability to absorb and assimilate and utilize ketones increases over time and that's a function of being in a state of ketosis. Yeah, that makes sense and it coheres with my own experience. Some research in anti-dolar reports suggests that given time, a sufficient adaptation period, anaerobic athletes such as wrestlers, boxers, M&A fighters will eventually regain what some call their low gear while on a ketogenic diet. That is early on in the adaptation process, people in sports like Jiu Jitsu or wrestling have often commented, you know, I feel better in every way, I feel healthier, I think better, but I've lost sort of some of my bottom gear. And then over a period of time, most people report the return of the peak power output. What is the current state of research on this topic and how might these athletes perhaps modify their fueling either through diet or through exogenous ketones to have the benefits of the ketogenic diet in terms of blood sugar and the cognitive benefits while also maximizing their performance in an explosive power sport like those I mentioned. Any thoughts on that? I think there's a lot of time, a lot of a topic in discussion about this and when it comes to, you know, sprinters, boxers, wrestlers, M&A fighters, I think if they rapidly transition to a ketogenic diet, there's going to be a period of time through the adaptation where their performance and energy levels may take a dip. And I think it's imperative to train in a state of ketosis and to try to get through that period, ideally in the off season and not if you're coming up to a big match, you don't want to rapidly convert to keto, you know, right before a big match, but really train in that state to force the adaptation to force your body to use fat as a fuel to increase its ketone levels and to get your brain in your body to use those ketones for fuel. But as ketones may be, we don't have enough research to really suggest that they should be used or but I think that they are potential tool in the toolbox as a supplemental form of energy that your body can use during those kinds of fights or that kind of activity. I also think that it's important to adapt your body to a ketogenic state and train, but when it comes up to a match, you may even want to add small amounts of glucose, like maybe forms of carbohydrate that break down slowly that don't cause an insulin spike, right? So you're giving your body, training your body not to use one particular fuel, but to use a toolbox, if you will, of fuels and things like creatin monohydrate, MCT oil, giving your body a range of different fuels to pick from. But not ingesting an amount of carbohydrates that's typically prescribed like drinking a gatorade or drinking, you know, eating a couple candy bars prior to a meal, I don't think would be ideal for an athlete that wants to benefit from being keto adapted and doing those sports in a keto adapted state. There are many benefits not just in performance, but also for recovery, for decreasing inflammation, protecting your brain. If you're a fighter or boxer, MMA fighter, training in a state of ketosis and even taking supplemental ketones just prior to or maybe even before, during and after the events. So perhaps one of the hottest areas of nutrition and even medical research in the past 10 years has related to the gut microbiome and the overall influence the gut has on health. And the ketogenic diet is a bit perplexing as on one hand, it appears to limit the substrates that feed many of the microbiota. Yet one of the most common clinical findings for people on a low carb or ketogenic diet is often years long GI issues resolved. So what is your view of the effect that the ketogenic diet has on gut health? Is it net win or net loss or individually driven? And do you have any insight as to the forthcoming Saunenberg lab of Stanford and their study looking at the ketogenic diet and gut health? So I may have a bit of a biased view on this because I get a lot of emails, maybe like maybe 20% of my emails are people that have these gut problems. I think it's a pretty big problem that really needs to be addressed. I teach all the GI stuff for medical physiology too. So I kind of get into this. But I mean, just this morning I got two emails about Crohn's disease and someone using a ketogenic diet, one person using low carb and other using a really restrictive ketogenic diet and intermittent fasting, whereas everything else didn't work for them. So I'm under the impression that it is a potential way to manage these gut issues that people are having. One thing that seems to be kind of prominent is what they're calling small intestine bacterial overgrowth. And that could be from excess sugars or carbohydrates, processed carbohydrates, timer-stricted eating. It seems to work, but I think a low carb ketogenic diet seems to really fix that situation. And I think that it's changing the diversity no doubt of the microbiome. And that can be variable depending upon the person, maybe even things like their geographical location, but I believe that it's knocking down inflammation in a way that's really enhancing the health of your gut and even down to the level of the tight junctions that really need to stay tight, if you will, to prevent the leaky gut and to prevent many of the inflammatory and immune issues that can result from a dysregulation of the gut microbiome. So it's a bit of a complicated issue and I think that it's also individual. Some people respond remarkably well and other people have continuing problems when they go low carb. And I don't think we really have the answer yet as to what is the optimal gut microbiome. I've asked many people and experts in the field and they say, well, if someone tells you that we know this, then they really don't know. They're really often to mark because those are just ongoing studies really determining what would be the optimal microbiome for the person. But I think the two big things that I see are just general gut inflammation, perhaps resulting from the small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. And that seems to be fixed or largely mitigated with low carb. So Dom, your group along with other additional collaborators are exploring an ecological idea of treating cancer with both a press and a pulse-based combat of therapy based on the ecological concept of animal extinction, which is just fine fascinating. So can you explain the philosophy of this concept and any work being done to determine if this concept is actually efficacious? Yeah, my colleague Thomas Safrid and kind of brought this idea up and I was an author on a review that addresses topics. So this idea of, in its most simple way, is that a press therapy for treating cancer would involve enhancing a person's own physiology and changing their metabolic physiology to compromise the growth and the proliferation of cancer cells and to essentially weaken the cancer to make it a vulnerable target for pulse-type therapies. And those pulse therapies could be hyperbaric oxygen therapy. It could be intravenous vitamin C, vitamin C when it gets up to very high levels does two things. It acts as a pro-oxidant. It also acts as a glucose antagonist blocking the transport of glucose across membranes and cancer cells that could be lethal to the cancer cell. And the press therapy can also enhance the efficacy of chemo and radiation. So something that we're not studying in our animal models right now, we're mostly focused on relatively non-toxic forms of therapy. But we're also interested in testing things like 2Doxy glucose, which blocks specific, cancer-specific, like-elitic pathways. So right now our studies are ongoing. We are doing a number of different animal models where we're testing this idea of using a multi-therapy approach that would involve some press-based therapies, a ketogenic diet being one of them. And so, we're also studying and can be taking continuously to hit a number of pathways associated with cancer growth and proliferation and to maintain the organism or the model in that state while we implement periodically different press therapies. So we think that this has a lot of potential for human-based therapies because with chemo and radiation you're aggressively trying to eradicate the disease with a lot of damage to the patient. So our idea is really to have the patient come out the other end of therapy in a better physical state than they would be otherwise by enhancing their metabolism and using more non-toxic therapies in combination. Yeah, that's absolutely interesting work and I'm really excited about following where it goes, Dom. You and your PhD student, Andrew Kutnik, worked with Brendan Egan, who by the way appeared on Stemtalk episode 65 on a comprehensive review paper titled Anti-Catabolic Effects of Keytone Bodies in Skeletal Muscle. Can you talk about the primary findings reported in this review paper? Sure, yeah. I think it's from an evolutionary perspective. We've kind of known all along that the Keytone Bodies really serve an anti-catabolic function. It's pretty clear to me, at least as a neuroscientist, that the brain is a very large glucose sink and in a fasted state when your glucose levels are depleted from your liver from mobilizing stored glycogen, the liver in your body will search for gluconeogenic precursors to maintain that fuel flow to the brain and you liberate a lot of fatty acids too from adipose and these fatty acids don't effectively cross the blood brain barrier so the brain gets into a state and your body gets into a state of energy deprivation. So the Keytone Bodies from an evolutionary standpoint really help to preserve the gluconeogenic amino acids in Skeletal Muscle. So they're very anti-catabolic to Skeletal Muscle. So the review that was authored by Andrew Kutnik and with Brendan Egan really delved into mechanistically how the Keytones are impacting various anti-catabolic pathways. Now I would encourage your listeners to actually dig up that review and to look through it to read through the studies that we referenced in there because it's a little bit too much information to cover in this talk. But there are a number of emerging pathways that demonstrate quite convincingly that Keytone Bodies function not just as not just preserving from an energetic standpoint but from a signaling standpoint and that's really sort of the basis besides beyond Andrew Kutnik's PhD dissertation is to really look into all these anti-catabolic mechanisms which include anti-inflammatory mechanisms like NF-CAPA-B and NLRP3 and flamazome and very specific sort of downstream signaling mechanisms. As you know this topic is an interest of longstanding for me and the context of looking at how baby boomer age people might avoid sarcopenia or at least kick it way down the road. So I was happy to see the review article we just discussed. So Dom your group has also been exploring cancer cakexia which is a devastating multifaceted dynamic wasting syndrome. What spurred the interest in this topic? Yeah that's a really big topic of investigation and I think you know the review article that we mentioned anti-catabolic effects of Keytone bodies and skeletal muscle really that was the motivation kind of behind that review was the potential ability for Keytones to maybe stimulate muscle protein synthesis but more importantly to knock down the proteolytic pathways that result from protein degradation. So with cancer cakexia you could probably call it one of the leading causes of death of cancer. So there is skeletal muscle wasting throughout the body and various factors released from skeletal muscle that can contribute to the demise of the patient but also just you know the muscle weakness in general even like the diaphragm where you're just you know not able to breathe over time. So we recognize that Andrew Kutnik in particular recognized that cancer cakexia was an under appreciated and understudied phenomenon with really no potential countermeasures or therapies for it. So he kind of dug into mechanistically studying what is causing this and looking at particular mouse model that we think is the VM M3 mouse model of metastatic cancer. We think is a fantastic representation that recapitulates many of the aspects of cancer cakexia. So Andrew is characterizing that and also developing a mitigation strategy or testing the effects of keytones on that particular animal model and looking at the upstream and downstream signaling pathways associated with a key tone induced anti-catabolic effects. So Dom people who are exploring the keto diet devote a remarkable amount of time to their macronutrient ratios and they obsess over grams of protein and grams of fat and grams of carbs. So what's important as it is to get this part right how important is the often overlooked topic of electrolytes and what targets do people need to shoot for with regards to electrolytes and what might be the signs and symptoms of inadequate electrolytes in the context of the keto diet. Yeah, that's a really good question. I think your electrolytes are probably one of the things that changed pretty acutely and pretty dramatically on a ketogenic diet. So low sugar low carbohydrate diet will result in suppression of the hormone insulin and suppression of the hormone insulin leads to called a natural retic effect which is the sort of dumping of sodium in your body and a diuretic effect. So water and sodium fall with it and me personally my magnesium levels my food levels of magnesium was pretty high but my blood magnesium levels were lower than normal until I started supplementing with magnesium and got that into the mid to upper range and that eliminated some of the issues I was having I was getting some cramps at night and things like things like that. So I really think it's important for people to consume higher levels of electrolytes in general when they start a ketogenic diet in particular sodium liberally salt their your food and I think things like having a big salad and you know liberally salt salt thing the salad and perhaps taking a potassium calcium supplement as well as putting sodium on your food. It's really important in staying hydrated right because you tend to if you run a little bit dehydrated that can contribute to electrolyte in balance and that can impact performance dramatically right because your your cell volume is maintained through electrolyte status and neuronal function and also your plasma volume if your plasma volume takes a dip from low levels of sodium and electrolytes then your performance is going to take a big big dip. So really staying hydrated but also making sure you have higher than you normally would be consuming mineral supplementation because you are dumping a lot especially the first two or three weeks of nutritional ketosis and I think even continually your renal physiology adapts to ketosis but I think you continually actually excrete more electrolytes in a state of ketosis even after adaptation. That makes good sense to me. Reflecting back on the last 10 years or so are there any particular moments that really still stick with you or stand out as you think about the scientific journey you have been on over the past decade what really pops out at you? Yeah man there's so many things because our lab or I should say the people in our lab are so active I have an amazing group of students and my wife leads up a number of projects herself. I think off the top of my head going way back would be the observation that reactive oxygen species dramatically explode I would say in cancer cells in the presence of high levels of oxygen. So that was very interesting to me and I didn't really fundamentally understand why until going into the literature to suggest that cancer cells have defective mitochondria and that we could potentially exploit the oxygen inducing elevation of oxidative stress in cancer cells with hyperbaric oxygen in particular if we create a state that metabolically compromises the cancer cells. Hyperbaric oxygen would be acting as a toxic agent to the cancer cells. I think the other thing was when we tested the first test of the ketone ester we didn't have enough of it to feed it continually for a week that was our first sort of experiment plan was to maintain a state of ketosis for a week. I was under the impression that ketosis needed to occur for a period of time for it to have an anti-seasure effect but I only had enough ketone ester to give like really one dose. So we dozed like a single rat and we put it inside a chamber at five levels or five atmospheres of oxygen and I remember just kind of standing around the chamber after an hour and the animal is in there grooming itself and typically these seizures happen in about five to ten minutes. So I was just you know hoping and praying that this wasn't like an outlier like occasionally we get like a super rat that'll go like an hour but every animal that we ran after for that particular study had remarkable neuro protection or anti-convulsive effects were mediated by the ketone ester. So those two things really stand out in my head as sort of game changing sort of observations in the lab. Great. I can see how those would stick out. And Dom just doesn't aside it's really cool just since you and I have known each other for about decade now over a decade I guess which is scary and I'm starting to date myself. But to watch your careers it's gone along from you know hyperberecnerofisiology to the incredible work that you guys are doing now so just isn't aside. So during the interview that we did back in 2016 you and your wife Chilla had just got under rescue dog and you talked about how you guys like to take the dog on long walks on the beach in the evenings but since then the two of you have have adopted a second rescue dog that you now take for walks on a farm rather than the beach so what happened. Yeah we have our second dog our first dog is Ryan and you met Ryan yeah he's a adorable black lab and keeps us very busy. He just cut his leg open on the farm actually and had to get some stitches so we're nurturing him back to health but he's doing super and then Scooby is our great dain mix and he gets in a lot of trouble yesterday he got outside the fence and ran quite a while away and I have to go I got a phone call that I had to go pick him up but he's the trouble maker. So yeah we have a farm now a 24 acre farm and there's a trail all the way around the outside gate and we take them for walks at least once sometimes three or four times a day like when I'm working especially working at home I like to take frequent breaks and just run with him and I have ATVs too so Scooby is very fast and very athletic so I'll do it's almost a mile or so around it three quarters of a mile so he'll chase me around and we get a lot of activity now a lot of walks and sometimes rides on the farm where we you know get a lot of physical activity for us and for our dogs too and I think that's really crucial for our pets to get physical activity because a lot of pets you know just sit home and some of them don't even go outside so I think for pet health which we are very into especially with keto pet sanctuary if if people have dogs and maybe their dogs have cancer they might want to look up keto pet sanctuary because they're implementing some of the approaches that we've developed in our lab to help manage cancer in these dogs so yeah we're having lots of fun now on the farm and the dogs are probably having more fun than us because they have so much space to run around and do their own normal things that they they should be doing. I hear that you haven't visited the gym in about six months that might be duty or farm life if that's the case what kind of workout routine do you have now I imagine it's a bodyweight based approach of some kind yeah yeah I actually I did my wife chiller just joined the gym a planet fitness and if you want to call that a gym just last week so I'm a fatness I call it yeah yeah to my surprise they don't even have like an Olympic bar with like a squat rack but get out candy and pizza they do yeah I noticed uh yeah there's candy bags like buckets of candy on the shelf you and chillers should watch out in that gym because if they see anybody doing too well and looking too buff they don't like that yeah yeah well we go in and out pretty fast and she uses the equipment and I usually kind of use the equipment to do bodyweight exercises like chin ups and dips or whatever but uh yeah I took a break from the gym for a while because our farm really has a lot of work that needs to be done we have lots tons of big at hundreds if not thousands of big oak trees and a lot of this needs to be cleared because we have a six acre lake on the farm and uh used to be a it's a cropped farm and a fish farm so I spend a lot of time cutting trees and and big big oak logs and and moving these things around on the farm and just doing all the normal things moving equipment around moving digging holes irrigation ditches and things like that I like doing all the stuff myself and that has really kept me busy I kind of look back at my journal which I keep every day and maintaining about 20 plus hours of work on the farm every week for the last you know maybe five six months so would you recommend farming and gardening as a way to get some useful activity and in one's life he absolutely if they have the ability to do that just to get outside and I think there's something to just being outside and doing physical work outside and if you don't have a farmer garden I think it's good to just go to your local you know park and do some chin ups and push ups and wide range of things that you could do with your body weight on there and I'm a big believer now after a couple years of transitioning from weights which I still try to do uh just getting back into now to body weight exercises and if your body weights too light for you for push ups you can always add weight in the form of weighted vest and things like that which I like to do too yeah people nowadays forget that for athletes unless you were a weightlifter for all the rest of the athletes there really was no resistance training until maybe the seventies you know even sports like wrestling until maybe the early seventies or even mid seventies there was no such thing as resistance training the coaches thought it would make you slow and muscle bound and yeah you did things like body weight exercises climbing ropes and rings and things like that very different yeah and I think there's some pretty big dudes in the gym like that if you put them on a on a rope or a chin up bar or yeah they would do too well yeah it wouldn't be pretty when they hit the floor yeah yeah yeah I have a lot of friends that are very strong but they they cannot do pull ups or chin ups very well you know powered weight ratio just working on a farm like bailing hay and things like that and doing body weight exercises really prevents injury I mean when when I power lifted I was always kind of achy my joints were achy but after doing strenuous labor on the farm and stuff I feel just as strong but without a lot achy joints from doing those kind of exercises yeah I think you're onto something there Dom yeah absolutely one last question Dom is it true that whole food stores all around the country ran out of wild planets are deans after you mentioned how much you liked them during an interview you did with Tim Ferris on his podcast that's when I heard that was the case and since then I've connected with wild planet and they've graciously given me a wide variety of products that they sell not only sardines but I think that may have been the case because Tim Ferris has such a tremendous following and over the years I have been sort of eating a little bit lower on the food chain instead of big fish like tuna and swordfish I've gravitated to sardines and they just become a staple for me especially during travels but I've diversified my brands of sardines but I still keep wild planet in the cupboard and with me when I travel so it's an amazing brand of sardines and a lot of people did question me if I my mercury levels or heavy metals were high and I consume a ridiculous amount of these things and got all my all those things tested and they were they were pretty low so so that's one good thing I mean people women especially who are pregnant or breastfeeding may have a concern about heavy metals with fish because fish are part of the diet and I think sardines are a good option for that sardines are typically very low in mercury as opposed to the larger fish I like those particular sardines as well tasty and convenient but I have to point out to you that these things are now off your diet off your menu if you're going to do the vegetarian experiment that you mentioned so yeah I have a meal planned together and I'm just just ready to you know waiting to pull the trigger on that but right now I'm enjoying some of my butcher box beef and chicken and fish so I do plan to do that experiment just think about the you could have soy sardines and other truly young gross things by way appreciate you doing the diet be good to see what becomes of you I'm personally interested Dom yeah well Dom it's been fantastic having you on Stem Talk again thank you so much for joining us today and thank you for having me Don and Ken I appreciate it you did a great job thanks things stem talk stem talk stem talk stem talk stem talk so of course as a vegetarian I'll be interested to hear how Dom's experiment with a vegetarian ketogenic diet works out that's one of the things that Stem presses me about Dom he has a sensational curiosity to fully understand nutritional ketosis and he's also willing to try out different things you could hear in his voice today how excited he gets about the research that he's doing and he's always been that way since I've known him absolutely Dom has clearly established himself as a leading expert on nutritional ketosis and exogenous ketones there's still much to be learned about ketosis and his applications and Dom is one of those who will lead the way if you enjoyed this interview as much as Ken and I did we invite you to visit the Stem Talk web page where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes stemtalk.us this is Don Kanegas signing off for now and this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stem Talk thank you for listening to Stem Talk we want this podcast to be discovered by others so please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review more information about this and other episodes can be found at our website stemtalk.us there you can also find more information about the guests we interview
