Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host Don Conegas, and joining me to introduce today's podcast is Man Behind the Curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, ITEMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Section Committee that selects all the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Hi Don, great to be here today. So our guest today is Dr. Robert Epstein, who is a psychologist, professor, author and journalist who is currently a co-founder and senior research psychologist at the American Institute for Behavioral Research and Technology in Vista, California. Robert is the former editor of Psychology Today and has had a distinguished career as a scientist who is passionate about educating the public on advances in mental health, the behavioral sciences, and most recently, warning the public about the invisible influence that technology companies have on consumer and political behavior. Robert is the author of 15 books and has written more than 300 scientific and popular articles. He is founder of the Cambridge Center for Behavioral Studies and became well-known early in his career for his work on creativity. And since then, he has conducted research on diverse range of topics such as adolescent and adult competency, arranged marriages, sexual orientation, self-control, and voter manipulation. He also has developed a number of unique online competency tests which are annually taken by more than a million people. We will be sure to provide a link to some of these online tests in our show notes, but before we get to today's interview with Robert, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the double secret suction committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps. For the widest and most lavishly praised field reviews to read on Stem Talk, as always, if you hear you review Red on Stem Talk, just contact us at Stem Talk at ihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk t-shirt. Today, our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker, Eagle Scout, 1958. The review is titled, Very Intelligent Discussion. It reads, The Gary Tubs interview was great. The discussion around nutrition has been badly corrupted with personality striving policy instead of being based on reasoned science. It is refreshing to hear the truth in terms of real studies instead of hearing the old dogma that has been discredited. I had high blood sugar for more than 10 years, but I cured it by going on a ketogenic diet. After curing myself, I went on to lose more than 60 pounds. We need to spread the word and your podcast has contributed to the discussion in a very positive way. Well, thank you, Eagle Scout, 1958, and thank you so much to all of our other Stem Talk listeners who helped Stem Talk become such a great success. And for those of you who want to check out our interview with Gary Tubs, go to the Stem Talk webpage and look for the episode 37. It was indeed a great conversation. OK, and now onto our interview with Dr. Robert Epstein. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Hi, welcome to Stem Talk. I'm your host, Don Conegas, and joining us today is Dr. Robert Epstein. Robert, welcome to Stem Talk. It's my pleasure. And also joining me is Ken Ford. Hi, Don, and hello, Robert. Hi, there, Ken. So, Robert, I understand that you were born in Connecticut. Did you grow up there as well? I did until my late teens, I guess. And then in elementary school, you were a very strong in math, and we're grouped with other kids who had high IQs. And I understand that the Russians and Sputnik had something to do with this. Is that right? Oh, yeah, back then, we used to have drills all the time, and we used to hide under our desks in case of nuclear war. I don't know what that would accomplish. But yeah, because of Sputnik, lots of communities organize special education programs such to try to keep pace with Russia, I guess that was the idea. So where I grew up in Connecticut, which was a harvard area, all of the kids in all the elementary schools were tested, given IQ tests, and they brought together from all over the city. They brought together the 12 highest scoring children. And we had special treatment for the next four years. We did a demonstration each year up on stage before hundreds of professors at the University of Hartford, the authors of our textbooks, including the author of our math program materials, actually visited us once a year. So we got amazing treatment and incredible educational opportunities. And you must have skipped a greater two because it looks as if you graduated from high school when you were 16, is that right? I graduated at 16. I was number one in my graduating class of a, I think it might have been 666 people, which is very unlucky. And so yes, I did get out early. And there was a lot of chaos at that time because that's the time of the Vietnam War. That year was the year of the Cambodian invasion. So when I went to college that followed Trinity in Connecticut, not too far from where I'd grown up. Low campus was pretty much shut down. Right before I got there, the students had gone on strike. They had locked up the trustees. They had abolished all of the campus organizations, including the student government. And all course requirements were gone. So this is, that's a bad thing. It turns out to go to college where there's nothing you can join and there are no course requirements. I mainly just took for three and a half years there until, until my last semester when I came to my senses, I mainly took courses in psychology and dance. Yeah. Sounds utopian, not really. So Robert, you were very technical as a teenager and even started programming computers back in the 60s, which was well before computers started to show up in classrooms. So is it true that your high school is one of the first in the country to have a computer and was it one of those computers that took up an entire room? That is correct. It was Conard High School in Connecticut and West Hartford, Connecticut. It was actually the Fredric U Conard High School. Now if you spell out those initials, you'll see that we would refer to the school by a rather pejorative term. But anyway, yes, we, it was a pretty wealthy community and we had an IBM 1620 that filled the whole room. There was no one in the high school had any idea how to use it except me and one other student. And so I started programming basically when I was about 13 years old and have continued to this time. And actually I did my first hack. There was no word for hacker back then, but I actually did my first hack, committed my first hack when I was probably around 17. And so I really, I do know what hacking is because I was doing it more or less before anyone was. You mentioned Trinity, yo, what was the main factor that led you there? Well, I mean, it was in my community. It's a beautiful school. And so my head known people who had gone there. And you know, the fact that I was so young actually made it tough for me and my applications to get into other schools. So it was my best option. And I'm very glad I went there. I loved the school. I loved the intimacy of the place and the close relationship that students had with professors. And later I got on to one of Trinity's governing boards. And as you can imagine, one of the things I tried very hard to do was to strengthen course requirements because there weren't any course requirements at all when I was a student there. That must have been interesting undertaking on the advisory board. It was. It was pretty intense. I did that for years. When you first showed up at Trinity P. Did you know that you were going to major in psychology or suspect it or did you just sort of gravitate to that field? Okay, I definitely had no intention of going into psychology. I started out in math and physics. I still love both of those fields. And they've helped me actually those fields and my technical background has helped me throughout my career. I ended up getting psychology there for the wrong reason partly because in math and physics you have to do a lot of homework. And in psychology and sociology feels like that. There's very little in the way of homework. So that was a factor. And then we had this very charismatic professor there. And his name was George Higgins who taught a course in psychopathology which was so popular they had to hold it in the college's theater movie theater. And it seemed to me when I did back of the envelope arithmetic on this at one point that some people had to be taking it twice because the whole college had only something like 1600 students. But there seemed to be so many people taking his course on psychopathology that it just didn't make sense to me mathematically. The point is that was the first psych course I ever took. There was a lot of sexual content in this because the professor was afraid in. And I sat front row center and I just just got hooked on psychology. And I just I couldn't stop. I actually I petitioned my way out of taking introductory psychology. So even though I ended up teaching that course dozens of times later on. I never actually took intro psych. My first course was a was an upper level course of this amazing course on what makes us crazy. So speaking of all this during your senior year Trinity did his first ever campus wide sex survey. So how did you end up with all the stacks of sex surveys that your classmates filled out? That was kind of a crazy thing. I was the only student on campus who had my own office. I had my own computer terminal. I was working with a computer time-sharing company that was based in Maryland. So I had access to massive for that for that era. I had access to massive computer power because I was a computer geek working part time for a computer company that had a lot of equipment. And I could access this via my own terminal over the phone. And so I the point is you know everyone knew that that I had this all this computational power. And when they were doing the campus wide sex survey I was approached by a professor who asked whether I could analyze the data. And I said well yes I can. And so this was an absolutely wild thing to be able to do at that time because I was still hadn't reached 20 so maybe I was 18, 19 years old. And I had access to all the sex surveys from everyone on campus. And I got to see the results before anyone else because I was computing the results. So I knew in general about every sexual thing everyone on campus was doing. It was a crazy time and that was a very wild experience. Yeah, it sounds like it. And you didn't go to graduate school until 1976. So what did you do during the two years after you graduated from Trinity? Well another odd thing about me back then is I felt I had a calling from God to serve humanity. I wasn't actually sure that God existed. I still have my doubts. But I felt I had to act on this calling. So I actually went to Israel and at first I lived on a Kibbutz which is a farming community. And then I went to an actually an orthodox religious academy which is called a Yashiva. And I just needed to explore that part of me. And eventually I decided that I had misinterpreted the calling. I had brought with me some of my psychology books, not just my prayer books. And I had brought with me books by BF Skinner who I had become fascinated with as an undergraduate. And I decided that's what I was meant to do. And so I came back to the U.S. I applied to graduate school. I ended up working side by side with BF Skinner at Harvard and he was technically retired. But we hit it off in an amazing way. And he hadn't done research for many years but the two of us started building equipment together and started doing all kinds of pretty wild research. So that just that began another phase of my life. And then you ended up at the University of Maryland Baltimore. So how did that happen? Well when I first came back to the U.S. I applied to a couple of schools. I never thought I could work with Skinner since he wasn't active at the time. So I applied to places where his most prominent students were located. And at University of Maryland there was a professor named A. Charles Catania who was a Harvard PhD under Skinner. And so I went there first and worked in his laboratory. And it was when I was working in a Catania's lab that I began to correspond with Skinner. And then eventually had this opportunity to go to Harvard. You mentioned BF Skinner and I understand that you have an interesting story about him helping you get into Harvard for your doctorate. Could you tell us the story in less it's forbidden? It's not forbidden. It's a little embarrassing but I will tell you that I had been corresponding with him. He was working on his autobiography, asked me to look things up for him which I did. And so he credited me with helping him in the acknowledgments of I think two volumes of his autobiography. And I volunteered to come up and work with him for a summer. And we ended up building equipment together. We ended up doing research that summer that eventually got published in science. It made national news. And at the end of the summer I was supposed to go back to Maryland because I hadn't finished my master's program there. And he said, well, maybe you should stay around here. And right in front of me he called on the phone. And he called up the chairman of the psych department. This is August. So the chances of reaching anyone were very, very small. But he actually reached the chairman. And he said, right in front of me, I have this young genius here. And is there any way we can keep him around? And apparently the chairman said to him, well, you know, we are, the incoming doctoral group is complete. But we just had someone drop out. He said, so maybe we can convene a committee and evaluate this young man. And maybe we can do that quickly. And they did. They literally, you know, it was mid-August. And they got a committee together. And we got letters, you know, a fact stop. And lo and behold, I mean, that's it. The next thing I knew I was staying in Cambridge. Wow, that's nice. It pays to be a strong candidate at the right place at the right time. Right time was definitely the key here. Is it true? I've heard that you were one of the few people who never had to ride a dissertation while at Harvard and get your doctorate. That seems very unusual. If that's true, how did that happen? Well, that's also the case. And it made some of my fellow graduate students pretty angry. But that is actually true. I not only worked with Skinner there. I also had the honor of working with an extraordinary historian of science, Ibernard Cohen, who had founded the history of science department at Harvard back in the 1930s. And I knew from Cohen that he never wrote a dissertation. He got the doctorate without doing this because I think he'd gone off to the military or something right in the middle of his doctoral work there. And then he took time off and then he wrote a book and he published a book. And he said he went back to Harvard with the book. He had written, and they just handed him his degree. So I knew it could be done. But at some point, when I was a grad student there, I started submitting papers for publication. I was getting publications while a graduate student. And I think by the time I was up to five or six, the chair of the psych department said to me, he said, why don't you just staple some of your publications together and carry on with your life? And I literally went back downstairs, this is William James Hall, which is Harvard's only true ivory tower, 15 stories I recolored. And I went downstairs to my TRS-80 computer and I printed out some of my publications in a kind of a dissertation format onto the correct parchment paper. It took me an afternoon and I added a one page introduction, a table of contents. And that was it. And I still had to do the oral defense. And I was a bit controversial there because I had not written a dissertation. And I was working with Skinner who was retired. So the oral defense, that was tricky because 10 faculty members showed up and Skinner himself did not come. Oh, no. I was on my own and I did not know most of these people, and they didn't know me. That was pretty intense. And I will tell you a secret. I will tell you a secret. A few days before that, I was called into a professor's office. Now I might get choked up telling you this little story, but this is the truth. And he handed me a folded piece of paper, one of those yellow lined pads, but it was a folded piece of paper. And he said, these are the questions I'm going to ask you at your defense. Wow. And I said, I don't understand. And he said, well, many years ago, he said a professor did this for me. He said, I'm doing it for you. And I didn't know what to say, but I left. I looked at these questions. They were impossible, impossible questions. They were just absolutely ludicrous. They were so difficult. And of course, I prepared answers to them. So we're getting through the orals. And at Harvard at that time in that program, professors could ask you anything about anything. They didn't have to stick to your dissertation. And I was asked all kinds of things by all kinds of professors I didn't know. And then when it seemed to be, people seemed to be running out of gas, the chair, a very brilliant mathematical psychologist whom I didn't really know, said, well, are there any other questions? At which point that professor sitting in the back raised his hand and said, yes, I have a question. He asked me one of these impossible questions. And I paused for dramatic effect. And then I just gave a brilliant answer to this question. At which point the chair looked around and everyone said, well, I think we've heard enough. Don't you? Everyone nodded their head. And I went out in the hall for the wait. And they came out about 15 minutes later. They all shook my hands. I was done. Yeah, it's a fantastic story. Yeah, it's fabulous. So you became known very quickly because of the work that you were doing with Skinner. And many behaviors at this time were running experiments on chimpanzees. And you and Skinner, however, were running experiments on pigeons. So can you explain to us why pigeons? Well Skinner had worked with pigeons starting in the 1940s. So he was quite famous for doing his pigeon research. But we started doing some new pigeon research because we were dissatisfied. Skinner especially very dissatisfied with some of the hot research that was being done with chimpanzees, which was being interpreted in human cognitive terms. And Skinner always hated the idea of studying the mind. And he thought cognition was a kind of bogus concept. So we started making fun of the chimpanzee research by accomplishing more or less the same kind of behaviors with pigeons that people were studying and making a fuss over in chimps. So one of our first publications, which was published in science and made news around the world, was called symbolic communication between two pigeons. And then we had the Latin name for pigeons, which we threw into the title just to be pompous. And we interpreted this by the way, is the first and to my knowledge only satire ever published in science. Do you have? They've published a few that might qualify as satire, but they weren't intended as such. Well no, this, this we intended as a satire. No, you do. We wrote the entire piece as if the pigeons had minds and were communicating ideas to each other. We wrote the entire thing as other researchers had written articles about chimpanzees. And of course we didn't mean any of it. And then we got to the last paragraph and we borrowed a line from the famous Watson and Crick paper on the structure of DNA. And last paragraph we began, it has not escaped our notice, which is exactly how the last paragraph of the Watson and Crick paper starts, where they're basically saying in kind of modest, you know, British terms, hey, it hasn't escaped our notice because we know about this structure of DNA that tells us a lot about things we can do and so on. So our paper ended with it has not escaped our notice that the performance we've described can be explained fully in terms of a simple training procedures and techniques of operand conditioning, etc. So in other words, finally in the last paragraph we gave away what it was we were doing and we basically, as is true in all good satire, we kind of gave away the satire in the last paragraph and that made it into science. So yeah, I was definitely getting a lot of attention partly because I was working with Skinner, but also because of the extraordinary things we were doing. We simulated some aspects of human communication, of mirror use and eventually I moved on and actually simulated so-called insight in the pigeon and other cognitive phenomena, but I was doing this without reference to the language of cognitive psychology. Yeah, that's fantastic. So after pigeons you started to work with kids and then adults and this led you to your creativity work, which is research that to this day you still are involved with. And what sets you apart is that you're one of those odd people and I say that in the best way possible, it says that creativity is an orderly and predictable process that can be taught. And this is actually a lot of interest with some of the elite performers that we work with here at IGMC. And a lot of people disagree with this concept. They imply that creativity is a gift to something that's in people's DNA that they either have or they don't have. But can you talk about how you came to understand that creativity is actually an orderly process? Well, yes. Here's how it started. It started with a first skiner and I training pigeons to do things, but then kind of letting them loose and watching them and learning more and more about the orderliness in the behaviors we would observe after we had finished training and we're just letting the pigeons do their thing. So I can't really get into great detail here, but the point is I came to believe over a period of several years. This is while I was working with Skinner and then for several years afterwards when I had my own lab. I came to believe that previous experience, whatever it might be, and of course often times we don't know what the previous experience is, but with the pigeons, you know, I had a pretty good idea since I was providing the experiences. But I came to believe more and more that the new behavior that arises in new situations is an orderly function of experience of previously established behavior. And I, over a period of years, began to understand that relationship better and better eventually even described it in terms of a series of equations and a mathematical model and then finally a computational model so that I could with pigeons and then with children and then even with human adults, I could under highly controlled laboratory conditions, I could predict precisely the emergence of novel behavior of new behavior moment to moment in time, at least for short periods, based on, you know, a previous behavior that had been trained. So in other words, I was seeing that the behavior we call creative is orderly and predictable moment to moment in time. And that's what my research was telling me for years and years and years and I still believe that that is true. You know, I've done so many other kinds of things that that work kind of got pushed into the background a little bit. I don't think it's ever been fully explored. But yes, I still believe to this day that the behavior we call creative is orderly and predictable and that's very good news because, you know, if it really is, that means we can train creativity. It means we can be very deliberate about boosting the creativity that people show and that led me eventually to looking into what's called the competencies approach to creativity. And so I wrote several books on that and indeed I've kind of boiled it down to some core competencies of creative expression that can be trained in individuals and then some managerial competencies that these are these are competencies that you can train managers and teachers and parents and that help to bring out creativity in other people. So all of this is very, very structured, very orderly, in my opinion, very, very positive. It's a very positive way to look at the creative process. After Harvard, you ended up founding the Cambridge Center for Behavioral Studies and I understand that you took on the role of executive director despite a very strong warning from Skinner to never, ever do anything administrative. Is that right? Now I assume you're interested in this, because probably you've done a lot of administrative work. I guess. I think Skinner was wise in this respect. Well yes, there were several reasons why Skinner's relationship with his colleagues at Harvard was not always best. But one reason was because he always refused to take his turn to serve as department chair and he, yes indeed, warned me never take on administrative work. And here I found myself an executive director, but that's because I wanted to share not just my own research with other people who I thought could benefit from the findings of my research, but I felt that I had a need. This is part of that mission, that I was on. I felt that I had a need to try to share all of the behavioral sciences with the general public. So the Cambridge Center for Behavioral Studies, I founded as an institute that was devoted to that end. It still exists now after, wow, it was founded in 1990. So I think that's a long time. We're talking 30 years. And so yes, I became an administrator. Now I always kept my hand in research and writing, but I was trying to create opportunities for other people to share their work more broadly. And as I say, that institute still exists. It's still pursuing that mission. And I still believe very, very strongly in that mission of not just doing your research, but communicating what you've learned and trying to help people to live better lives based on scientific findings and the behavioral sciences. 1990 was a good year for starting institutes. That was also the year IHMC started. So that's what I thought. That's right. Well, while you were there at the Cambridge Center sort of continuing on the theme of communication, you yourself, not just the others, but you really started writing quite a bit for popular magazines, trying to communicate the excitement of behavioral science. Is there a particular theme to the articles that you were doing or was it sort of general social science communication? Well, I was writing about things I knew about. So things that I studied that was my main focus. And I was very fortunate. And then I ran into an editor at Reader's Digest, Terry Dunkel, whom I'm still in touch with. I still consider a friend. And he was a senior editor at Reader's Digest, which at the time had the largest readership of any publication in the world. They had more than 100 million readers. And he worked with me. He trained me. I mean, he really taught me how to take scientific ideas and findings and translate them into pretty simple, straightforward terms. That's what Reader's Digest was all about. And he worked with me for years and really helped me tremendously. And those are skills that I ended up using over and over again. I'm still using today, literally. So I owe a lot to him. But I ended up publishing pieces in Reader's Digest and then Parenting Magazine and other places. So again, I'm doing my science. I'm doing my administrative work. But I'm also now learning how to talk to the public on a pretty large scale. Which is really important too. And some of this writing was collected in Cognition, Creativity, and Behavior, which is a book of selected essays that you published in 1996. The book provides a glimpse into the experimental and theoretical work that you were doing early on in your career. And it covers a diverse range of topics from the behavioral study of creativity and innovation to parenting to artificial intelligence. And there's even an essay on world peace. So it seems as if this book was a record of your evolving views on all these different topics. So can you talk a little bit about this book? Yes, looking back, I don't understand how a major academic publishing house could possibly have published this book. I say this. This is my modest side trying to show up here. But I don't understand how they did this because I was not by any means a famous psychologist. But yeah, they published this gorgeous book. I think it had more than 30 of my papers. And it did seem to show that I had done a lot up until that time. But it turns out I was barely getting started because it was around that same time that I became a at first a contributing editor for Psychology Today magazine, which had begun its existence out here in California. And at this point was based in New York. And looking back, I was barely getting started at this point in the late 90s when that book came out. And I still can't even believe that book came out. But it did. And it seems to show that I had done a lot fairly early on in my life and in my career. After 10 years with the Cambridge Center, you then moved to the West Coast. And this was a time when you were really continuing your transition into journalism and professional writing. Can you talk about this transition as well as the reason that you moved to the West Coast? Just a brief explanation. I moved to the West Coast, first of all, only kind of partially because I had fallen in love with a woman who lived on the West Coast and I also had fallen in love with the West Coast. But I was actually going back and forth. So I had places in Cambridge and in the San Diego area for more than 10 years. I was truly by coastal. And I got more and more involved during those years with media projects, but also with new lines of research. And I was learning how to talk to larger and larger groups. So I became editor-in-chief of Psychology Today magazine. And I think 1999, I completely revamped the magazine so that instead of journalists writing all the articles, we went back to our roots and I now had psychologists communicating directly with the public and then using our editorial staff to kind of patch things up and make things more palatable exactly as I had been taught to do for readers digest. And I also went and started doing radio work at that time. So I had a national radio show that was connected to the magazine. And I was bringing on the show very prominent researchers in behavioral sciences, but also bringing in celebrities and political leaders. And that was to try to, of course, make the audience larger. That was the point. So if I had an expert on, let's say, misuse of medications like Vykinin, then in order to build the audience, I also had Jamie Lee Curtis on the show since she had been addicted to Vykinin at one point. And that's kind of how we rolled. So when we talked about depression, I had experts on depression, but I also had on Carrie Fisher, who was wonderful. I had on the surgeon general of the United States four times. I had on Dr. Ruth, the famous sex doctor. She was on multiple times. So I was learning how to reach larger audiences and create more opportunities for behavioral scientists to talk directly to the public, which I still think is very important. Yeah, agree wholeheartedly. But you always also kept your hand in research, even though you were becoming much more interested in media at the same time. So you studied arranged marriages, and you found that in many of these marriages that the couples had developed greater affection for each other than couples who had married for love. One of the reasons why you've advocated that people can deliberately learn to love each other? Well, when I was editor in chief of psychology today, I also at that point was in between marriages. I was single, I did not like dating, but I was very much aware of research that had been done on arranged marriage. I started doing my own research on arranged marriage, and I made an announcement through an editorial in the magazine that not that I was going to enter into an arranged marriage, but I was going to create something which I called the love contract, and I was going to enter into a contract with someone who would agree with me that we were going to learn to love each other over time. Maybe with the help of counselors and therapists, I wasn't sure what all the methods would be, but we were going to commit for some period of time to try to fall in love. And I did not expect this, but right after that was published, I think 6am the next morning I got a call from, I think the New York Post or something like that, and the phone did not stop ringing, the phone kept ringing until 11 o'clock that night. It was media outlets, and it was TV producers, and movie producers, and literary agents, and so on. I received over a thousand offers from women who wanted to sign the love contract with me, including a bathing suit model, a woman who owned her own island in the Caribbean, sent me first-class tickets to fly there. I sent them back, I did not go. So it just started a crazy period of my life, and I did eventually sign a contract with someone, and we were followed around by cameras for six months from CBS. Meanwhile, I was starting to learn about how love is built in many arranged marriages around the world, and I started research on that and eventually published on that, and learned a tremendous amount about how that is done. And I began to believe that I could package a lot of that for the Western countries, which don't practice arranged marriage. In other words, bring the techniques in without bringing in the religions, without bringing in the cultural practices, but bring the techniques in for learning to love. So I did start working on a book on that topic called Making Love. I'm still working with people now, actually, at this very moment, in Canada and in Los Angeles, to develop a television show around that concept of getting people deliberately to learn to love through various exercises and so on. So that's still a big part of my dreams for the future, is teaching the Western world how to do that. But there's no question, by the way, I know this from research now in a dozen cultures that practice arranged marriage. There is no question that this can be done. I know because most of the marriages in the world are arranged, and in many of those, perhaps at least half, people fall deeply in love over time, deeply in love in the Western sense. So for example, one of the people in my study was a well-educated woman from Pakistan, and when we got to that part of the interview, I said to her, okay, on the day you were married on a scale from one to ten, where one is the lowest, ten is the highest, how in love were you with your husband? And she said zero. And I said in how in love, are you with him now? And she said 11. And I said in how long have you been married? And she said 45 years. So this is a very, very different concept of love and the role that love should play in a marriage and our ability to control what happens to love in our intimate relationships. So I taught courses on this, and again, still working on that book and working on developing a TV show. I believe very strongly in that concept. Cupid will not be happy to hear of this. So during your time at the University of California San Diego, you gave students extra credit for taking part in affection building exercises. So can you describe what these exercises were like and then also what you learned from this assignment? Yes, I've taught actually a number of courses over the years, but that one course, this big, big course I taught at University of California San Diego, UCSD, I wanted it to be practical, so we weren't just looking at a vast literature on emotional bonding. We were also practicing techniques that I felt could be used to lower inhibitions, to increase vulnerability, and to build emotional bonds. And so we were doing simple exercises, for example, like what I call soul gazing, where you simply, you and the other person looked deeply into each other's eyes for several minutes. One exercise was involved mutual disclosures, telling each other secrets, again, that increases vulnerability, and that increases emotional bonds. And I actually have done experimental research on this as well. But in that course, something like 95% of the students, and I think there were more than 200 students, said that these exercises had helped them to increase emotional bonds, liking, loving, in a variety of different relationships, not just in their love relationships, but in relationships with, in some cases, their parents, in some cases, their spouses, in some cases, their best friends. So that was, to me, just another indicator of the potential here for helping a lot of people in the Western world, where of course our intimate relationships have not been doing so well, at least for the last 50 years or so. And I think we, I still believe we can take this kind of thinking, take some of the techniques that are used either consciously or unconsciously in some Asian cultures. And I think we can put our love relationships on a much stronger footing by, again, taking scientific knowledge and applying it to, you know, our personal lives. STEM Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research lab pioneering groundbreaking technologies aimed at leveraging and extending human cognition, perception, locomotion, and resilience. You've also done a lot of work on psychological maturity and have been generally pretty critical of what you describe as the artificial extension of childhood that seems so prevalent today. You even published an online maturity test. Could you talk a little bit about this? Yes, I spent more than 10 years looking at the origins of adolescents and then looking at the abilities of young people and comparing those to the abilities of so-called adults. And this led to a book I wrote called The Case Against Adolescence and a new version of the book, which is called Teen 2.0. Eventually this book got cited by the US Supreme Court. And I developed actually multiple tests of what I call adultness, so I don't actually call it maturity. I call it adultness. Looking at adult competencies, a wide range of adult competencies, and giving people tools to measure, you know, those competencies. What I've found is that, you know, we have indeed artificially extended childhood, a well-passed puberty. It's now up into the mid-twenties, at least maybe even the upper twenties in the United States, and that this has done tremendous harm to young people and to our families and to our society. Because what we've done is we have isolated young adults from, you know, more mature adults. We've isolated them into high schools, and we've packed them together like cattle, and we basically forced them to interact with each other most of the time. So in the US, they're interacting with each other about 70 hours a week. If you go to other cultures, developing nations, for example, or look back in history, you find that that's very rare. So in developing nations today, young people and their teens might spend about five hours a week with their peers, not 70 hours a week with their peers. They're spending most of their time working side by side with adults, learning to become adults. And as a result of that, there are more than 100 cultures around the world that don't have a tumultuous period of life like adolescence. There are cultures around the world that don't even have a word for adolescence. So adolescence, I eventually concluded, and I've argued in multiple publications, is an invention of the West. It's a very unfortunate invention that's caused a lot of misery. We're talking about suicide being one of the most common causes of death among teens in the US. We're talking about half of the teens in the US diagnosable with at least one disorder from the DSM, which is the book used by mental health professionals to diagnose people. We're talking about half of US teens diagnosable with at least one disorder. And this is not true in cultures that allow young people to enter the adult world as soon as they show signs of readiness. We don't allow that to occur. We've literally treat young adults as if they are still children. Even though they're screaming back at us, I am not a child. So yes, this has been a research area of mind for a long time, and I still dabble in it and occasionally write about it, less involved in it than I used to be. But I'm still very passionate about this issue, about this topic. This infantilizing of young people seems to be accelerating. I mean, even in a relatively short life, we're about the same age. You can see a tremendous change in how adolescence and children in general are handled in terms of the degrees of trust given to them and the degrees of freedom they have in making decisions about day to day activities. You can't see a tree anymore with a kid in it. If you see a kid in a tree, take a picture. In about 10 minutes, the police will show up. It's something is really a miss. Well there's no question about it. You know, I've developed very wonderful relationships with people like Lenore Scanese, who has founded a whole movement called Free Range Kids. She published a book by that title. She got into very bad trouble about 15 years ago because she allowed her son, I think, was nine years old at the time, to cross Manhattan by himself on subways. And that made national news, and she was branded the worst parent in America. And she's turned that into a whole movement to try to give young people a little more independence and try to get them outdoors more. So there are these movements, but you are quite right. As a culture, we are continuing to move in the wrong direction, further infantilizing young people who are older and older, and further isolating young people from adults. These are mistakes, terrible mistakes. Conquer. Yeah, I do too. So you published a study on sexual orientation in 2007 that supported Freud and Kinsey's view that bisexuality is the human norm. Can you talk about that study a little bit? Well this is a whole other area where I just seem to be saying things about, you know, a topic that's adventurous to a lot of people, in this case sexual orientation, that just doesn't seem to match the zeitgeist. But the fact is I've been doing research now for a very long time on sexual orientation, published a study in 2012, almost 18,000 people in it. I will be publishing, I hope, next year, a study with more than 600,000 people in 219 countries and territories. And developed, I've developed an online test, which is available, I think, more than a dozen languages. The English version is at MySexualOrientation.com. The point is that, you know, following up on some of Kinsey's ideas, I have accumulated a massive amount of data supporting his idea, Freud's idea that bisexuality is actually the norm for human beings. Freud himself throughout his career said that heterosexuality was a neurosis, something abnormal that interfered with the ability to lead a happy and fully functional life. Freud was emphatic about that throughout his career. So I have, as I say, a massive amount of data now that supports that idea, that notion. And, you know, again, I've developed mathematical models, which helped me understand kind of how this works and how, you know, same sex and opposite sex attractions are distributed across populations. The effect that heteronormativity has on populations, that's the pressure to be heterosexual. Basically, what I've concluded is that if you take away that pressure, which comes mainly from major religions, if you take away that pressure, then almost everyone, at some point in their life, has attractions to members of both sexes. And that's what my survey research suggests. And I've absolutely no doubt that this is correct, that again, Freud and Kinsey were correct on this issue. Now, on the other hand, does anyone want to hear that message? Is the question. So there I'm working on a book, which is called The Mix. Everyone is a mix of straight and gay. Where are you in the mix? Will I ever get to publish that book? It's unclear. So I will be publishing more research on this as early as next year. And I will continue my writing in this area. But I do not expect I'm going to have much impact on the world on this topic, because we are fighting deeply entrenched religious beliefs and religious rules that are hard to fight. They're so deeply entrenched. So while you are working on this study, just step aside on this topic just briefly, we're also co-editing a book called Parsing the Turing Test. In the 1950, the British mathematician Alan Turing, when arguing in a philosophy journal for the possibility of intelligent machines, suggested that a suitable test for success would be an imitation game, in which a human judge holds a three-way conversation with a computer and another human and tries to tell them apart. So what led you to the work on this book? Well, I've been interested in AI as long as I can remember, partly because I was one of the first people to use a program that was written way back in the 1960s by Joseph Weissenbaum, who was a professor at MIT, whom I got to know quite well many years later, and I called Eliza. Eliza is still out there on the internet. If anyone wants to look up Eliza, you can actually have a conversation with Eliza. Eliza was the first successful conversational computer program. It was very simple. And yet, and yet, there was something about it that made you think that you were talking to a person as you typed in your questions, and it typed back its answers on these clunky old computer terminals. And Joe himself Weissenbaum tells of a time when he was trying to go to the office in his secretary kind of shushed him and made him leave because she was in the middle of a private conversation with Eliza. And of course, he thought that was preposterous, but guess that he knew what it was, really, just some lines of code. But everyone thought back then that because Eliza was so successful, at least in a brief conversation, the true AI or true machine intelligence was right around the corner. That proved not to be the case. I was discussing these issues with a dear friend of mine, who Loebner, who passed away about two years ago. This was around 1988 or 89, I think. And he said, well, why don't we set up a real touring test? Why don't we set up the kind of tests that Alan Turing back in 1950 had proposed, at least as a thought experiment? Why don't we set up a real one? Because computers now are getting pretty good at this stuff. Why don't we set up a real test? And so he funded it. I was head of the Cambridge Center for Behavioral Studies. So we set up the contest through the Cambridge Center and through the Boston Computer Museum. And we had an event. And it was an incredible event that made the front page of the New York Times. I think 1990 or 1991, we had extremely distinguished scholars involved in setting up the contest, including Weisenbaum from MIT. And we brought in a top reporters. In fact, there was literally a crush. You've heard of the press of the press. Well, there was literally a crush of reporters at this first event that we ran. And we had people interacting with terminals and they had to figure out whether they were conversing with a computer program or with a person. And then they had to rank order them. And at the end of this first contest, there were some big surprises. That is, on the median rank, no computer came anywhere near the human level. That is the median rank of humans. No computer came even close. And this contest, by the way, is still running now after almost 30 years. Now it's held every year at Letchley Park, which is we're touring. It was built his famous machine for decoding the German enigma machine during World War II. So the contest is still still being held. It's still the case that no computer really ranks up in the human range if you kind of compute the median ranks. But even in the first contest, there were a couple of computer programs which for a few minutes, fooled a couple of judges into thinking they were human. So this is an exciting area that philosophers debate about and computer scientists debate about. And it's still slow moving. You know, the fantastic advances we thought we were going to see in the 1970s. Still not quite there. AI, of course, has blossoming, has blossomed in the last even five or ten years in a way it never has before. But we're still far away from knowing how to build intelligent machines. Now the main reason for that is because we don't really understand human intelligence. That's making it very tough for us to build intelligence machines. But yes, I'm still working in this area as well. I'm absolutely fascinated by AI. And I'm using AI now in a new body of research I'm doing. So I'm gotten lately into machine learning and using big data sets to try to make predictions. So I'm out there and again working in this other area, of course, along with everything else. I recall that Pat Hayes Clark Gleamore and myself provided a running commentary on Turing's paper in your book. That was a fun project. Absolutely. And that was a fantastic contribution that you made. And that book is still around. It's called parsing the Turing test. It's actually downloadable. Not just the whole book, but even the particular chapters of it are downloadable. And the subtitle of that book, I think, is interesting. It's a philosophical and methodological issues in the quest for the thinking computer. And they're the methodological issues, which is what the computer scientists are struggling with every day. They're still philosophical issues, too, because what happens when we do have machines that are indistinguishable from humans in some respects? What do we do? And should we give them citizenship? Should they have the right to vote? And so on. So those issues are still being tightly debated. And the bottom line on this issue is as follows, which is when the day comes, when you find yourself debating these issues with the machines, then you've got to throw in the towel. Yeah. When that day comes, they need to find somebody from your profession. Exactly. So in 2012, you helped co-found with the former student of yours, the American Institute for Behavioral Research and Technology, which, as a mission, seeks to promote and conduct research that has the potential to increase people's well-being. So right now, you're the senior research psychologist. And as we've talked about earlier in the podcast, you're sitting on the largest sexual orientation study ever conducted, which is really exciting. So can you give us an overview of the institute? Yes, a-i-b-r-t.org. A-i-b-r-t is a small institute. We have about a dozen research psychologists associated with us. We have a scientific advisory board. We have an institutional review board. But it's a small research outfit where people can really focus on research projects rather than teaching, rather than advising, rather than committee work, just focus on research. So we have about a dozen areas of research where we have projects underway. And it's-you know, this was just, you know, another, I guess you could say, idealistic idea that I had. And of just having a place you could retreat to where you could just focus on research. There aren't too many places like that, believe it or not. They're the Mox Plunk Institutes, of course, in Germany, are very famous for that. Generally speaking in the U.S., if you want to do research at a university, it's hard to focus on your research. It's very tough. So that's what this little institute is all about. It's been going strong since- since 2012. Cool. Online manipulation, as everyone knows, has become a major news star after the 2016 election. Your paper in 2015 on search engine manipulation effect, I think, was quite ahead of its time and showed in a series of controlled experiments that biased search results could easily shift. The opinions and thereby the votes, perhaps, of undecided voters by maybe 20% or more, you mentioned, I think, 80% in some demographics. Given that most elections are these days one by small margins, this was a alarming finding. Can you talk about that paper, which by the way I understand is one of the most frequently downloaded papers on the proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences website? Could you give us a quick squirt on that and what you found? Sure. Yes. And last I checked by the way, that paper had been accessed or downloaded from PNAS website more than 200,000 times. That is very, very unusual. I've never had that experience before with any research I've ever published. That's a lot. Yeah, that's a lot. So this phenomenon seems, SEME, search engine manipulation effect, this is something that I stumbled onto. I had been looking in 2012 at the new literature on the impact that search rankings have on people's purchases. At that point in time companies are starting to spend a lot of money to try to push themselves a little higher in search results because that's worth a lot of money it turns out if you can get a little bit higher that can make or break a company or determine whether you make a million dollars or 10 million dollars. But the research on this was fascinating to me. There were eye tracking studies, for example, showing that even when you put a good search result down below in the list, it doesn't matter. The eyes go right back to the top. There's something about those top positions that's very special. It has power over people. 50% of all clicks go to those top two search results. So I wondered, well, could those top results, if people believe in them so strongly, could they be used to shift people's opinions or even their voting preferences? I set up controlled experiment. I thought I could shift voting preferences by two or three percent. And I thought that would be important, by the way, because there are very close elections out there. And if you can shift the voting preferences of undecided voters by even a small margin that can flip an election. But in that first experiment, the shift I got was not two or three percent. It was 48%, which I thought was a mistake. Repeated the experiment with a different group, got a shift of 63%. You know, at this point, I've been doing research on that phenomenon and other phenomena like it for over six years. And all I can say is that some of the online tools we all use are the most powerful mind-control machines ever created by humankind. And they have the power to shift people's thinking and behavior and opinions and attitudes and purchases and votes to shift people's thinking without them knowing they're even being influenced. And some of these effects, like Seam and others, are among the largest effects ever discovered in the behavioral sciences. So we are now living in a whole new world of influence that people do not understand. They're completely unaware of it. It is extremely dangerous. I calculated a few years ago that right now, well, at least as of a few years ago, upwards of 25% of the national elections in the world were being determined by Google's search algorithm. But anyone having the slightest idea that this is occurring, this is because many, many races are very, very close. So if you can just push undecided voters one way or the other a little bit, you can determine the outcome of an election. Well, maybe there's a bright side to the ever shrinking undecided population. I had never thought that was a bright side. And more and more people are quite ossified and quite far apart. Certainly in this country, that's true. Yes. So Robert Google was recently fined 1.5 billion euros or about 1.7 billion dollars by the European Union. It was the third time the Union has fined Google for antitrust violations regarding online advertising. And Europe's regulatory approach was once criticized as unfairly targeting tech companies. But that view is beginning to change. So do you see Europe's regulatory approach as a potential global model for tempering the influence of Silicon Valley? I'm not sure. I know that the EU has been aggressive so far and going after Google. There are total fines there in less than two years now are over 8.5 billion dollars. They're now gearing up to go after Facebook. I don't think that's made any difference in the bottom line though of either company. And it certainly has not impacted their business model. The business model they use is called the surveillance business model. There's an excellent new book about that model of doing business which is called surveillance capitalism by Shoshana Zuboff as a recently retired Harvard professor. And the regulators who've gone after Google and are now going after Facebook and Europe, they haven't had any impact at all on that model. It's that model that's the problem. There are three huge problems here that big tech have created primarily Google and Facebook but lots and lots of smaller companies as well that follow the same business model. One is their surveillance because these companies don't really sell products or what they do is they set up apparently free services which are actually just surveillance platforms. They collect data about us and then they sell the data where they monetize the data. And that's the business model. That's a crazy business model. Tim Cook, the head of Apple has called that model Creepy. One of the early investors in Facebook and Google Roger McNamey just published a book which is called Zucked. What can we do about the Facebook nightmare or something like that is the subtitle. And McNamey again was one of the early investors in both of these companies. Many thinks they're destroying humanity literally. So we find ourselves in a tough situation. What's going to happen here in the US are our leaders going after these companies? Are they tackling and challenging that business model? And the fact is that in the US, not much is happening. There are occasional hearings, occasional saber rattling, but the fact is I don't think we're doing much of anything here to take on these companies and these companies donate a lot of money to politicians. So we have the human race. It has a big problem. These companies are right now impacting the thinking and behavior of two and a half billion people around the world. That number will soon exceed four billion. And there's no easy solution to this. I keep writing articles proposing one thing or another. I have a one that I'm coming out with soon that I think might make a difference. But we have a problem. The business world has changed because of this surveillance business model. Europe is trying to cope with this, trying to bring it under control on the US. We're doing nothing. There's been a big change in how Silicon Valley regards Washington. What I was a young computer scientist, the companies in the Valley, I'll just hope that Washington would leave them alone and the less that they had to do with Washington, the happier they were. And most big companies in the Valley were largely without representation even in Washington. And now all of the biggest expenditures by corporations on lobbying are from Silicon Valley. Typically, Google's number one, Facebook's number two, Twitter, I think is number three. And in the past, this would have been defense contractors or something along those lines. It would not have been Silicon Valley. You mentioned Europe's regulatory approach. And they have this GDPR, the data regulations. And I've seen a lot of very negative commentary on that, particularly from the US. But I find GDPR quite helpful. I have it on my phone with a BBC commentator reading it out loud in Melodius tones. And if I just put that on, I'm immediately asleep. It's quite a fact. California, of course, we passed a similar legislation and that goes into effect. I believe January 1st of 2020. But I don't think that either California's large GDPR is going to make any difference really. Again, neither of these laws impact the basic business model. It's the business model that's the problem. And I don't generally speaking see our leaders thinking clearly about this. They're not well informed when they do bring people to Washington to testify before Congress. Our leaders, our members of Congress, seem to be completely helpless. They don't seem to understand what the real issues are. Yeah, that's for sure. In addition to discovering and studying new forms of online manipulation, and you've mentioned a few and there are many others, you've also been developing online monitoring systems. Can you tell us about the concept of monitoring that you have in mind? This is quite interesting. You've also built systems to monitor what search engine companies were showing people when they conducted the election-related searches in the days leading up to 2016 and 2018 elections. This whole notion of monitoring the surveillance business model seems promising. What did you find? In 2016 working as best we could in secret, my team and I assembled a network of field agents, we called them. We developed software that we installed on their systems, their computer systems with their permission, of course. This is a Nielsen type of network. Nielsen of course monitors people's television watching, not just in the US but in many other countries around the world. This is the same kind of concept. We have real people, so they're getting real search results. In this way we were able to keep an eye on what Google, Bing and Yahoo were showing people when they were conducting election-related searches. We found a very clear bias on Google, not so much on the other search engines, but a very clear bias on Google search results that favored Hillary Clinton over Donald Trump. As a matter of fact, I was a very strong Hillary Clinton supporter, but still this bothers me because of the research I've done on Seam. I know that if there is a strong bias for one candidate that shifts a lot of votes with no one understanding that this is occurring, and I calculated that that level of bias in that election could have easily shifted between two and three million votes. That's a very conservative estimate. 2018, we set up a larger network. We collected a lot more data. This time we were able to preserve more than 47,000 election-related searches. The 400,000 web pages to which the search results linked again, we found a considerable liberal bias in search results shown by Google, but not by Bing and Yahoo. Again, here we're talking about, now we were focusing on three congressional races in hotly contested Republican districts, all of which flipped Democrat. We calculated that if that level of bias had been present nationwide in every race in 2018, that could have shifted upwards of 78.2 million votes to Democrats. Now I am not a conservative by any means. I mean, I'm not even close. Part of me likes that. It wasn't that nice that they're helping Democrats, but I'm horrified by this kind of power that exists in the hands of companies that are not accountable to the public. That's the dilemma we're in right now. These companies have enormous power. I think that one solution here is to set up large-scale monitoring systems worldwide, and to develop means, which is what I'm working on right now, of analyzing the data you're collecting in real time using AI. We're using good tech to fight bad tech, and then revealing what we find as it occurs. Now that could make a difference, because that would, in my opinion, that would stop these companies. I would prevent these companies from manipulating elections or manipulating people's thinking in general. We monitor it, and we can't detect shenanigans of one sort or another rapidly, and then report what we're finding to proper authorities or to the media. I think we'd have a way to keep these companies in check. I do not believe moving forward that law or regulation or antitrust action will be able to keep companies like this or the next round of companies that emerge in check, because tech moves too fast. Law moves very slowly. Monitoring is tech. Monitoring, in my opinion, can keep up with any kind of technologies that arise in the future. Yes. Following up on that, I recall that just recently Senator Elizabeth Warren called for a breakup of the large tech companies, sort of wholest-balless, without identifying which are the primary offenders. But I think it was Google, Facebook, Amazon, and Apple. From what you've just said, I imagine that you would see this sort of regulatory approach as unlikely to be successful. You kind of know that's true when Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg, he just has an op-ed piece in the Washington Post, in which he proposes government regulation of the entire internet. Well, yes, in fact, I published articles in USA Today and the Epic Times criticizing Elizabeth Warren's proposal and criticizing Mark Zuckerberg's proposal. Mark Zuckerberg's proposal is extremely self-serving. It does not, in any way, impact the basic surveillance business model. You know, it's in that sense, it's just kind of a joke. Elizabeth Warren's proposal, basically, she's saying we should cause these big companies to divest themselves of some of the smaller companies they purchased. Again, that doesn't impact the business model. It doesn't. It has no effect on the surveillance, on the censorship or the manipulation. So, you know, we've got a problem. You know, our leaders don't understand the nature of the threat, and perhaps they never will, which again, in my mind, brings me back to the need for monitoring systems. Or perhaps some of them do understand and quite like it. If you... Well, that's true, or they like the donations. Right. Because if you look at the degree of surveillance in these companies, it would never be permitted by the government. Yes. And again, people don't understand the degree of surveillance. Maybe people know that their Gmail's are being analyzed. Maybe they know that. Maybe not. Maybe they know that their search histories are being recorded and analyzed. But the fact is Google alone is actually monitoring people over more than 200 different platforms. The vast majority of which are completely invisible to people. Any website, for example, that incorporates any Google products such as Google Maps or Google Analytics and there are tens of millions of websites like that. Those websites, because they incorporate a Google product, they give Google permission to track all users on their websites. Literally, that's in Google's terms of service. So we're learning more and more about the extent of the surveillance and it's outrageous. We learned just recently that the smart thermostat company that Google purchased a few years ago called Nest began incorporating little microphones into the thermostats without telling anyone that this was being done. This Google putting microphones into thermostats. So Google recently had patents issued on techniques for analyzing sound in people's homes to determine whether or not your kids are brushing their teeth enough. I mean, Google has the ability to monitor our sex life and sell us appropriate products, monitor whether we're arguing too much and sell us mental health services. And that's the direction in which Google and many other companies right now are moving. So Robert, there's a documentary that's out called the Creepy Line that features several interviews with you. The film looks at a multitude of ways that Google and Facebook manipulate society. I understand that you were in Berlin recently for the documentary's debut there. So how did that go and do you recommend the film? Well Berlin was very exciting. There was a beautiful theater and there was a packed house and then there were questions afterwards. And there's no question that in Europe people are deeply, deeply concerned about these issues, partly because they view Google and Facebook as American. I mean, they're foreign. They're non-European. But we have also had premieres of the film in New York and Washington, DC. I actually won't give you every detail here, but I was sitting in the back at the Washington Premier next to someone everyone knows from, it was very high up. And in the world here at the moment in the United States and we were surrounded by secret service agents. So I won't say more than that, but the point is that it's actually, it's a very good film. The Creepy Line, which you can learn about at thecreepyline.com. It's now available on iTunes and Amazon. It's free for Amazon Prime Members to view. And it's a good film. I mean, it shows you the extent of the problems we're now facing. It doesn't exactly show you how to solve them, but it's a step, making people aware of the nature of these problems and the scope of these problems. I'm afraid though. I'm really afraid that whatever small steps are taken here and there, I write an essay, a film comes out, I publish a paper, whatever it may be. I just don't see that stopping these companies. I don't see that stopping the business model that, again, Zuboff writes about in her new book. Yeah, that's a legitimate concern. As a society, we seem addicted to convenience. And in many ways, the tech is providing convenience and will trade away privacy for convenience every time. And I think that's a shame. Well, I have gotten many people. It's in the thousands now. It's in the thousands I'm proud to say to stop using Gmail, to stop using Chrome, which is Google's browser, which monitors everything you do online, to stop using Android phones, which monitors everything you do when you're offline. So I've gotten thousands of people to stop using some Google products, but it's not like I'm making a big difference here. These companies are growing by leaps and bounds, even Facebook, which has been excoriated over the last year or so because of data leaks and other problems. Even Facebook is still growing rapidly. So how do you really tackle a problem this big with companies that are this powerful, especially in their ability to affect people's thinking or to put this another way? What if the mind control machine doesn't want you thinking bad things about the mind control machine? That's right. It will make Robert upstanding hard to find. Exactly. So Robert, you've certainly had a very career that has led you to a diverse range of research. And on your institute's website, you have a number of resources and tests that people can turn to if they want to learn more about the topics that you've written about and studied over the years. So some of these tests include, do you know how to parent a teen? Do you need therapy? How fan-tilized are you? And they're also tests to evaluate your sexual orientation as well as your creativity and relationship skills. We will make sure that we link to the website and the show notes, but can you give our listeners an overview of what they can find on the site? Yes, I think there are about a dozen different topic areas on the site. And within each topic area, we list a couple of major findings and then we list some of the publications, either scientific publications or popular articles that are available. And if there are tests that are relevant to that topic area such as parenting, we list the tests as well. So there's some nice resources there and we're planning to expand the site and fairly soon we hope to add a kind of audio library to it and some other resources too. Back in 2017, you wrote an article that provided people seven simple steps that they could take to guard their online presence. Can you quickly share that advice with our listeners and do you have any plan to update that list as time goes on? Also, in the 2017 piece, you pointed out that you had not yet received a targeted ad on your computer or mobile phone for more than two years. That's amazing. Is that still even the case? That is still true. So it's actually roughly since 2014. Wow. I have not received a targeted ad. So yes, you can learn ways to make your life more private online. This is especially important if you have kids or grandkids. We need to teach young people how to do this. And involves some learning and unfortunately it does involve here and there a little bit of inconvenience which people don't like. They don't like being inconvenienced but it's worth it. There's a whole different way to interact with the internet which does not involve surveillance and this constant giving up of personal information. The internet did not, it wasn't built to do that and even Sir Tim Berners-Lee has made public statements over the last year objecting to what's happened to the internet that it's become dominated by big companies whose sole source of revenue is based on surveillance. That's not inherently a part of the concept of the internet and that's why Berners-Lee and others are really trying to see if they can reinvent the internet that remains to be seen. Meanwhile, as individuals, we can learn some simple ways to be a little bit more private online and that's what that essay is about. So it is called seven simple steps toward online privacy. It's a pretty easy to find online but don't Google it because if you Google it, you're just giving more information to Google and you're letting them know that you're concerned about your privacy. Don't Google anything. In fact, one of the first things I say in the article is don't use google.com. Use startpage.com or duck duck go. There are alternatives to Google which are quite good. My favorite is startpage.com. Start the opposite of stop. Startpage.com uses Google's index which means it gives you very good search results but it doesn't track you. So go to startpage.com and type in seven simple steps toward online privacy or just seven simple steps and the name Epstein. You can find it easily but just please, please don't Google it. I use duck duck go and I find it gives pretty good results and we'll link to all of the articles that we've discussed in the show notes so people can not have to Google it. They can just click and go right there. Even better. So Robert, you obviously have a wide range of research and projects that keep you very busy. But what about your spare time? Do you have interest in hobbies outside of work? I love to read. I read, I mean just for pleasure I read probably two or three novels a week. I love music of all sorts right now. For some reason I'm kind of going through all the works of Beethoven and Franz Liszt and Fredrick Chopin. I have no idea why I've gotten this obsession. Recently it's driving my wife crazy. But yes I have five children so you know there's nothing more important to me in my life than my children. Absolutely nothing comes close. So my life is very active on the professional side and on the personal side. So I've had a very fulfilling life and I feel very fortunate to have been able to do all the things I've done and then the crazy things that I've done to my wife and I go on little mini vacations, one recent one. In January, the middle of January was to go dog sledding in Alaska. So yes I do have a life beyond Google. Oh that'll increase your wellbeing I think. Absolutely well Robert has been fantastic having you on Stem Talk. Thank you so much for joining us today. It's my pleasure and congratulations on having such a fine series. It's really extraordinary. Thank you Robert. You were a wonderful guest. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Well I must say I think we probably cover more topics during that conversation than any other interview we've done on Stem Talk. Robert definitely has had a diverse range of research interest over his career. He certainly has done his research on creativity and ranged marriages and the artificial extension of childhood have definitely provided us with important new insights into human behavior. The work he's doing today on the methods and algorithms used to affect the decisions of billions of people without their knowledge is also providing us with fascinating new insights and contributing to a much needed debate on this topic. I agree and if you enjoyed this interview as much as Ken and I did we invite you to visit the Stem Talk webpage where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes. Stem Talk.us. This is Don Kanagas signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stem Talk. Thank you for listening to Stem Talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others so please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website StemTalk.us. There you can also find more information about the guests we interview.
