 Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hello, I am David Lamey and I'm stepping in today to help host today's episode of Stem Talk. Joining me is the main man behind the curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that selects all of the guests who appear on the Stem Talk show. Hello, David. Great to be here. For regular listeners of Stem Talk, you may recall that David was our guest on Stem Talk episode 69. David is a physical medicine and rehabilitation physician, who has a Pensacola practice just a few blocks from IHMC where we're sitting now. His practice focuses on lifestyle and performance medicine. He is also a visiting research scientist here at IHMC. Thank you, Ken, for inviting me today to co-host the interview with Dr. Charles Sir, and a good friend of mine who is a Harvard professor best known for his discovery of specialized pro-resolution mediators. SPMs are molecules that can activate natural resolution of inflammation and help to avoid anti-inflammatory drugs. The discovery of SPMs has been described as spurring a paradigm shift in our understanding of inflammation and human disease. Charles is the Simon-Gelman professor of anesthesia at Harvard Medical School. The director of the Center of Experimental Theoroputics and Reprefusion Injury at Brigham and Women's Hospital, he is also a co-director of the Brigham Research Institute. Before we get to our interview with Charles, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all of the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the widest and most lavishly praise-filled reviews to read on Stem Talk. As always, if you hear your reviews read on Stem Talk, just contact us at Stem Talk at ihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk t-shirt. Today our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker, Norse Soul. Titled Stem Talk, the best science podcast out there, it reads, I have been a long time listener to Stem Talk, and it just keeps getting better with age. Not only do Ken and Don and Marcus do an excellent job of presenting interesting and thought-provoking topics, but they also delve into the personal stories of the thought leaders they interview. Your recent interview with Dr. Nicholas Norwitz was so packed with groundbreaking revelations I had to keep skipping back to read-listen to segments. As a physician, I'm impressed and encouraged by the energy and curiosity that Dr. Norwitz brings to his research. Thinking outside of the accepted science and constantly investigating the outliers and the exceptions is how progress is made in science. From the marvels of Roman concrete to next generation spacesuits and everything about optimizing human nutrition, I will keep coming back to Stem Talk on a weekly basis. Thank you Norwitz Soul and thanks to our other Stem Talk listeners who have helped Stem Talk become such a great success. OK, I'm now onto today's interview with Dr. Charles Serhan. Stem Talk, Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Charles, I understand you were born in Brooklyn and that your father was a French Lebanese and your mother was Italian and both were born in New York City. As a youth, you were quite passionate about music. You learned to play the vibraphone in junior high school and became so accomplished that you played professionally for about a year before going to college. So how did you end up as a scientist rather than a musician? Well, I felt and I still feel today that I could help many more people via science than I ever could in playing music. Although I have to say that I still love playing and I feel very comfortable behind the vibes and it's like second nature to me. What kind of vibraphone did you play? I have a mussel if that's what you mean. Yeah. An M55. And those are known as the one-nighters because you could travel around with them. But someday I will get the gold set of vibes which is the studio that's still looking for that. There used to be a guy up in the Boston area. I don't know if he's still up there. Gary Burton. Oh sure. One of my heroes. Yeah. I was in the music business in the early 70s and we used to book him and he was a very talented person. For Mallet Pro. Yes, I like to play some Gary Burton tunes. He was dean of Berkeley as you know for some time and a fantastic musician and he comes from the genre of Big Band. But his quartet work and the recording studio with Chikuria just phenomenal. Right. There was a period when he was really amazing. He was experienced and skilled and still youthful at one point. And it was wonderful time with Chikuria and others. He's etched into my memory. Oh yeah. I would always turn to play with my group when I was in school. One of his tunes called Sea Journey. Yes. Fantastic. You know, you mentioned that you had always liked science and had done well in science in school, which doesn't surprise me. What was it about science that you particularly enjoyed? You said that you felt you could do more good in science for more people than in music. But you know, was there a particular thing about studying science that you really mostly enjoyed? I really enjoy the rigor and objectivity and the ability to test hypotheses and do experiments. Doing experiments is, yeah, nothing more fun than that. After you were a professional musician, you went to the State University of New York at Stony Brook. Yeah, I was lucky. Yeah. And you studied biochemistry and immunohistochemistry there? Biochemistry was my major and chemistry. The histochemistry side came in my research project. I was really fortunate to work with very good immunohistochemistry in the Department of Pathology. Yeah. So, and for people in terms of the audience and understanding, this is something that's used to diagnose cancer and predict treatment responses and likely prognosis of the disease. In terms of your switch from, you know, musician to biomedical science, was there anything that carried over in terms of the music side that you felt carried into the scientific side? Yeah, that's an interesting point. Yeah, many things that I learned in music translated to science. For example, if you really wanted to play well, you had to study and practice your scales and you did this routinely, all musicians do. And it's like learning a language. And in science, the same is true. You need to learn the language and study and practice every day. Makes sense? Does, for sure. So after earning your bachelor's degree, one of your professors convinced you to head off to New York University for your master's and PhD. And also you worked in the lab of Gerald Wiesman at Woods Hole Marine Biological Laboratory. This all seems like a must-a-man, a major move in your development. Can you talk about that experience and how it all came about? Well, Ken, this was what set me on my path and I was very, very fortunate. So I'll describe this in a nutshell. I was very enthusiastic as an undergraduate, so I took graduate school courses as an undergraduate. And one of the courses was in the biophysics of membranes and we used as a compendium in reading texts, Gerald Wiesman's book that he put together called Cell Membranes, which was a group of articles that were at the scientific American level that were published in hospital practice. The other graduate school course that I took as an undergraduate was in cell cycle kinetics. And I really enjoyed mathematical modeling. And that professor, professor Edsmanns encouraged me to paraphrase and do something serious. So I was very fortunate to go to NYU and get an NIH pre-doctoral fellowship at the time. And I was in the first year of medical school class and Gerald Wiesman came to give a lecture on the cell biology of leukocytes. And he had just returned from Paris. I remember this clearly. He had this movie of leukocytes chemotaxing and I just thought that was so cool. So I went up to speak to him after class. He said, oh, come up to my office and his office was in Bellevue Hospital, where his lab was, Department of Medicine. So I went up to see him and he said, oh, what are you doing this summer? So I said, haven't made any plans yet. He goes, good, because you're coming to Woods Hole, the marine biological laboratories at Woods Hole. Wow, this was incredible. What an opportunity. We worked on white blood cells, leukocytes from dogfish. But the entire environment was really stimulating and I had an opportunity to work that summer. With Bang Samuelson's daughter, who was working with us in the lab. And then Samuelson came at the end of the summer. We were really lucky. We won the MBL award that year and I presented on behalf of the lab. That was fun. So he asked me to tell him about what we were doing. And I did and he looked at me and said, Charles, when you finish, there'll be a place for you in Stockholm. Wow. So I hadn't really thought about doing something like that, but it changed all my plans and I decided, yes, I'm going to Stockholm. I'll finish early. And I was really fortunate to continue a collaboration between the Weisman lab and with Samuelson. And two of my publications with Samuelson that were part of my thesis were cited in Bang Samuelson's Nobel lecture. I was very proud of that and I'm still proud of that today. That's amazing. And this kind of led you into the focus on neutrophil membrane remodeling for your PhD. Is that right? Yes. I was really fascinated with the process of phagocytosis and how these cells defend us by seeking out bacteria and foreign invaders and then quickly in matter of seconds and minutes to facetize these organisms and then destroy them. To do that, neutrophils have to very, very rapidly remodel their membranes, make new phospholipid sticks, and the surface area to be able to engulf and form a phagolisosomal vacuole that they then pour the all momentarium in them that break down the bacteria and kill them. And this is a very well known area of medicine and biology. And that process was discovered by Michnikov and the late 1800s. And he received a Nobel Prize in physiology of medicine for that discovery and the innate immune response. Yeah, it's incredible. And I understand that after you earned your PhD that you had mentioned the Carolinska Institute, is that where you met your future wife? Yes. Samusin used to joke that said, oh, yeah, Charlie was very productive, even met his wife at the Carolinska. Yes, we met on the cafeteria line during lunch one day and my wife, because I was studying medicine and finishing up her medical degree at the time. It seems clear that you are quite fortunate and have been quite fortunate to have a number of strong and effective mentors where you were in school. One who stands out is Michael Heidelberg, a two-time winner of the last girl award in medicine. He stands out particularly because of the advice he gave you, I think, and how to be a good scientist. What was his advice and what impact did it have? Well, Dr. Heidelberg was really special and he was an organic chemist by training and someone in the dean's office noticed that I had a background in chemistry and then I liked chemistry. And I remember very clearly this woman, Tha Yucun, she said, oh, you should go up and talk with Dr. Heidelberg. He needs someone to help him at this time. And I did and worked with Dr. Heidelberg, just he and I in this very small lab. His career was at Columbia University and he was the scientific grandfather of Baruch Benassarab, who also received a Nobel Prize for his work on energy and antibody combining sites. So when they asked Dr. Heidelberg about what it took to become a good scientist and he would always chat with me and he said, two things, Charles, you have to work on something that you're passionate about because this will carry you through the difficult times. And second, write everything down, write all your observations down in your notebook and carry a second notebook that you can jot down your observations and notes because in those notes will be your discoveries. And I tried to bring that message to all those that come to work with me and my research program because I found them to be absolutely essential. And I should point out that Dr. Heidelberg at that time was 91 years old and he lived to 103 and I was the last person to work with him. So I was fortunate in so many ways. He also encouraged me to go to work with Gerald Weissman. That's incredible. And speaking of, in terms of discoveries and amazing scientific progression in the 90s, you discover what became known as specialized pro-resolution mediators. And most people don't realize that there's even another pathway to the aspect of inflammation that is active. And since that discovery, you pioneered a new field of research and the utility of SPMs for all kinds of different diseases from chronic pain, rheumatoid arthritis, dental disease, macular degeneration, cardiovascular disease, depression, brain injury, inflammation, conditions like arthritis. I mean, it's basically a necessary part of our body in terms of healing and repair that nobody really knew existed before. It's kind of jump in here and tell you a little bit about that journey and the journey that was still on. I remember right in that when I was at the Carolyn's Institute, we discovered these new molecules and called them the lipoxins because they were like oxygenase interaction products. And I was convinced that there were regulatory mechanisms that we didn't know about to control the production and actions of the leukotrients. And Samuelson, part of his Nobel citation is the discovery of the leukotrients. And these are very potent molecules that control airway and smooth muscle constriction and their important asthma and in anaphylectic shock. So my reasoning was very simple that there must be some other molecules produced that could counter regulate these potent actions because why would the body make molecules that could ultimately kill us? It didn't make sense in evolution. And we already knew that platelets when they become activated, they make thromboxin, that was another molecule that Samuelson discovered with Mets Hamburg at Carolyn's and they did the structural lucidation. Very elegant molecule, only 15 to 30 second half-life in vivo. And this molecule propagates platelet aggregation and is essential for clot formation. So there's another molecule that counteracts the actions of thromboxin called Prostocyclin, which was discovered by Surjohn Veins group. It's also in a racodonic acid product. It's made by the vascular endothelium and Prostocyclin puts the brakes on the platelet aggregation response. So this already evidence that the physiology of counter-regulation important in the small molecule lipid mediators. So when I came to Boston, we didn't yet know what the role of the lipoxins were. We needed to do a lot more investigations with physiologic experiments. And then we had a Ureca moment with a fellow who came to work with me from Barcelona, Spain, John Claria and I worked together and found that when we take aspirin, it was already known that aspirin would block the production of thromboxin and Prostocyclin. And it's widely used as an inhibitor still today. And that was part of the Nobel citation for both Samuel Senn and Surjohn Veins. They shared the prize in 1982 in physiology and medicine. What we found is that aspirin triggered lipid mediators. Not only the blocked Prostocyclin and thromboxin production, but also triggered the biosynthesis of what we called aspirin triggered lipoxins or epimeric lipoxins. Lipoxins that were longer acting and a different chirality. This was really exciting and I then devoted our efforts to making my medics and stable analogs of the aspirin triggered lipoxins because we thought this was the stop signal for excessive leukocyte recruitment. And then worked for the next 10 years with Rolex biosynthesis and sharing Germany to advance an aspirin triggered lipoxin mimetic into clinical trials. And it worked fine. There were four phase one ghosting trials and many, many preclinical models and animal models demonstrating that the mimetic that we made with Rolexes sharing was very potent in reducing GI inflammation. And it was queued up to enter trials for IBD and eventually Crohn's disease. This was really exciting, but then there took over sharing and decided that IBD was not on their list of things to do and they dropped the program which was so disappointing after having put in such a monumental effort. But we learned a lot during those studies and that's the knowledge of the aspirin triggered lipoxins really opened the door to uncovering the resolvins which are also aspirin triggered lipid mediators and that's why when the families of resolvins in pro-resolving mediators that were made during the resolution phase of inflammation became clear as we did the structural lucidation. I went back and classified all these molecules as specialized pro-resolving mediators not because they're special but they have a specialized function to put the brakes on neutralic infiltration and stimulate macrophages to clear apoptotic cells, particularly apoptotic neutrophils, those neutrophils that die at the site of battle in inflammation. And this is a very important part of the pro-resolution, stimulation of clearance of inflammation. So I know that's a bit of a long answer but I hope it gives you a picture of how we wandered into the resolution phase. Hmm, that was a great answer, thank you. According to scholar GPS, you've done more research in the field of inflammation than any other scientist. That's pretty remarkable. We will be talking a lot about SPMs today but I'd like to back up a little and set the stage and ask you about the research and the work you did that led to the discovery previous to it. I suppose this journey of yours really kind of started when you were in your post-doc years at Carolinska and studying inflammation itself. What intrigues you about inflammation? I mean, we all know it has many, many functions, acute and chronic but could you talk to us a little bit about what really intrigued you about inflammation and pointed you in that direction? Yeah, Ken, when I was a student, when I first learned about the immune response and inflammation, I just felt that this was the key to all of medicine and surgery and that we needed to understand how the body controls the acute inflammatory response which is protective, controlled it from preventing collateral tissue damage and more inflammation. Yeah, so in simple terms, we kind of think of inflammation as getting rid of what's damage but also protecting what's healthy and there's different ways that we would discuss inflammation, acute versus chronic, the symptoms for the kind of for the audience, the symptoms of inflammation would be pain, redness and swelling typically. Like you would get if you got a rug burn, cut your skin, rolled an ankle, something simple. But I've heard you say that inflammation comes in many forms and that we have what you refer to as new villains of inflammation. And since we're talking a little bit about inflammation, can you kind of give us an overview of the different types of inflammation that we might talk about? Sure, I've come to learn that each of the medical specialties thinks about inflammation differently. It means different things to different specialties. An ophthalmologist thinks of inflammation in the eye very differently than a surgeon who is themselves an inflammatory stimulus from the first cut. Charles, that's great. I just love that. I have a surgeon, the office, two doors down for me here at IHMC and I love that description. I think I'll describe him that way. Well, inflammation has been known since ancient times, the times of Celsius, ancient physicians describe that you put heat, redness, pain, swelling and then when virtue came along, it was the, it ended the loss of function. So the different forms of inflammation that are common to most clinicians and general public is acute inflammation, one that occurs rapidly acute and then chronic inflammation, one going persistent inflammation that one may see in autoimmune diseases, for example. Or as we appreciate today in neurodegenerative diseases. Okay. So in the post genomic era, my view is that controlling inflammation is the frontier of medicine and surgery because most of the issues that we face in Western societies are the result of excessive inflammation and that's come to light. I would say only in the past 10 years or so with more and more cellular and molecular studies, people arrive at this conclusion that, oh, inflammation is set at hand here. Okay. So in our research, it was important for us to define very carefully what is known as the acute inflammatory response. This is a programmed repertoire of how white blood cells, specifically neutrophils, leave the post-capillary venial and then arrive in tissues, various tissues in the body to defend that tissue. When that process is excessive, when there's an excessive swarming of neutrophils and neutrophils swarm in and they move, they need chemical signals to smell like sharks moving to red blood cells, they swarm in. And this swarming occurs to protect us from invaders or tissue damage. If it's too much collateral damage occurs and that collateral damage propagates inflammation, I think of good example is in rheumatoid arthritis when neutrophils swarm into the synosium. If they spill these enzymes that have evolved to kill bacteria outside of the cell, if this incomplete phagocytosis, if that membrane doesn't close and seal from the healthy tissue, the enzyme spill reactive oxygen species spill and this destroys the synosium with time and leads to panus formation which takes this smooth surface and turns it into a stippled surface and it leads to a lot of pain. So in the textbooks of pathology, it's very clear that the acute inflammatory response had a resolution phase when the area is cleared and the tissues returned to homeostasis. That's what we focused on and asking what's going on in this resolution phase. It's self-limited. Okay, let's think about this for a second. Think of having a small pimple on your skin on the back of your hand. The white of the pimple, the pus, if you will. Those are the leukocytes that have swarmed to protect us and if you leave that pimple alone for a day or two, it completely resolves. So what's going on there? The body has resolutions, signals to bring us back to homeostasis and that's what we set our guns to understand and see if we could learn that process, learn about those molecules, can we use those molecules to make better and more precise therapeutics, better drugs. So the villains that you mentioned in today's society turns out that arachidonic acid which controls the biosynthesis of prostaglandins and leukotreins and it was well appreciated that the prostaglandins played important roles in initiating inflammation. All the signs we mentioned, heat, swelling, pain, these are all mediated by prostaglandins. Well in the resolution phase when the leukocytic infiltration reaches a maximum, the resolution program kicks in and that's where our serendipity comes in and we found in mouse models that the precursors of the pro resolving signals, the chemical mediators that orchestrate resolution come from the omega-3 essential fatty acids. Essential because we do not mate EPA or DHA, we need to take these in an oil diet and on nutrition and as you know these are the major fatty acids that are present in marine oils and it had been known for quite some time that the marine oils could reduce inflammation but the mechanisms of how that occurred has argued about in literature and not very clear. So in a nutshell what we learned is that the omega-3 fatty acids that we take in our diet in our daily nutrition set us up for self-limited resolution, we are challenged every day hundreds and thousands of times the alarm rings for our defense mechanisms or white blood cells to come out and protect us in tissue and that's when we need to turn off that response and that's where nutrition plays in a very important role in enabling us to have self-limited inflammation and return to homeostasis. That's an excellent explanation and I think it really hit all the big points. A key development in your research on inflammation turned out to be a trip to Asia where unfortunately you developed a hole in your intestine. Now that had to be pretty traumatic and does not sound like a fun time. Can you tell us about this incident and its aftermath which I understand gave you a firsthand experience and why controlling inflammation is important? Yeah okay I was returning from Japan and I thought that I had horrible jet lag but it turned out that I couldn't stand up and I still made it to the lab that day but my wife urged me she said no something's wrong you have to go to the ER and the bottom line is that I had perched my bowel and I had parotonitis brewing which as you know is life threatening and in the ER some students that work in my quest as I said don't worry about this this is I'm just having a kidney stone yeah it's a lot of pain but it'll go away and that was not it at all I went up for emergency surgery and I had a colostomy and that taught me that I couldn't waste any time that we had to understand how the body controlled inflammation it was a very unpleasant experience for me but I learned a lot and started to collaborate with a GI pathologist James Madera and his group used an expert on epithelial cells and we started to do the first experiments on how neutrophils talk to epithelial cells and how that acute inflammatory response can get out of control when I got back to the lab I said oh we have to study parotonitis so I switched my research program and I primarily an in vitro guy I like doing experiments in test tubes but it became painfully evident that I needed to bring in animal models and so it is then that we started to study animal models of parotonitis and self limiting parotonitis gave birth to the resolves in other words yeah how that inflammation in the parotonium resolved was dictated by the availability of EPA and DHA in the system and to me this was a revelation because I didn't think much of the literature at that time around EPA and DHA but clearly they were an important role for these essential fatty acids in human development and it became my mission to figure out how they played a role in enabling the biosynthesis of the resolves and the other specialized pro-resolving mediators the protectants and the macrophage derived mediators of resolution that we named the marinescence and I'm happy to report that the marinescence at least mar 1 the first marines we discovered is very potent in controlling pain and tissue regeneration and it is in clinical development and hopefully that company will be in clinical trials for reducing pain later this year and resolving E1 is in clinical trials this year from another company and I hope that those companies are successful because they will bring the first precision tools to the clinic for controlling inflammation now why is this so important well because our current pharmacopeia while adequate in most cases blocking the initiation of inflammation the thinking was oh there's just too many prone inflammatory molecules we need to reduce them actually leads to a unhealthy state of immune suppression and why is that important because such one would be treating rheumatoid arthritis with an agent that would block a cytokine or like TNF alpha would open up the system for rampant infection so that's a really unwanted side effect you wouldn't want to get TB as a result of taking care of your RA so we think that pro-resolution pharmacology will pave the way to developing a whole new set of precision tools for clinicians and it's also opened up an opportunity to think about precision nutrition and how can we get the right amount of EPA and DHA in our children in our daily diet so that we are resilient to the many challenges that come to us each day as humans when you had your issues with the paratonitis were were you taking any un-air inflammatory medications non-steroidals oh non-steroidals no I refrained from that but the main staple treatment prior to surgery was to be on steroids so steroids also as good as they are in controlling inflammation they also lead us to a state of immune suppression it's all about the timing and at certain doses all of a works as group in Germany showed that steroids like Dictumethasone can actually turn on SPM production so it's a matter of timing when and how much to use and that's a very exciting work with these non-steroidals they typically will block obviously the production of things like prostaglandins and so they alleviate pain but that's basically but then the you know that's been the focus within sports medicine community and in a lot of the areas where I'm working but I you know obviously the complications but those are significant and I think this is a huge piece to the problem can you explain briefly what the anti-inflammatory medications will do to the healing process sure one of the big surprises for us it was to find that if we added a non-steroidal into an acute inflammatory response either in the paratonium or in the lung and an animal model the non-steroidal of course reduces prostaglandins with some cases down to zero production but this un-couples resolution and we need a little bit of prostaglandin E2 to actually trigger the production of the biosynthetic enzymes that are needed to make the pro-resolving mediators so it's again it's a situation of temporal analysis and when and where so when we published those results they were replicated by many of the groups in working in the areas of rheumatoid arthritis and pulmonary inflammation Dr. Liewi's group but there was one very rapid translation to humans by James Markworth and at the time he was working in New Zealand and he's an exercise physiologist and as you said in sports arena and this is unfortunate in high schools and all of our children have been avid athletes somehow they have the notion that if they load up on non-steeroydals before the meat or before the game before a match that this is going to help them in fact that's not the case at all it's the most deleterious thing that we can do we actually consider and to push this point that introduce the notion that non-steeroydal inflammatory drugs as they're called today are resolution toxic and so in James Markworth's study he studied 60 males before and after strenuous exercise and he was able to replicate our results from the animal models in humans and show that the onset's uncoupled resolution let me just tell you one exciting thing that's happened from that work that I think is relevant to all those listening who love to play sports it turns out that the SPMs are made by muscle tissue not just leukocytes and that the SPMs stimulate the muscle stem cells and a group in Canada discovered recently that one of the results result in D2 stimulated the proliferation of muscle cells from the stem cell and they have reported that they're after trying to treat duchess muscular dystrophy with resolving and resolving ligagnus would be that's exciting yeah and you also when I was up at the conference that you had up at Harvard they discussed aging in animals and the lack of ability to produce resolution mediators leading to loss of muscle mass at as we age yeah well thank you David for bringing up that point because it enables me to talk about hilder on a thought who was a fellow in my lab from Iceland she was the first nutritional immunologist to join the group and she did that study we looked at the NIH aged mice versus young mice and found that there was a defect in the production of resolution mediators and I'm happy to make that point because hilders an athlete she was training last year and running and she had a cardiac event and early morning run and no one was around to help her and unfortunately she passed away too soon so but that research that she did yes it's a big loss for us on the field and she's just a wonderful investigator and a really nice person to work with yeah and I'm quite a loss I'm happy that others have taken up the the aging issue and other labs are focused in on on that research but we can thank her for starting that work indeed and that's so important as the percentage of the population that's moved into their later years is grown just immensely that focus I think will continue to be very important stem talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition a not-for-profit research organization investigating a broad range of topics aimed at understanding and extending human cognition locomotion health span resilience and performance as we discussed earlier and you know we just chatted informally about how uncontrolled inflammation is a very prominent component of many many unfortunately common diseases we talked about arthritis we'll talk in the future I think about parodontal disease but asthma cancer diabetes just the whole slew of them including Alzheimer's Parkinson's a lot and so as we think about this and the effect of inflammation on most of the dreaded chronic diseases you know one starts to think that there must be many many therapeutic opportunities for spms of various kinds can you talk about what seems to be an explosion of research in the field in recent years it seems to have really garnered much more interest than in the past could you talk a little bit about that sure well like all science it was lonely in the beginning but yesterday on pubmed.gov just on the resolves of 1,784 publications yeah that from groups around the world sure that constitutes an explosion but there are two things going on simultaneously one is increased recognition that uncontrolled inflammation is important in many many diseases as you point out but the other good fortune for us in the resolution field is that several companies have made the resolvins and specialized pro resolving mediators available for research use we published the first total organic synthesis of each of the molecules to establish the complete state of chemistry and confirmed how they work but without having commercial sources so that groups in Taiwan and groups in Japan and groups in Australia could purchase the molecules for example and all throughout Europe to test in their systems and make new discoveries and teach us how important stimulating resolution is so one of the points I want to make to you and to your audience is that this is such an exciting system because it's a feed forward system we learned that if we give SPMs back in a disease model not only do they control the inflammation but they also stimulate endogenous programs to stimulate more production of pro resolving mediators and reduce inflammation to get to a new homeostasis you have mentioned kind of of the super families you have resolvins protectants and morassans can you kind of give us a little bit of an overview of the differences between those and then maybe the timing that they might show up in a healing response sure the first on the scene if we're doing a temporal analysis of pus the initiation begins the pro and inflammatory mediators the prostaclandins come into play the cytokines and chemokines come into play and you heard about them in the delay press during covid because that is the cytokine storm that brings the long down and bring down many individuals during that pandemic we then shift to production of the lepoxans and they are produced from a racodonic acid just as the prostaclandins endolipotrines and then the system begins to use EPA and DHA to make resolvins protectants and then late in inflammation when the pro resolving macrophages come along as they were described by Mitch McCoff back in early 1900s the big eaters they eat the dead neutrophils that have lost their lives in the battle against bacteria or in clearing debris they need to be cleared so that temporal sequence is what happens in ideal resolution in a laboratory setting they are each structurally different so the EPA derived resolvins come from EPA which is a carbon 20 structure with five unsaturated double bonds and we work out the structures of each of the resolvins of the E series and one that we discovered just in the beginning of the pandemic is resolving E4 number 4 in the panel and this molecule is important in instructing the macrophages in the spleen to clear old red blood cells so this is a physiologic mechanism that's not necessarily evoked by an acute inflammatory stimulus aha so there are physiologic roles not just paths of physiologic roles of the resolvins the next structures to come along with the protectants and the protectants are trying and they are also produced from omega 3 centrafatiasis but here this the precursor is DHA and then the D series resolvins kick in and they are the base structures old DHA in each molecule of the D series we carried out the structural lucidation of and they each activate different receptors holy cow we have receptors for each of the day families and those receptors stimulate resolution one of the really exciting things that's come up well I'm excited about it is that a company in France has followed all were on resolution OSE they made an agonist antibody an antibody that will activate the resolve in E1 receptor and they demonstrated that that antibody can help in cancer models in reducing pain and reducing inflammation now why is that so exciting Charlie well the big pushback for me in trying to make my medics with companies has been the enormous cost of making the scale up of these would seem like simple molecules but they are actually quite difficult to synthesize in some cases the steps are 22 steps so that makes manufacturing of the molecule by total organic synthesis very very challenging and very costly now I never thought that cost is going to matter when it's going to improve life but as you know that's a little naive and that's what companies live by is being able to make a profit so that's why I'm so happy to see agonist antibodies emerge as a way to stimulate resolution I think it'll change healthcare completely honestly yes I agree as well in fact far listeners I think I'd like to mention an article that you did back in 2017 that I particularly liked it was in the journal of molecular aspects of medicine it was sort of like an overall review sort of thing it was really excellent and it talked about SPM's marking the dawn of resolution physiology and pharmacology and it was it was a really good overview article we'll provide a link in the show notes to the article for the listeners so they can read it as well oh good so happy that you like that you know that was really can attribute to my colleagues and students and fellows that have worked with me over the years that was a special issue of the journal molecular aspects of medicine that one of my former fellows who is a professor in the UK talked to Jasmine Dali edited the series and there are articles in there by all our colleagues and former students but in the review that it's basically a preface to those chapters in the special issues and I I tried to hit the high points and as I recall I discussed in the introduction Claude Bernard because Claude Bernard was very influential in my learning about biomedical sciences and he wrote the study of experimental medicine introduction to the study of experimental medicine in 1865 wow and in that book he describes that each of the disciplines the dawn of physiology and pathology and chemistry each develop as separate disciplines and he urged us to have interdisciplinary discussions and that's I'd have to say is the whole mark of my research is it's a multidisciplinary approach chemistry, cell biology, pathology interacting with different disciplines internal medicine, surgery and learning their perspective in oral medicine, periodontal disease you mentioned and I learned from them all and we worked together on this common mission which is a mantra we repeat in my web meeting every week our mission is to help as many people as we can so I also in that short article focused on the importance of leukocyte traffic and this repertoire of edema, nutrophilic infiltration and the non-fligistic recruitment of monocytes and macrophages which is the acute inflammatory response now people get that confused with acute inflammation and I think medical school is so jammed with so much to learn that people don't have an opportunity to recall this chapter three in Robinson, Coatran on inflammation and I urge all the medical students and graduate students and clinicians out there dust off your Robinson, Coatran and take a look at that chapter and I was very fortunate to work with Professor Coatran is the chair of pathology here and he was very very instrumental in my career development and I have to say that I've been fortunate with mentors but every academician needs just not one mentor but I have a dozen mentors as we take this journey. I think we too often hear the academic tale of one giant mentor but we all stand on the shoulders of multiple giants if we're going to be successful. Absolutely, I use the things that you've been teaching every day in my practice and working with teams and athletes and veterans, I mean this has made such an impact on on their lives. I wonder if we can take just a simplistic sort of for some of our audience that aren't as scientifically minded or their background maybe makes it a little bit confusing. One of the ways that I describe this in terms of how I discuss this with an athlete, the difference between inflammation and resolution, if I am 5'1180 pounds and I'm in my 50s, I shouldn't be playing any professional sport but if I for some reason get stuck on a pitching mound for a professional baseball team as a joke, it wouldn't take them more than one or two pitches to figure out that I'm a mistake. So getting me off the field is sort of what I describe to the athlete as the inflammatory phase. An excessive inflammation would be pulling more than me off the field, either way you look at it, we're going to lose until you get a replacement. Is that an accurate or somewhat maybe useful way of describing this in terms of the difference between inflammation and resolution and how it affects people? Yeah, I think that's a great analogy because it's important to provide mental images to people that they can relate to if you're speaking to an athlete, a baseball player, that's very very appropriate. If you're speaking to a surgeon, I don't think so. Absolutely. I'll go very far. Yeah. No, but surgeon gets it why we need to control inflammation and certainly the critical care docs get why we need to understand what's going on in sepsis. One of the other things we introduce is this concept of an immunosolven rather than a blocking agent that we would have an agent as a therapeutic that would stimulate the body's own ability to resolve. We came up with that by doing in the laboratory the first quantitative assessments and introduced some very simple calculations in a systems approach to studying how pus resolves. There was one review that Dr. Mara Paredi did for children, which I thought was really cute. In the frontiers of immunology, he published resolution for kids and yeah, it's worth looking at. It sounds really interesting. Charles, let's talk about some of you more recent research discerhan laboratory. Can you give us an overview of the research currently underway in the lab? Well, we have ongoing studies detailing the biosynthesis of resolves, working out the complete stereochemistry of transient intermediates, which is really challenging. And then other studies that are going on in the lab that are addressing how to activate resolution during infection and how to clear infectious inflammation. And then we have ongoing collaborations with Dr. Levy's laboratory looking at the impact of environmental triggers, environmental agents on the resolution and how they cause inflammation. And one of the very exciting projects we just got funded from NIH is with a cancer researcher, Deepak Panegrai, at the Beth Israel Hospital. He's a cancer expert looking at how to stimulate resolution of inflammation around solid tumors to reduce the tumor burden. And those are so exciting. He keeps me happy in coming to work every day. So that's roughly what we have going on at this time. And I should say that I'm very, very fortunate to be a grantee of the National Institute of General Medicine and IGMS helped us enormously because the base work of resolution and working out the biosynthesis of each of the members of the super family of resolving mediators was supported by a program project grant that I led for 10 years that was supported by an IGMS. And I've been supported by an IGMS for my entire career. The other institute that's really been incredibly important is an IDCR in developing this work. And there I served as a principal investigator program director for a P-50 Centaur grant where we used peradontal disease as a demonstration of controlling inflammation. That's about it. Yeah. So last year you had another article on the proceedings of National Academy of Sciences that was titled Resolve in D1 Prevent Injurious Nutrophil Swarming and Transplanted Longs. And this provided some insights for therapeutically enhancing pro-resolution pathways to minimize early leukocyte mediated tissue injury and promote healing following transplantation. Can you talk about the progression in that field and how this impacts us? Sure. I really love this study because in the OR and particularly in transplant there's a phenomenon called Reflow Injury where a surgeon went to clamp a vessel to work in an area to repair it. When they open the clamp the leukocytes that come rushing out in the blood they have become preemptively activated and they hit that lung and start to cause collateral tissue damage. And the reason why I like this study with Daniel and his group so much is that they have a tool for a ton microscope and it's possible to visualize what's going on during this Reflow Injury. So first in humans we were able to get from Daniel and his colleagues human grafts and analyze them using LCMS MS and we could follow the temporal production of the prosthoclantins, leukotrine and the resolvins in this primary graft dysfunction and then going to the animal model where it can do real-time movies. Dr. Lee and his group has made these extraordinary movies using two photon microscopy of the lung where you can see that neutrophils swarming. I urge everyone to just come and take a look at those movies they're available on the PNAS website and what's so convincing and so dramatic is when giving resolve in D1 it stops the swarm. You can see that it stops the swarming of the leukocytes and prevents collateral tissue damage and you can visualize all this in that study and the reason why I like it so much is because this is the primary action of the resolvins when they are produced to control excessive leukocyte traffic. Does this translate over into areas such as an ischemic stroke or ischemic myocardium after cardiovascular disease event? Absolutely. These cellular molecular events include translate to cardiovascular disease. Organ transplant is a major major issue where we see all these things happening but in atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease these are happening over a long period of time, decades in some cases the vascular endothelium and surrounding tissues become inflamed and there's a very nice work in the area of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease being done by a number of groups one is a tachycardi-fretment group at Albany Medical. She's a former member of my group and Magnus Beck is a cardiologist at the Caroleans Institute and he's working in this area and they have published some really elegant studies demonstrating how resolvins can reduce the sequelae of inflammation in atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease. I was very fortunate some years ago back in 2006 and 2007 to work with Larry Chan who's an endocrinologist that Baylor and Larry was able to make a rabbit, a transgenic rabbit that overproduced the enzyme that's responsible for lipoxin and resolvins production and one of the things we saw is that those rabbits didn't get atherosclerosis and they had a very diminished acute inflammatory response in skin on challenge. They were like super rabbits. Lucky rabbits I guess. Yeah and the reason why I mention the rabbit is because much of what's known about the pathobiology of atherosclerosis comes from the Watnabi rabbit model where taking high lipid and cholesterol intake leads to an atherosclerotic plaque in those rabbits and the cool thing is that my colleagues and I was not involved in this study when they treated the rabbit peridontium that had peridontal inflammation. They did not get any atherosclerosis. The vessels were clean. It was just amazing. That's Tom Van Dyke's group working with another imaging specialist in the area of lipids at the Jim Hamilton nice study. So we will put a link in the show notes to Gabrielle Fredman's article that you mentioned looking at the evidence that supports SPMs as therapeutic tools for the treatment of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease sometime in the future. That leads to sort of a follow-up question here. You mentioned rabbits and that research is very interesting that the natural diet for a rabbit isn't very much like a natural diet for humans I would assert but in any case what I'd really be interested in are there any clinical trials in the works that you know of that will test whether increasing SPMs in vivo in humans can indeed affect arthroscratic progression. I think that would be really fascinating. Yeah you're absolutely right Ken. That is a tall order. That's a very expensive long type of study to do but nonetheless it is extremely important and Magnus Beck the cardiologist that I mentioned at Carolyn's Institute he was able to secure a ground from the EU across multiple countries where they are going to be testing exactly that and I'm fortunate to be a member of their scientific advisory and watching how the data comes in and I do believe that they will be successful because these mechanisms are highly conserved across species all the way from fish to human. It's really interesting and very hopeful for the outcome of that study. Charles you have two children who are currently in the military and your third is potentially on the way into the military what are your thoughts on the need for the use of SPMs in the military population. That's a very deep question data and because I'm emotionally tied to trying to do research that will be helpful in the battlefield and say well where did you get that idea from? So well I was invited to the San Antonio battlefield research a few years back to give the Basel Pruitt lecture and Dr. Pruitt was a trauma surgeon in the military and on that occasion I got a chance to see some of the very important work that they're doing at that site and started a collaboration with Dr. Rios on using some of the SPMs in their synthetic form to protect ear damage from acoustic injury and he has developed a model for blast injury and what happens in the battlefield is that if a soldier steps on explosive device the day after perhaps losing a limb those soldiers lose sight due to a retinal detachment from the blast shock and one of the SPMs neuroprotectant D1 protects from that in animal models, prevents retinal detachment and I didn't have an opportunity to tell you but the neuroprotectants are produced in the retinal pigment that epithelial cells that's one of the places that make that specific SPM so I'm hoping that we can get some of those molecules into the battlefield kit and in the other approach which I think is so vital is what many have called nutritional armor to help increase the resilience in the battlefield by specific support of the SPM system. Well how are you going to do that, John? Well since it's taken more than a lifetime to make mometics and to launch the idea of precision therapeutics in resolution, resolution pharmacology one of the really fortunate things we stumbled into is that marine organisms not only make EPA and DHA, they also make resolfins and they make them in high amounts so it turns out that when you purchase at the local store your omega-3 fatty acids most of them come from the Peruvian anchovy so anchovies very rich in EPA and DHA so you want to get anchovies on your pizza but the cool thing is that they're very rich the anchovies in the intermediates in the biosynthesis of resolfins so why is that important because if you give the intermediate resolfins they're used at about a hundred times more efficacious than EPA and DHA and then we thought that they were only biosynthetic intermediates it turns out that they also carry potent biological actions. 17 HDHA one of the molecules we described is very potent in regulating pain and 18 eat which is an intermediate E-series biosynthesis of resolfins is very potent in regulating cardiovascular function. So do you see in austere situations let's say pilots or other extreme environments do you see a preventative aspect that may be used from let's say taking SPMs over the counter? Yes David absolutely I do hope that this is the direction that I'm having a great of visibility to larger audience which would give me an opportunity to do today will dawn people that this is really preventative medicine and that if we use precision nutrition we could raise our resilience and yes and then to use the therapeutic approaches more and more extreme cases. You mentioned phrase nutritional armor earlier and Joe Hillman is one of the people coined that and I remember he visited here and gave a lecture back in 2014 about nutritional armor and he was stressing the importance of fish oils and related substances so I hope he's been tracking your work since then because I'm sure he would find it really interesting. I know Joe well he was at NIH and I was on the border scientific advisors at the institute he worked in which was NIH AAA and he was a student of Norman Salem and Norman has done some of the most impactful work in thinking about EPA and DHA in nutrition and he's demonstrated how important and his team how important DHA is in neural development. Yes so we don't know sure Joe is a psychiatrist by training and he been aware of the importance of omega-3 in the diet and preventing suicide. Yes partly due to my interactions with him at the time was on the defense science board and of course issues having to do with injury brain injury but also suicideality were issues for the board and in one of the reports it talks about there should be more focus on nutritional armor and on thinking about DHA and other kinds of approaches and so it was very hard to get it in the report because defense science board reports are normally dominated by things based in physics or things or computer science or you know not something biological and so it was an interesting process. What I can tell you is that there have been some very nice studies in TBI, the traumatic brain injury that was done by initially by the research center in Kentucky for TBI and they showed that in repetitive TBI a percussive model in animals that resolves E1, D1, D2 all protect from TBI and that's an issue that also crosses over not just from the battlefield but also into sports today. Absolutely. That work stimulated others in the area of Alzheimer's and neuroscientists to look at how the SPMs regulate and protect in neural inflammation and there we had shown very early on that microglia cells, brain microglia cells, make resolvings and those cells are like the macrophages of peripheral blood and they're the ones that are thought to be in an excessive pro-inflammatory state in diseases like Alzheimer's. And just yesterday I read a paper from the Carolins group group, the neuroscience group working on Alzheimer's and how they used Mar1, one of the SPMs to protect from advancement of Alzheimer's that's Mary and Schultzberg's group and they also did a very cool study that came out just about a year and a half ago with a gave SPMs intranase in the mouse and it was in an Alzheimer's mouse and they found that those mice got their memory back in base studies, really impressive and reduced in neural inflammation and one other line of research which I think is very important that's come up from Japan about SPMs is that they may actually be the molecules themselves and dodgenous antidepressants. That is interesting. In the sports world there's a big focus on recovery and healing because the high number of injuries and nagging chronic muscular skeletal problems, does it make sense to focus more on resolution in this context rather than thinking sort of anti-inflammatory in the traditional or old sense of understanding? Yes David, this is something we need to pound the table about because traditional anti-inflammatory therapies delay wound healing, that's one of the unwanted side effects. But the natural progression of resolution back to homeostasis is tissue regeneration we have found that there are additional molecules that are produced during the resolution phase by the SPM pathways that stimulate tissue regeneration and we found that in a very cool system in Plenarya. If we cut the Plenarya in half this little worm will grow back both halves in like five to seven days but if we added one of these molecules that we isolated from the resolution phase and then determined its structure we could shorten that regeneration period. So tissue regeneration is part of the resolution cascade, the resolution code. And a follow up to that at your conference I noticed there were several papers discussing sleep and how resolution and sleep kind of interact or what the what the play is. Do you mind touching on that as well? Sure, the sleep group is over at the B.I. Diakness and Monica Hack is the senior there and I just serve as a mentor to the fellow that presented she showed disrupted sleep study and in disrupted sleep the proinflammatory mediators go up in peripheral blood and there's a deficit of SPMs. So I was quite surprised to see that those analyses were done by the group in Michigan and it really suggests that to get a full sleep cycle one has to over inflammation. So there I think the SPMs could have a real therapeutic impact in enabling people to skip over if you will disrupted sleep pattern and I think that can have enormous impact in the general public in the military and in sports world as well. Yeah I see in the professional sports world but also with friends of mine that are you know either veterans or active duty population, in fact of a friend that is involved in human performance space, active duty and he does some he's in the reserves as well but one of the things that he told me recently since he started taking these SPMs he sleeps better in his forties now he is getting better times on a lot of his physical testing that he was getting when he was in his 20s. So it's a good and that's the only change that he's made and I see that across the board when I'm dealing with athletes that those kind of improvements it's really outstanding. On a personal note I've been taking SPMs for a long time. I don't even remember how long but quite a while in particular the pro resolving I think it's called pro resolves. Yeah pro resolve and the other one is metagenics active SPM active. Yeah. Yeah. That I personally take. Well you'll be happy to know that they are the same pill solved by very happy. The actually I'll tell you a little anecdote there you know to sort of jump start that getting it to humans I gave the Spanish company Sciotech that had this and this is actually an important point for your audience okay so supplements do we really need supplements well if you're eating a well balanced diet maybe not so some supplements are synthetic molecules like vitamin C B12 etc and that's definitely needed. In the case of of the SPM active those are the natural SPMs isolated from Peruvian and Chovis and the Sciotech cooperation had at that time around 2012 the world's patent and dominating what's called CO2 based purification so there was no organics that would ever touch no softens the molecules and so as I mentioned briefly earlier we found that the Peruvian entropy has SPMs and the intermediates SPMs and I obtained a patent on that which I gave to the Sciotech group for $1 why because I wanted to see this get to people as fast as possible and they did that and I'm so happy they did and their first customers were metagenics and metagenics did has done and is doing a wonderful job in making educational material available about the SPMs and doing nice clinical studies showing that taking the SPM active reduces pain and having those tools available for people like Dr. Rameh this opens up even more potential uses because it's only until you get a tool in a physician's hand that you really know what things are good for because that makes sense absolutely it certainly does from my perspective yeah totally agree with you yeah so very soon you'll be teaching us what we really need to do with the SPM actives and I'll tell you a story that that makes me there are two things you know I you must adhere to what I'm saying that my basis is really in molecular pharmacology you know that I love so the first is the discovery of the viagra molecules okay this you know no one went out to specifically discover something for ED this was a side effect of a cardiovascular program that Pfizer had to block phosphodiesterases and it turned out that their molecule blocked the phosphodiesterase that's it that regulates a cyclic GMP and relieves I mean I'm trying to figure out a delicate way to say this erectile dysfunction ED okay and this is a really important problem the other one which is really cool is latina prost which is used it's a it's an eye drop to lower intraocular pressure it's actually a prostaclant and my medican analogue that was developed by astrozenica and when that compound went into use the side effect noted by the ophthalmologist was people got extra long eyelashes it was a side effect and the other side effect was it turned brown eyes blue oh wow so you can imagine this in need for both of those and so businesses has grown up where companies make the compound and put it in cosmetics for people who like to have long eyelashes so I'm anticipating that just like we learned and I didn't anticipate it I didn't even expect it that muscle was going to make SPMs when we found that adipose tissue fat made pro and flammatory mediators and the SPMs we were pretty shocked at that so I think there's some unexpected things to come up both in the clinical observations and our continuation of these investigations is going to teach us how to use this information and the best way possible to help as many people as possible that'd be great looping back to the early days of your career I just want to tie back to that little bit because stem talk has many many listeners in graduate and medical school so we get a lot of correspondence from med students and graduate students and physicians as well but we're really very interested in these young budding scientists and physicians and you know they they have a lot of passion I understand there were two books that you read earlier in your career that really had a big impact on you and maybe we maybe we should share this with with these folks one was the art of scientific investigation and I understand the other was men like gods what stood out about these books and would you still recommend them to young investigators and graduate students and medical students today yes wow that's a great question thank you so the art of scientific investigation by beverage I still ask people to take a look at it beverages a professor of pathology at university at Cambridge and this is the only book I know that tries to operationalize preparing to do research and in the first page it says scientific research is not itself a science it is still an art or a craft and I believe that is very true and he gives some inspiring pearls throughout the book and tells people how to go about preparing yourself to make discoveries yeah I would definitely tell people to go out and get it it's out of print I think the last print thing of it was in 1957 but you can get almost anything today out there on Amazon so do make a look for it if you're interested in a career in science the art of scientific investigation and what about the other book men like gods what's that about well okay that that's an hg wells book that he wrote towards the end of his life that really into weaves many of the concepts that he had in his other books like time machine and war the worlds and as you can hear I I like sci-fi I don't have as much time to read in days but men like gods was particularly interesting to me at the time because it's a it's about an English newspaper man who's driving on a road I mean this is in the late 1920s and he and several other I was a representative of society at that time were transported to a parallel universe in time an earth 3000 years ahead in time and and then you know this is a utopian society and the main character Bonsdopol is really enamored by the whole society but they become jeopardized by the viruses that the people form out time brought to them and so they had to be isolated on an island so it brings up a lot of concepts that like in world of worlds hg wells you know in the end we don't defeat the invaders they get defeated by the microbes of earth I I just I just like those frame shift ideas and I I encourage people to read not only science outside of your area of interest but to get stimulation from other sources from reading books that you like and from listening to music and and going out and running and getting your endorphism and smiling every day the other book that I thought was and I think is very important there are two other books for the medical students the book that was transformative for me was Aros Smith oh yeah and that's not the rock root it is Sinclair Lewis's Aros Smith yeah it's famous book yeah it's in it picks up a medical student in his early years and carries him through the clinical trial and the forces that come to bear during this epidemic that they face yeah I was Sinclair Lewis's book and he was the first literature Nobel laureate from the United States so it's definitely worth reading in the other book is an obscure book that I found that I just love and I still copy a page from it and handed out to members of my group during all of me and that's Maxwell Maltz M-A-L-T-Z he was a plastic surgeon and he wrote a book of his experiences does the end of his career that he called Psycho Cybernetics so what is that Charlie well this is where you could program he believed the brain was like a computer you putting good stuff you get out good stuff and you can program yourself to be positive and have a positive impact on those around you and he learned this apparently by performing plastic surgery on people he noticed that if someone came to him it's at all you know my ears are too big you know can you can you take off a little bit so and after he did that in 21 days after the surgery he noticed that there was a personality change and so he documented that it wrote this book for us interesting yeah very well Charles this has been great fun and we've enjoyed talking to you very much and I'm sure our listeners will as well absolutely thank you for joining us today keep up the good work yeah that's for sure well thank you so much David and can forgive me this opportunity to expose our passions and to tell people about our mission and I hope that others will take it up and if you're interested do write to me may take me a little time to get back to you but I certainly will thank you so much guys well you're quite welcome it was fascinating interview and thank you for your important work yeah thank you very much stem talk stem talk stem talk stem talk I'm one of those people we talked about today who finds SPM's to be a revolutionary new field of research I'm grateful for the work that Charles has done in pioneering the potential of SPM's to promote the natural termination of inflammation in addition to my performance medicine practice where I see a wide variety of high performing patients and athletes and retired and active military members these patients have inflammation as a result of persistent injuries and trauma I'm a big fan of SPM's because of the positive impact that they have had on so many of my patients to me this discovery is Nobel worthy information as I believe it will transform healthcare in the near future I suspect David that one reason you are particularly fond of SPM's among others is because they allow a person to avoid anti-inflammatory drugs and their numerous side effects here at iHMC we work a lot with military populations who suffer inflammation as a result of persistent injuries so the potential of SPM's to promote the natural resolution of inflammation is something I am keenly interested in as Charles has pointed out in the past anti-inflammation is not equivalent to pro-resolution anti-inflammation suggests a blockade of signals and cells whereas pro-resolution suggests an activation of signals and cells quite different this is David Lemay signing off for now and this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stemtalk thank you for listening to Stemtalk we want this podcast to be discovered by others so please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review more information about this and other episodes can be found at our website stemtalk.us there you can also find more information about the guests we interview