Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host Don Conegues and joining me to introduce today's podcast as a man behind the curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that sucks all the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Hi Don, great to be here. So our guest today is Dr. Charles Brenner, the Roy J. Carver Chair by a chemistry at the University of Iowa. He is one of the world's leading experts on nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, commonly referred to as NAD, which is actually an essential molecule found in every living cell. In today's interview, we talked to Charles about his research into NAD and why he believes supplementation with nicotinamide riboside could help people age better. In addition to his work at the University of Iowa, he is also the chief scientific advisor for chromodex, which markets the NR supplement true niogen. But before we get to today's fascinating interview with Charles, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five-star reviews that have been piling up on iTunes. These reviews really help us get the word out about the show. Thank you. Absolutely. And as we announced in several earlier episodes, the double secret selection committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher and other podcast apps. For the widiest and most lavishly praised filled reviews, read on Stem Talk. As always, if you hear your review read on Stem Talk, just contact us at StemTalk at ihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk t-shirt. Today, our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker Dr. Wadi. The review is titled Inspiration for a Wondering Mind. It reads, As a fourth year med student currently interviewing for residency positions, I've been on the road over the past month more than I've been home. Before my first road trip, I decided to give podcasts a try instead of my tired playlist of music in an attempt to make my driving time more productive. I was fortunate to have stumbled on to Stem Talk. Every episode has broadened my horizons and giving me potential jumping off points for future areas of research. Between Dr. Kanagas and Dr. Ford, the insightful questions for guests are usually one step ahead of where I am, which keeps me engaged on long trips. Well thank you Dr. Wadi and thank you to all of our other listeners who've helped Stem Talk become such a great success. Okay and now on to our interview with Dr. Charles Brenner. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Hi, welcome to Stem Talk. This is Don Kanagas, your host, and joining us today is Dr. Charles Brenner. Charles, welcome to the podcast. Thanks, great to be here. And also joining us is Ken Ford. Hello Don and especially hello, Charles. So Charles, is it true that you were a curious kid who dreamed of becoming either a comedian or a rabbi? Yes, I think what those professions have in common is the love of words, people, happiness, and I would say healthy argument. You know before I knew about being a scientist, you know I saw comedians, I saw rabbis and I had a little bit of affinity for both. So in high school you were on the tennis and cross country teams, but I understand it was the math team where you really stood out, is that right? Yes, I'll have to admit to being a math nerd in high school. I also did some theater, wrote for the school newspaper and I was active in the Jewish Youth Group as well in Western Connecticut. So as a national merit scholar you must have had a number of opportunities for college. So why did you decide on Wesleyan? Well, I'm not sure how it works now, but at the time you had to specify where you would be a national merit scholar. If you were fortunate enough to be named a national merit scholar semi-finalist, which I was. So when I got into Wesleyan and was named a national merit scholar, it was pretty much a done deal. Wesleyan was a terrific place for me to go to college. And so you showed up on campus and you decided to major in ecology. But when you went to your advisor, you found out that Wesleyan didn't have an ecology department. So can you tell us what happened next? Yeah, basically I went to Dr. James Donady in the biology department. You know, that would have been the home of ecology if they had really had it. And of course I didn't exactly know what ecology as an academic discipline was, but you know, I was someone that was interested in environmental science and environmental conservation. And you know, Dr. Donady said, you know, it's not really something that we do a lot of here. So essentially what I did then, which is what I've done many times in my life, is made lemonade, right? So he told me that we've got a great program here in molecular biology and you know, we're trying to understand how life works at the molecular scale with DNA, RNA, and proteins and you know, dig in and find a research lab to participate in. So that's what I did. So after graduating with honors in biology, I understand that you traveled across country to work in the Bay area. So what was that like? Well, let's see. It's 1983 and I actually went to college with a quaint idea that you go to school in order to not be a burden to your parents, right? To learn some skills and be able to be employed. And it was really just early in the 1980s that the biotechnology industry was being established in the San Francisco Bay area and in the 128 strip as it's called in a Boston area. And it was very attractive for me to go out west. We didn't even call it the biotech industry yet at the time. It was called the genetic engineering industry. But it was right around this time of year in 1982. So the middle of my senior year that I went out and interviewed at a place called Kairon Corporation, which was very small at the time and got a position there and started there in July of 1983. It was a great experience for me because I learned molecular biology even more than in college and also learned the value of teamwork because in industry, you can have fully formed, you know, scientists, fully formed human beings that will work together in kind of larger groups in order to solve a common problem. And that's something that still is very appealing to me. After about five years, you enrolled at Stanford and eventually earned a doctorate in cancer biology. When and why did you become interested in cancer research? And also I understand that you were the first cancer biology graduate student in the biochemistry department. Is that right? Well, wait a second here, Ken. I'm not sure I like the sound of the word eventually. I mean, I got done in a crisp four and a half years in terms of cancer bio. There were two of us actually. Viola, Alison and I showed up in the offices of two new faculty members, Pat Brown and Bob Fuller respectively. Viola went to work on HIV, you know, molecular biology. And I worked with Bob Fuller actually on pro hormone processing, but we were both, even though she was doing molecular virology and I was doing something that could be described as enzymology or molecular endocrinology because it related to hormone processing. We were the first two graduate students in the cancer biology program that worked in the biochem department at Stanford. They were a great environment and like my intellectual grandfather Arthur Cornberg was there on faculty and Dale Kaiser, Bob Lehman. And I really have a number of mentors from that period. Yeah, it sounds terrific. So along the way, you began to get a whiff of an idea that not everything was known about how nicotinamide adenine dinicletit or NID was formed. You worked on this from 1996 to 2003 during your time on faculty at Thomas Jefferson University. So can you tell us a little bit about that research? I actually got interested in all manner of nucleotide binding protein. So the most famous nucleotides are known by four letters, ATG and C, right? And there's the RNA and the DNA version of those nucleotides that basically get built into RNA and DNA, right? But there's all sorts of other small molecules in the cell that are considered nucleotides. So there's something called diadenicine polyphosphates. There's the capped nucleotides that form the five prime ends of RNA and then there's NAD, the central regulator of metabolism. And so I was working on a super family of enzymes that bind and interact with these unusual nucleotides. And yes, it became clear to me that even though there was a lot of information on nucleotides in biochemistry textbooks and some of it going back to Arthur Cornberg's era in the late 1940s and 1950s, that not everything was known about these molecules, including the synthesis of NAD. Your research really took off. It seems once you move to Dartmouth in 2003. Can you share with us how you worked during this time? Did you discovery that NR or nicotinamide-rebicide commonly referred to as NR is a precursor of NAD? Could you talk a little bit about that? Well, let's start by stipulating that NAD is the central regulator of metabolism. If you want to understand how living things work, there are very few molecules of as great importance as NAD. So in 2003, 4, around the time that I moved from Jefferson and Philadelphia to Dartmouth up in New Hampshire, I found myself working on an enzyme called glutamine-dependent NAD synthetase. So this is an enzyme that maybe only an enzymologist would love. So if you look at a diagram, a wiring diagram of how yeast cells make NAD and yeast are almost everyone's favorite model organism, they're a eukaryote. They're used to make bread and beer, but they're much more closely related to plants and animals than they are to bacteria. And all of the wiring for making NAD went through this enzyme glutamine-dependent NAD synthetase. So there was a pathway that was known to make NAD from trip to fan, the amino acid, and there were arrows or pathways to make NAD from two forms of vitamin B3, namely nicotinamide and nicotinic acid or niacin. All of those precursors, trip to fan, nicotinamide and nicotinic acid, had to go through this enzyme. So what I realized is that I might be able to solve two problems. I might be able to figure out how this enzyme works, and I elected joke that maybe 12 people on Earth would have been interested in that. And then in addition, I could test the received wisdom or the implicit assumptions that scientists were making when they drew those diagrams, when they said that all routes to NAD come from trip to fan, nicotinic acid, nicotinamide. So I wasn't sure that that was necessarily true, and that I thought it was entirely possible that we would find a new way to make NAD another precursor or that we might find that one of the enzymes that was described as doing one thing could actually do two things. And it was in the course of doing that research that we really solve both problems. First, we purified glutamine dependent NAD synthetase, we figured out how its two active sites work together. We solve those problems that the 11 other, you know, enzymologists were really interested in, and then we cracked open the question of how NAD is made, and we showed that there's actually another pathway. So there's a pathway in eukaryotes from yeast all the way up to human beings that will take another vitamin precursor of NAD NR and then convert it into NAD, the central regulator of metabolism. So that involved discovering new genes, new enzymes, and then it wasn't just that discovery that turned out to be, there were a number of previously unappreciated biochemical and genetic steps in forming NAD and creating the NAD metabolism. And so as you said, I've been working on that problem really since about 15 years now, around since 2003. So NAD is a coenzyme found in all living cells, and it serves both as a critical coenzyme for enzymes that fuel reduction oxidation reactions, carrying electrons from one reaction to another, and as a co-substrate for other enzymes. So can you give us an overview of research into NAD and its relationship to overall health and also age-related disease? So I think I'd like to try to take this in three parts. First, what is metabolism, and what is its relationship to this molecule that we call NAD? Second, I want to introduce the concept of metabolic disruption or metabolic stress, and then third, I'll tell you what is NR and how does NR uniquely address these conditions of metabolic stress? So when people think of metabolism, the first thing that we tend to think about is our waistline. So we tend to think, well, if we're lean, then we must have a fast metabolism, if we're gaining weight, maybe our metabolism is slowing down. But metabolism is quite a bit more than that. Nuronsum is the process by which we convert our food into energy, but not only that, actions, thoughts, and the function of every organ system. So the heart can't beat, the muscle can't flex, the lungs can't take oxygen, neurons cannot transmit sensations or ideas without metabolic transformations. These are constant in every single cell in tissue. And the central mediator of all of the chemical reactions that make up metabolism is NAD or to be technically correct. It's four related coenzymes called NAD plus NADH and NADP plus, if you must, and NADPH. So these are coenzymes that convert one set of molecules to another. So for example, in cell division, a cell is going to need more nucleotides to make more DNA and RNA. It can't do that without something called the pentasphosphate pathway. That depends on NAD, NADPH. Making more plasma membrane, making steroids like androgens and estrogens depends on NADPH. Converting our fuel into ATP depends on NAD. Making our blood glucose and ketone bodies overnight depends on NADH. So these are the most important catalysts of cellular transformations that we have in our bodies. So that's metabolism and the relationship of NAD and metabolism. The second important concept is what I call metabolic stress or metabolic disruption. So you would think that NAD has got to be like the family jewels or the crown jewel that it would be protected against all invaders, against all things that would attack the organism. But it turns out that because NAD coenzymes are required for resistance to a lot of toxic insults, the NAD system gets disrupted by metabolic stress. So examples of metabolic stress, alcohol. Isn't that funny, right? Because we tend to think, well, we drink alcohol in order to de-stress ourselves, but actually in the processing of alcohol in our liver, in the metabolism of alcohol in our liver, it affects our NAD system. When we made mice in our laboratory, fat and type 2 diabetic, it disrupted their NAD system in their liver. When you expose skin or any other tissue to sun damage or oxygen damage, reactive oxygen species, you're also depressing the NAD system. When Anthony Sauve in New York City exposed mice to sufficient noise that it induced hearing loss, it attacked their NAD in the cochlea, in the hearing organ in the ear. Time zone disruption, jet lag, affect the NAD system. And then in addition, there's disease processes like heart failure and neurodegeneration that affect the NAD system. So what I'm telling you is that NAD is required for our metabolism. NAD is disrupted by conditions of metabolic stress and that we need NAD for all of our tissues to function. So basically, what I'm explaining to you is that we need sources of what we call precursors in order to replete or to fill up our NAD stores. And what our research has done is it is put another molecule in the toolbox with the discovery of nicotinamide riboside with yet another way to fill our NAD stores and what is unique. And this is the third and last thing that I'll tell you in this hopefully not too long explanation. That nicotinamide riboside has a number of properties that make it the most efficient molecule for filling our NAD stores. And it turns out that under conditions of metabolic stress, our ability to convert other precursors of NAD to NAD goes into decline and the ability of a damaged or stressed tissue to use NR actually goes up. So that's why there's quite a bit of value in NR. And that's why our research is getting into not only common conditions of metabolic stress and an area that could be called healthy aging, but also in its investigating the degree to which NR will be able to help in human diseases and conditions. Wow, that was quite a list of stresses that can diminish NAD when I was young, which was long ago. And in the Navy, it was common to experience nearly every one of those stresses, those NAD thieves that you mentioned on a single trip or a single day often. So one wonders what the effect was on all these young people. So true about your time in the Navy, but I'll go and I'll talk to groups of people and I'll ask for a show of hands of how many people would like to hop on a jet plane to Ibiza, right? Sit out in the sun and the fresh air. You see where I'm going with this, right? Getting to music could be at an elevated volume, having some drinks and enjoying food up until the late hours and essentially everyone will raise their hand, right? And there you have alcohol, overnutrition, time zone disruption, sun damage, oxygen, noise. And so a lot of these things are actually quite enjoyable if not inevitable stresses of life. And then you throw in some of the chronic conditions of aging and heart failure and nerd of generation. And you see how potentially powerful NAD boosting strategies can be for health. Absolutely. Think about the guys in the current conflicts, special ops guys deploying to Afghanistan and Iraq. They literally have every one of those tremendous noise, stress, prodigious alcohol consumption, jet lag. Pretty much everyone you just mentioned. So Charles, I understand you're not a fan of the term anti-aging. In fact, from what I understand, you don't even use the term. So why is that? Well, first, it sounds a little bit disrespectful. Like we're opposed to maturity and aging, which all of us are trying to experience, right? Second, it sort of conflates the kind of stuff that we're doing with non-scientific areas, with snake oil or beauty treatments or anti-aging clinics. So no, I'm not really a fan. I do believe that because the NAD system is disrupted in so many conditions of metabolic stress that boosting or maintaining NAD with nicotine-amide riboside can help people age better. And for sure, we're also very much involved in designing and participating in and reviewing clinical trials of nicotine-amide riboside in actual diseases and conditions. But I don't love the term anti-aging. Yeah, makes sense. The alternative to aging is not a pleasant part. Verden and numerous other investigators have reported that NAD content declines with age following up on our discussion here. And it's seen in multiple organs from pancreas and adipose tissues, geltamusso, liver skin and brain. And I wonder, do you have an apathethys for why NAD goes down over time? What is the current evidence in humans? Can you just give us a little primer on why NAD declines with age? Well, in fact, Dr. Verden's group and ours have a paper in review about this exact topic. And it's true that there are many experimental models in which people have observed tissue-specific NAD decline. And there are a number of theories. One of the theories is that the expression of particular NAD biosynthetic genes or enzymes like NAMPT decline in aging or decline in conditions of metabolic stress. And there's evidence that that's really true. So we have an example. It's not exactly age-dependent, but it goes back to my theme of metabolic stress. So in heart failure, both in mice as well as in people, there's a decline in NAD and there's lower expression of the enzyme that converts nicotinamide to NAD while there's increased expression of the nicotinamide riboside kinase 2 gene. So that gene encodes an enzyme that allows the failing heart to use NR. And so the failing heart is losing the ability to use nicotinamide and it's spiking up or increasing its ability to use nicotinamide riboside in the course of its failure. So that's one theme that it's a change in the ability to use a vitamin. Second possibility is that there's increased NAD turnover and these are not mutually exclusive possibilities. So you can have an increase in churn of NAD or turnover of NAD, robbery or thievery, as you called it earlier, of NAD while there's also challenges to replenishing the NAD. So this is an area where I find myself having a little bit of a debate with some of the people in the field. Some of the people in the field seem to think that it's a purely age-dependent phenomenon. And I'm inclined to think that it may be episodic. So the way that I would explain that to you is that if you would take photographs of a cat owner's hands, you would see potentially evidence of increased scratches with time, right? So if you saw a set of photographs that were taken when that cat owner was 40, 50, 60 years old, you might see more scratches on the hands in the picture from when the person was 60. And you might be able to order those photographs. But I would contend to you that those scratches were not caused by time. Those scratches were caused by cats. And so it may be that the decline in NAD is more episodic and relates to conditions of metabolic stress that could include infection, or microbiome and other kinds of episode of events that we go through. And so this is really a very active area of research. But one of the great things about it is that the two technologies that my group has kind of developed can be applied to find out the diseases and conditions that could potentially benefit from NR. So one of our technologies is called targeted NAD metabolomics. So you folks know what omics, right? Like genomics and transcriptomics, where rather than sequencing one gene or looking at the expression of one RNA, you try to look at the whole complement of genes or RNAs. So metabolomics, you measure lots of metabolites at once. And in quantitative targeted metabolomics, you measure their absolute level. So we developed this technology and this technology tells us the conditions in which NAD or maybe NADPH is under attack. And then simultaneously we can look at a targeted transcriptional analysis and we can see whether some of the genes that were interested in are being induced. And I'll tell you, Don and Ken, when we see a condition in which either NAD or NADPH is going down and a nicotinamide riboside kinase gene is going up, that's a condition that has a very good chance of being addressed by NR. So those conditions include things like heart failure and neurodegeneration, fatty liver and conditions like that. And that's what's really guiding our research into 2019. That's a great way of explaining. Nicotinamide adenine dinniquely-tied phosphate, which we'll from here on refer to as NADPH, is particularly important because of its role as a central regulator of reactive oxygen species toxicity. So can you discuss this? NADPH is really one of my favorite compounds. It's something that we don't talk about enough. So I'm glad that you're asking about it. So when we oxidize fuels, we're trying to take our lunch and turn it into ATP and carbon dioxide in large part. It's a little more complicated than that, but that's one of the ways to think about it. But one of the things about biology is that biology doesn't let the electrons go up in smoke. And so NADPH is carries electrons from our lunch and puts the electrons into what's called the electron transport chain, and that's used to generate ATP. But the other electronic sector is NADP, and that generates, as you said, on NADPH. And the electrons on NADPH are used to do two kinds of things. In addition, they're used to detoxify reactive oxygen species, and two, they're used to generate lipids, including estrogens and androgens. So reactive oxygen species is a main kind of damage. In fact, it's a type of damage that is associated with aging. Now the funny thing is that we know that reactive oxygen species is one of the mechanisms that will kill model organisms like worms. So people thought, well, great. So I'll put antioxidants on worms, and maybe I can extend their lifespan. But what people commonly find, if you put antioxidants on worms, they actually live a shorter lifespan. Why? Because you need a certain amount of reactive oxygen stress in order to induce a response to reactive oxygen species that allows your body to kind of fight it. And so that's why antioxidants, although there's some antioxidants that are in skin products for these kind of the outside of your skin that may have some value, antioxidants as medicine have kind of failed. What NR does, on the other hand, is by boosting NADPH, it boosts your natural antioxidant defense so that when reactive oxygen species are generated, we can detoxify them in the cells that need that detoxification. And in addition, we can maintain our biosynthetic capacity to make very important compounds like estrogens and androgens. So NADPH is really important. We find that when we overfeed a mouse, NADPH is the most sensitive metabolite. It declines more than NAD plus does, and we're quite certain that by repleting or filling up the stores of NADPH in the liver, we're protecting whole body metabolism. Stem talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research lab pioneering groundbreaking technologies aimed at leveraging and extending human cognition, perception, locomotion, and resilience. So a few years ago, you labbed some mouse studies that looked at obesity and type 2 diabetes. Can you talk about those experiments and findings? Yeah, we decided. It was actually our first mouse experiment. We decided to make mice fat and type 2 diabetic with a high fat diet. And in the course of doing that, these mice in just two, three months' time got a whole post of metabolic dysregulation. So they got a fatty liver. They started circulating high levels of liver enzymes like alineumino transorase, aspartate amino transorase. They had elevated blood glucose, fasting and non-fasting blood glucose. And they started developing diabetic polyneuropathy, pre-diabetic polyneuropathy. Then when we pushed them into type 2 diabetes, they got a full-blown diabetic nerve damage. If we gave them nicotine-wide riboside, we could blunt the weight gain. We could partially contain the fatty liver. We could lower the circulating liver enzymes, lower their blood glucose, and largely prevent the diabetic nerve damage. It was amazing. Now it would be truly amazing if you could do that in a human being. But the problem is that human obesity, common human obesity, and type 2 diabetes don't develop over two, three months in a human being. They develop over two or three or four decades. It's decades of overnutrition. It's decades of an imbalance between our energy intake, the amount of food that we're eating, and our energy expenditure, how many calories we're burning over the course of the day due to our physical activity. Whereas we've already completed human safety studies in overweight men to show that even two grams of nicotine-wide riboside is safe in overweight people, it's going to take a longer trial than 12 weeks in order to be able to move the needle on some of these parameters. But the evidence from the published human clinical study indicates that of all of the things that I mentioned, namely the fatty liver, the blood glucose, the circulating liver enzymes, and the diabetic neuropathy, probably the most sensitive parameter in a human being is going to be fatty liver. And so what we think we'll be able to do is by randomizing people for hepatic stiotosis for fatty liver and giving them nicotine-wide riboside for probably six months at an elevated dose. So we think that there's a very good chance that we will be able to put a dent in human fatty liver disease with this safe over the counter of vitamin. Now one thing I should definitely tell listeners is that I have an IP interest in this technology, so as you both know, when I was on the faculty at Dartmouth and we discovered the yeast and human nicotine-wide riboside kinase pathway and we discovered the phenomenon that nicotine-wide riboside could be in fact a human B3, a human NAD precursor vitamin. We filed for and were granted intellectual property for the uses of nicotine-wide riboside and that's been exclusively licensed by Chromodex Corporation for which I serve as the chief scientific advisor. So I have an IP interest in NR and I advise the company that developed it and I received grants from this company. But going forward, we're really committed to doing the safe testing of NR so that it's not only available to people just as a wellness product which it is now, it's true nitrogen. But in addition, that it could be indicated for people that have an authentic disease or condition. Fantastic. So I suspect a lot of our listeners after listening to your previous answers in some of the previous discussion, they're wondering how do I learn if my NAD or NAD levels are dysregulated? Is there an easy way to do this? Well, it's a good question. There's an easy way for my lab to determine people's blood NAD but their blood NAD is really not all of that interesting or actionable. We've seen very few human diseases or conditions in which people are walking around with low blood NAD. So depressed tissue NAD is probably much more common but even in people that have a failing heart and low cardiac NAD, it doesn't mean necessarily that they're going to be walking around with low blood NAD. So although I have the technology in my laboratory, I could really commercialize this at any time in order to measure people's blood NAD, I don't really see it as a terribly useful readout for most consumers. That said, we have discovered some very interesting biomarkers that when you elevate people's NAD in as little as three weeks of time, there are some things that you can see in their blood that improve. I'm not ready to tell the podcast listeners what those factors are because this work is in peer review and it will upset the peer reviewers if I just blurred it out before the reviewers have a chance to review all of the data. But we have identified some companion biomarkers that go along with boosting people's NAD safely when they can turn them on the drive aside and it will be very straightforward for people to measure those. Can you talk about the circadian rhythms of NAD? I've read that there's a diurnal cycle of NAD, essentially a daytime peak and a nighttime peak. This would seem to imply to me a possible benefit to dosing in the morning and before bed. Does that make any sense or am I way off the beam on that? No, that's pretty much my thinking as well. It pretty much makes sense for those people that are taking nicotine my riboside to take a morning dose and if they decide to increase their dose to take twice a day separated about 12 hours, the work that we've done indicates that there is a diurnal function of the NAD metabolism in the liver. It's not been investigated in every single tissue but I think it's pretty likely that there are two peaks a day and so if you're taking a morning dose you are contributing most to your daytime NAD cycle and a dinner time dose would be contributing most to your evening NAD cycle. NR is phosphorylated to nicotine my mononucleotide which we will refer to as NMN by nicotine my riboside kinases and NMN is converted to NAD. As reported in 2016, cell metabolism paper, mills, et al, conducted a 12 month long administration of NMN to wild-type mice which mitigated much of normal age-related physiological decline and so NMN administered mice switched their main energy source from glucose to fatty acids and these results suggest that NMN has significant preventive effects against age-associated impairment and energy metabolism of mice so assuming that the human trials that are now underway demonstrate safety and efficacy, why not supplement directly with NMN? This kind of amazes me that this is still a debate in the scientific world. So NMN has a phosphate on it. It's a nucleotide. NAD has two phosphates and NADP and NADPH have three phosphates. Compounds with phosphates don't get into cells. We've known that for 50 or 60 years. It would be great if compounds with phosphates did get into cells because there's a lot of classes of drugs that essentially act as nucleotides. So there's anti-retroviral drugs. There's anti-cancer drugs that compete with ATP or compete with nucleotides and so forth. But you cannot deliver those compounds as nucleotides and when we and others have looked at NMN, we've clearly demonstrated that NMN and NAD both have to be dephosphorylated or converted to a vitamin in order to get into cells and to regenerate cellular NAD. So people thought that they were being clever by using NMN because right, if we had a whiteboard here, I would show you that NR goes into cells, NR is then converted to NMN and then NMN is converted into NAD. And then some of the NAD goes to NADP. So what people thought that they were doing with NMN is taking a shortcut. They're taking a compound that is closer to NAD than NR because it's already NR with a phosphate. But our research shows that that phosphate has to come off outside of cells and then the phosphate has to be put on inside of cells again. So I am impressed with the physiological effects of NMN. So if you feed mice, high dose NMN, a lot of good things happen. It looks very much like feeding mice with high dose NR, but no, it doesn't really make sense to do the trials in mice or in people with NMN because the NMN is not cellularly available. In the study that we're discussing, the authors seem to say that NMN appeared to mediate its anti-aging effects and again, we're talking about mice at least in part by preventing agent-associated gene expression changes in a strongly tissue-dependent manner. And I was wondering, that's a slightly different discussion, but you're the guy to talk to about this. So, you know, the authors talked about skeletal muscle as being one of the most sensitive target tissues for these anti-aging effects that associate it with gene expression changes. Do you have any thoughts on that angle on this? Well, we have a study that's in a review right now that shows that oral nicotine-wide riboside, given to people, had an effect on their skeletal muscle gene expression. So we know that NR becomes available to people's skeletal muscle. I'm not quite sure how much is known about NMN and the tissue-specific effects of NR versus NMN. NMN is sort of a delivery molecule for NR because the phosphate has to come off. So it's possible that it gets to a different place or at a different speed than NR, but I would expect that they would largely function interchangeably and that they would both depend upon conversion to NR outside of the cell and then be taken up. But then, yeah, when you're boosting NAD inside of cells, you're going to do a lot of things. You're going to have the potential to improve DNA repair because DNA repair depends on NAD. You have the potential to improve estrogen and androgen synthesis. You have the potential to improve resistance to reactive oxygen species, stress, and a lot of good things will happen if you're restoring cellular NAD. That was good. Thank you. Some people are going the route of intravenous NAD infusions, but since, as far as I know, cells can't take up NAD directly, these NAD-IV clinics that seem to be springing up all over the country would appear to me to be unlikely to be effective. That said, there's all kinds of antidotal reports of benefit. Could it be that some of the NAD is converting to NR or NAM and having the benefit in that fashion? Probably an inefficient way to do it if that were the case. What's your take on NAD-IV infusions? Well, I've gone to a conference on I-V-NAD infusions and I believe that in April I'll be at another one. I would say that the anecdotal reports are pretty striking and a little difficult to dismiss, but none of them have been evaluated against placebo controls. I've actually gone to one of these conferences and proposed a crossover study in which people go from an oral nicotinamide riboside and crossover to an IV, a people who are on IV crossover to oral. Some of the folks that are administering this type of IV NAD therapy are so convinced that it works and that it helps people quit drugs that they don't consider it ethical to do the placebo control. I don't agree with that. I think that the way that we're going to change medicine and change healthcare practices is by following the rules and doing placebo controls, but the way that we can make sure that everyone is getting the benefit of either oral NR or intravenous NAD is to do a crossover in which everybody gets essentially both treatments, either first the IV or first the oral NR and then does the crossover. The other thing that I'll tell you, and these are data that I showed at such a conference, is that in collaboration with a group in Paris, it was Eric Tupoulou, D-U-P-L-U-S. The first author was Vauer V-A-U-R. We showed that in a model of central brain injury that's caused by high dose NMDA, so excitotoxic brain injury, that nicotinamide riboside was more effective than NAD. So NAD worked at something, I don't know, it was 15 times higher concentration than nicotinamide riboside at reducing the size of this brain lesion. The reason that it took so much NAD is exactly as you suggested, Ken, that the NAD has to be degraded back to NR in order to go into these cells and to restore the NAD and restore brain function. We think that it's entirely possible that there will be a better way to formulate and or deliver nicotinamide riboside, but I don't think it's going to be NAD itself. When we eat food, if you eat whole food with a small W and a small F, I'm not making a store endorsement, but when you eat cellular stuff, you're getting lots of NAD. You're getting lots of NAD, NADH, NADPH, and to a lesser degree NADP. So our bodies have the ability to digest NAD coenzymes down to the vitamins and then our cells take up those vitamins. Now the reason that we don't just go out and eat more NAD or eat more food is that over nutrition itself attacks the NAD system in our liver as we've shown from work with mice. And in addition, because we can't control our microbiome, we can't control the digestive path that the NAD will take. So we don't know how much of the NAD that we eat is going to be available as NR, available as nicotinamide, or available as nicotinic acid. In terms of NMN, that's just on the root from NAD being degraded down to something without a phosphate and that just doesn't get taken up on its own. So earlier we discussed increased production of NAD through supplementation with the precursor specifically NR. Another way to skin the cat might be any despairing through the ketone metabolism. Many of our listeners consume various versions of the ketogenic diet or intermittent fasting or a time restricted eating in which they find themselves in a ketogenic state. In a recent 2018 paper, it was reported that ketones can increase the redox NAD plus NADH ratio in the brain of healthy adults. And so I wondered if some of the beneficial effect that one sees in time restricted eating or ketogenic diets might really be down to NAD. In other words, I wonder if the increased NAD as a result of the ketoletic metabolism might be one of the primary mechanisms behind the beneficial effects of these diets in a variety of brain disorders and in promoting health and longevity. Have you given that any thought? I've given it a little bit of thought and we've done some assays in that space. I don't think that NAD is going to be the whole story in the ketogenic diet, but for sure, when you change the fuel source from a balanced diet to a very high fat low carbohydrate diet, you are for sure changing patterns of NAD reduction in oxidation and there may be something to that. We also think that there's a relationship between time restricted feeding and NAD cycles between liver, hyperacetulation and overnutrition and so forth. That's definitely an area of further research. That was certainly an interesting paper and I think it can't explain all the effects that you see from the diet or other means of attaining the ketogenic state, but it might be that NAD is playing an important role in there. So recently, the University of Colorado announced the results of a human trial that found anniogen increase NAD plus by 60% in healthy middle-aged and older adults after just six weeks. Can you give us an overview of that human trial? Right. So this was a trial that was done at University of Colorado and they were healthy older adults. The first thing that they wanted to assess was safety, right? So they were giving, I think it was a gram of nicotinamide rybicide per day to older men and women. These people were lean and good health and one of the unexpected but delightful outcomes was that nearly half of the participants had moderately elevated blood pressure. In the group that had moderately elevated blood pressure, who is a strong tendency of taking NR to lower their blood pressure and to improve their vascular function as measured by arterial stiffness. So this was the first indication, not only of the safety of chronic use of nicotinamide rybicide, but the potential efficacy in improving human cardiovascular health. So there's larger trials that have been designed and that are being conducted right now. So is it possible that taking high doses of a B3 could deplete methyl groups? It's something that you can draw on an envelope, right? So you can say, let's see, you put in more nicotinamide, nicotinic acid or nicotinamide rybicide. You're going to boost NAD and in the course of all of NAD metabolism, there's going to be a methyl group added to nicotinamide and we've shown that people excrete in our urine, methyl nicotinamide and related metabolites. There's been some questions about that. We've already looked at that as a function of dose of nicotinamide rybicide and at 100 milligrams, 300 milligrams, and at a gram a day, we've not seen any depression in one carbon metabolism and methyl group metabolism. So if there were a depletion of methyl groups, then you would see elevated homocysteine and depressed acid density or methionine. And we've looked for that and we've not seen it. So that paper is written and is going into peer review. Speaking of dosing, we earlier discussed the possible increased efficacy of twice a day dosing once in the morning and once right before bed, perhaps. What is the current evidence show as an optimal if there is such a dose in humans? Is it 500 milligrams twice a day? What does it look like from your standpoint? Well, one of the differences between me and some of the other people in the field is, I'm not going to tell you what I take. I'm not going to tell you what my dad is taking. I'm not going to try to not dwell on anecdotal data. The recommended dose that is on a bottle of true niogen is 300 milligrams per day. We initially had a product in which the recommended daily serving was two 125 milligram capsules, but we found that since we've published clinical experiments at 100, 300 milligrams and one gram that it made more sense for us to seek regulatory approval to go ahead and recommend 300 milligrams. Now, there's certainly people that take more and we always tell people that if you have a disease or condition, you should ask your doctor. You're getting out a little bit ahead of your skis if you're self-medicating for sciatica or chemotherapy or something like that. anecdotally, there certainly are people that report benefits in general, people that are looking for what would be termed therapeutic benefits are dosing either on the basis of their own experience or in consultation with their physician at something on the order of a gram per day, maybe 450 or 600 milligrams in the morning and maybe 300 to 600 milligrams in the evening. This is really something that people should try to work out on their own and in consultation with a physician. As it says in the bottle, it's not intended to treat, diagnose, or prevent a disease or condition. We've tested it for safety and it's been tested to safety up to two grams per day and we feel good about the fact that it does have a new dietary ingredient notification, actually two such notifications from the US FDA and it has generally regarded as safe designation from the US FDA. There is no other nicotinamide ribosy that carries those designations. It means that the FDA would receive reports of adverse events, we don't know of adverse events. They haven't come up in our clinical trials and the FDA draws for this product are very, very clean. We feel good about that but I'm not going to make a specific recommendation that would be optimal for one particular person, people come in different sizes and have different different needs. The research reported in 2017 coming from Joshua Rebenoitz's lab at Princeton Challenge Long Hill View that the mitochondrial intermembrane is impermeable to pyrodene nucleotides and suggested the existence of an unrecognized mammalian NAD or NADH transporter. So do you think there is a NAD or NADH transporter in humans? Yeah, I think that it's pretty convincing at this point that there are two or three lines of reasoning that indicate the NAD that is made in what I call the nucleosidoplasm, the nucleosidoplasm becomes available to the mitochondrial compartment through a specific transporter. We know of two or three groups that are looking for that transporter. I'm going to go out in a limb and predict that someone is going to present that molecule by the time of the summer NAD conference in Dublin, Ireland this year. I think that that is going to be discovered. That would be interesting. The 2018 loop paper in cell metabolism, also from Rebenoitz's lab, seems to show that in mice, oral NR is only converted to NAD by the liver with no other tissues seen enough NR or presumably NMN to reach adequate cytosolic levels. Thus, unless increasing hepatic NAD provides benefit, this study would lead one to believe that oral ingestion of NR is of little value. And the study is widely interpreted this way. I imagine that you may have some thoughts on this study that you could share with us. So it essentially can't be true in the sense that there are three different studies that have shown that oral nicotinamide riboside acts in tissues outside of the liver, so extra hepatic tissues. So I think I've told you about two of them already. One is in heart failure. So we have a heart failure model in which the ability of the failing heart to convert nicotinamide to NAD is going down and the ability of the failing heart to convert NR to NAD is going up because there's a bioenergetic crisis in the heart and it costs less ATP to use NR as a precursor. We showed in that paper, it's by DGAY, DIGUT, et al, in circulation, that's the name of the journal circulation, that nicotinamide does not restore cardiac NAD and that nicotinamide riboside does restore cardiac NAD. So if all of the NR was being taken up by the liver and the liver was redistributing nicotinamide, then nicotinamide and NR would be the same in that model and they're not. And our works in nicotinamide doesn't. Similarly, there was a paper from the Bauer group in Philadelphia and incidentally Bauer was a co-author with Rebenowitz that showed that they knocked out skeletal muscle nicotinamide salvage and oral nicotinamide riboside rescued the skeletal muscle deficiency in NAD. So once again, if you knock out the ability of skeletal muscle to use nicotinamide and nicotinamide can't get past the liver, then neither nicotinamide nor NR should rescue that mouse, but in fact nicotinamide riboside rescues that mouse. And then third, there are a number of experiments that show that there are tissues like a failing nerve in which the nicotinamide riboside kinase pathway is induced. So there's a damage nerve induces the NRK1 gene and or the NRK2 gene. In this Bauer et al paper, we showed that in a damage nerve NRK1 and NRK2 are transcriptionally induced. These genes wouldn't be coming up unless there's ability of nicotinamide riboside to be available to the brain and to damage nerves. So one of the problems with nicotinamide riboside is that we can't extract it efficiently from blood. When we draw blood, there's a cellular enzyme that spills out that degrades the NR. There's additional problems with extracting and quantifying NR. We can extract NAD and NADP perfectly well from blood, but it's very hard to account for the NR. So we think that there are technical issues with the Liu and Rebenowitz paper as elegant as it was and that it's not arguable that all of the NR is taken up by the liver because there are so many systems that show effects of NR that are beyond the liver. In terms of additional human trials, can you share with us what you're working on in the time frame for when you think we might see some results from those trials? Okay, so let's start with, there's one that we have in peer review right now that looked at the ability of nicotinamide riboside to be available to people's muscle and we also found really, I think, pretty exciting useful biomarker of elevating people's NAD with oral nicotinamide riboside. So that should be coming out fairly soon. My colleague here at the University of Iowa, Dr. Donna Hammond has a National Cancer Institute, clinical trial on using NR. This is a small scale study, but to use NR to see if she can keep women on treatment who are being treated for metastatic breast cancer with cancer chemotherapy drugs that make people suffer from neuropathy. That's going to be something that I think launches in 2019. He's got an IND application that has been approved that allows her to start that. There is a mild cognitive impairment study that is being done in San Antonio at the Claude Pepper Center there. I know that it's been accruing patients for some time now. There's lots of studies I think that there's more than two dozen that have been registered around the world. So every year there should be more clinical data on nicotinamide riboside. We always look at safety first and we look at measures of efficacy second. The important thing is that people design the trials in a thoughtful way. If you're looking at human obesity, you can't treat a human being as an oversized mouse. Get obesity and type 2 diabetes in a couple of months. Humans get obesity and type 2 diabetes over the course of decades. You have to design the trial to have a long enough period in which you can observe things and you need to know what are the driver biomarkers and what are the passenger driver markers. What's the thing that you're affecting first? If you guess wrong, someone in Denmark guessed that nicotinamide riboside was going to be rapidly insulin sensitizing in human beings or rapidly causing weight loss in human beings and you randomize on the basis of weight loss or insulin sensitizing, then you may not be able to detect a really meaningful effect on fatty liver. So the Danish study clearly looked like it was moving the needle on fatty liver. We didn't have the men randomized for fatty liver and so we were not able to get to P.0.5 with that study. We think that the studies are getting wiser and there's a lot of investment that is being made in testing the efficacy of nicotinamide riboside. We think that in 2019 and 2020, you're going to see some important clinical studies published. We're really excited about following the studies and the results of those studies. So you certainly, after all of that, have a lot on your plate right now and I guess it's a good thing that back in college, you fell in love with the lab because to this day, it sounds like you still love the lab but also spend a lot of your time there. But I also understand that you're a fitness enthusiast. If there's anything that can drag you out of the lab, it's the opportunity to do some high intensity interval training. Is that right? And second question on this is, if so, what does your training regimen look like? See there you go trying to get me to make health organizations for other people. Well, exercise is so important. Eating, eating, right? People ask me of a healthy aging all the time as though I would have different advice than what your mom or grandmother would give you. So the first thing is to try to eat well and sleep well and get enough physical activity. When I turned 45, I stopped using the elevator unless I really can't find it or I'm terribly late for a meeting. I try to use the stairs. But high intensity exercise is great. So I'm in a group fitness class where, you know, over the course of an hour, I'm on a rowing machine, a treadmill, and using some free weights. I really like being in a group class because I feel like I get pushed harder in the group class than I would necessarily work out on my own. Over the course of the past few years, I've also tried a bunch of other things like Vinyasa, you know, yoga and I like skiing and cycling. I'm a terrible swimmer, so I don't see myself doing a triathlon anytime soon. But I just enjoy working out hard and I enjoy dance and music and trying to stay positive. So those are some of the keys that I have to living better and trying to be productive and happy in my life. Well, fantastic. Charles, thank you so much for joining us today. We've had a great discussion and really have enjoyed having you on the podcast. My pleasure. Yes, it was great, Charles. And thank you for me too. Stim talk. Stim talk. Stim talk. Stim talk. Stim talk. Well, I can certainly understand why Charles became so fascinated with his research into NAD and NR. There's so many potential human uses of nicotinamide riboside. There does indeed seem to be a lot of promise, but of course, a lot more research needs to be done. Charles mentioned in the interview will be fascinating to see the results of the upcoming and current human trials not yet published. Yes, and I absolutely look forward to seeing the results of those trials too. If you enjoyed this interview as much as we did, we invite you to visit the Stim talk web page where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes. Stim talk.us. This is Don Coneg, signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stim talk. Thank you for listening to Stim talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others, so please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, Stim talk.us. There, you can also find more information about the guests we interview.
