 Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host Don Conegas, and joining me to introduce today's podcast is Man Behind the Curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, HMC's director, and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that selects all the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Hello, Don. Great to be here. So today we have a great conversation with Dave Feldman, and Dave is the founder of the Citizen Science Foundation, which is a nonprofit established to support projects and research that promote collaborative efforts across the spectrum of disciplines, both inside and also outside formal scientific institutions. Dave has a background in software engineering, but his journey studying the effects of nutrition on his own metabolic well-being and let him to a world of self-experimentation and a passion for communicating science. Before we get to our interview with Dave, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the widiest and most lavishly praised field reviews to read on Stem Talk. If you hear your review read on Stem Talk, just contact us at Stem Talk at ihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk t-shirt. Today, our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker, Splash888, and the review is titled, Newest Superfan. The review reads, I am so excited to finally have discovered this incredible podcast. I love learning about cutting-edge science. As an emergency room doc, I most often listen to field-specific podcasts. Broadening my awareness of research across other fields through this show is so enjoyable, especially learning the fascinating biographies of the researchers. As a mother of older, school-aged kids, I am always telling my kids that most people follow a non-linear path to their careers, so keep an open mind about career options. I love the skillful way Don interviews these amazing scientists to describe the unique path that brought them to the interesting areas of work. Keep up the good work. I am binge listening to catch up. Well, thank you so much Splash888 and thanks to all of our other Stem Talk listeners who helped them talk become such a great success. Okay, and now I'm to today's interview with Dave Feldman. Stem Talk, Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Hi, welcome to Stem Talk. I'm your host Don Crenegus, and joining us today is Dave Feldman. Dave, welcome to the podcast. Thank you for having me. And also joining us is Ken Ford. Hello, Don and hello, Dave. So Dave, let's start by learning a little bit more about how a software engineer with a background in game design came to be so and meshed in the science and pathology of Libba proteins. So we're going to start at the beginning. What kind of kid were you? I was definitely a very nerdy kid. I love to play with Legos. I love to once I got my first computer, which was a Commodore 64. I love to code on it. I like to build things, but like many engineers, we're sort of known more for taking things apart. So I enjoyed getting on the inside of things that looked simple externally, like a clock, and then sure enough, you get underneath it. And on the inside, there's all these gears and wires and other things that could be involved in that that was always very interesting to me. So you've shared with us that your parents were, and I'm quoting this happily divorced when you were five and that you grew up splitting your time between Denver and Wichita. So what were the best parts of your childhood? Well, actually, I would say that I enjoyed connecting with others, as you mentioned, because I was kind of coming back and forth between two households in two different states that taught me the importance of playing well with other kids, because I might only be seeing them for a portion of my time. Building relationships was, I think, very instructive in helping me to understand the importance of collaboration and getting projects going that also could be started and then also stopped at a later point as well. I understand that you've described your parents that you just mentioned both as graphic artists and a bit of Bohemian sort of hippie spirit types. What did you learn from them that ended up fueling your interest in science or other interests? Yeah, that's part of what's ironic is that I would say from both of them, I learned the importance of kindness. I think that how you treat others will pay big dividends for how you will be treated and kind. But I'll concede they probably weren't as much into science as I would ultimately become. One of the things about understanding engineering, especially at a physical level, is getting a sense of how science can explain physics, for example. You're getting back to the clock, you care about things such as friction. But at the same time, I appreciated their approach to finding out things that are in the unknown and better understanding how to pursue that and keeping that wonderment alive, that sort of curiosity. One thing that I've loved about both my parents is that they've always been curious spirits. I think that's wonderful for a child to have parents that are inquisitive and curious and it typically transfers to the child as well. Earlier you mentioned that you took great comfort in taking things apart and that seems to be a common theme actually among some of our guests. I mentioned the cherished, you called it a cherished Commodore 64. I remember my first computer outside of the military was a very early Apple II. Before they came assembled, I don't think it was called Apple II then, but it was like a motherboard and you bought parts. So I understand the excitement of those days, loading the game programs from a cassette tape. I don't know if yours work that way. There weren't disc drives yet. The floppy drives weren't around yet for personal construction. No, I was doing exactly the same thing. That was just the one way in which you could record and keep data for later. There was an adapter that I would buy which you could adapt and just a normal commercial cassette tape player. It was exciting to me that this was even a thing that I could repurpose what was normally recording voice for recording data and stuff. I had to understand how this magnetic tape could contain these ones and zeros that would become so important for me to retrieve later. Once the floppy disk drive came, I was in heaven because I thought, wow, this has got so much more data that I can now store and retrieve. Yeah, same experience here. It's sort of marvel of it all. Do you remember the sound the cassette tape made? It made this weird sort of data sound when you actually listen to it in an audio frequency. It was unintelligible, of course, but it had this strange sound. By those were very exciting days for computers and somehow these little pathetic computers, I think line was 48k boosted to 64k with an extra board. Seemed so exciting compared to the big mainframes that I was dealing with and the computers in the military. These seemed to have so much promise and so exciting. It really was an exciting time in that the concept of personal computing seemed so foreign at first to everyone. All of a sudden it was, wow, we could have the power of what these companies that were usually paying the money to do for us right here at home. Something like word processing, which we take so for granted now, just being able to type something that then is stored in some electronic fashion that you could then distribute in some electronic fashion was revolutionary in the 80s to be done at home. And it's kind of neat to just reflect back on not only that time then, but just how fast technology has moved in such a short span of time for all of us in our lifetimes. Right. The first word process I remember where uppercase only on my machine and you had to get different hardware to get the lowercase detenders, you know, the lower pieces of the letters. It was an interesting time. So Dave, your early interest in computers also came about in a time that predated the internet. So what did you learn in those early days? And I'm just going to sing things like learning to write code and building games and exploring bulletin board systems. Is that right? That's right. So you would go and meet other likewise computer geeks often. There would be what you might call back then meetups, but they were like regular weekly sessions. And I'd start hearing about this BBS that was everyone was getting excited about bulletin board systems. And you really could say this was the precursor to the internet. What you would do is you would get a modem on your own home computer that would call via phone. Another computer that was stationed at somebody's house and they would have their computer set up so that it would be waiting for phone calls. And then they had a modem on their end. And once the call was connected and it's the same sound you probably used to from AOL back in the days. And then suddenly you were connected to that computer and you could access things on that computer. But usually with some kind of program that was set up to handle that. And that was a bulletin board. And the bulletin board system was the software that we were all connecting with. And then we could like write a message and then post it knowing that other people who are going to call in later would see what we posted. And those were the earliest versions of chatting. And it was electric. We were all excited except the problem was it could only take one call at a time. So we would regularly be checking to see if the line was open so that we could log in. And then in order to manage it, you would only get a certain amount of minutes that you could be on any given bulletin board system for your account per day. That that's that was the very earliest stages I would argue this precursor to the internet. And as you mentioned, this is all back in the early 1980s and you said you didn't have ready access to computer science curriculum until high school. And of course high school computer science courses typically contain almost nothing that a computer scientist would recognize as actual computer science. So it's a good thing then that you like self directed learning. It would seem I'm guessing. So how did you engage your interest in programming? Well, that's where it gets fascinating. I didn't really take a lot of computer science courses either in high school or in college because I actually enjoyed the self directed learning more. I wasn't good about structured learning. I like to like many engineers. I'm a kinesthetic learner, which is I learn a lot more by doing. And I kind of want to go at my own pace. And while that's very commonplace now, there's a lot of internet courses and so forth where you can kind of set your own pace and learn at your own speed. This was not how things were done back then. So it was great to be able to get a book and then actually be able to acquire the software or other tools myself and learn on my own. And that's pretty much what I had been doing since the first time I had a hold of a computer. I liked to trial and error my way through many different things. And that was something that's been a constant throughout my life. There are many different things throughout both my childhood and into young adulthood that I dabbled and was interested in trying out thinking, hey, this, you know, this coding, this engineering thing is sort of fun. But maybe that's not really going to be my career. And it wasn't really until the dot com boom that I realized that probably was the direction I needed to go. It would seem that your interest in self-directed learning that we've been discussing in addition to helping you learn about computers and particularly about programming also is really enabled your current interests in your current work just as well. We'll return to that shortly in our discussion, but it seems that that same style of learning, as you mentioned, has been sort of a theme for you throughout throughout your life. Absolutely. And I, I have to say it is a skill like so many other skills you get used to working on your own toward goals that interest you recognizing what limitations come with that. When you don't have somebody there that's, for example, filling in a lot of gaps of the foundation that would typically come with structured learning, then that can be a con, but it can also be a pro. There's downsides obviously in that you might have holes in your knowledge from what might be more typical of the introductory direction, but by the same token, and this kind of gets down to some foundations of science, but the same token, you might also get biased by a number of existing assumptions that come from the beginning of the day. That's that come with structured learning. And so there's something kind of nice about coming from the outside and not having a lot of these preconceived notions such that you have a little bit of fresh eyes on the use of your approaching. I think that's true and you picked early in your life, one of the ideal things to learn that way, which is programming, maybe not computer science in an academic discipline, but programming is an ideal thing for the person with the right attitude and the right outlook for self-direct learning because every program you write is an experiment in a sense. And you get feedback quickly on your experiment. So I think that kind of topic really was an ideal first go around for you and learning something on your own, and then you applied that same sort of attitude and spirit to other things. Absolutely. So Dave, speaking of skills development and kind of thinking about things outside the box in terms of hobbies, you mentioned that you were a bit of a runner and that you also enjoyed forensics. And when we say forensics, this is a kind of competitive storytelling, not the criminal science version that might first come to mind. Can you tell us a little bit more about that? Yes. So first on the running front, that was a bit later in life and was with the influence of my now wife. She had kind of gotten me into running. I am by no means very competitive on that front. We'll have to come back to that later. Definitely during high school and college, I enjoyed what is typically called forensics there. Now normally when you hear forensics, you think of CSI, forensic pathology. And that's not what this is. Forensics is kind of if you don't know it, it's an interesting competitive storytelling and or competitive debate. But it's what a lot of us in school were coming together for and within visit other schools. And so for example, you might have, let's say, a 10 minute comedy that's like a one man show. You actually get a piece of material. It has to be published material, maybe from a play, something like that. And like a one man act playing multiple parts, you are then playing the different parts. You have 10 minutes to do it in a judge is taking down notes that they're going to give you later in your up against say four or five other competitors in the same. I forgot what they were called at that time session or something like that. And you do this for several different rounds. And then you might break into finals. If you had the highest judging scores of those of your competitors, and then eventually you might win awards. Great in many respects because it taught me some degree of discipline. It also sort of rewarded that self directed learning because we're not all doing the same thing. In fact, your selection process of what you chose to read and perform was a lot more up to you, which was great. But then there's the other component, which is in that same forensics discipline is debate. And forensic debate is very popular in both high school and in college. And does teach you to interact it. You have to collaborate with your debate partner, but also you have to be good about making a case and defending your case. And this, you know, really drew forward the importance of critical thinking. So I learned quite a lot from forensic debate. You really appreciated what it brought to me. I can see that would be very helpful throughout your life. And even dealing with technical subjects and colleagues in teammates working on a on a project. The ability to express your ideas clearly and in the structure of an argument as opposed to in the structure of just assertions is frustrating when your colleagues on the team, you know, passionately make assertions, but there's not an argument. You know, there's just an assertion. And so I think that must have been helpful to you. It absolutely is crucial to anticipate rebuttals. If I'm going to make an assertion, just like you said, if I'm going to make a claim, the sky is orange. I should already be anticipating what the push back is going to be. If I can go out and double check my own work. Oh, actually, the sky is not orange. And I anticipate people are going to be pushing back on it may seem self evident to some degree. But I believe any good scientist for that matter should anticipate what they're they should be the best critic of their own work. They should know what the best arguments are against what they're wanting to assert because they've built that muscle in their mind of thinking critically about their own work most of all. Right. And you have to do that when you're constantly facing debate when you have to hold up a proposition and do your best to defend that proposition, knowing full well, we argue against it. Because in a way, you already are doing it yourself. You already are your opponent inside your mind. And that allows you to better structure and understand and present your ideas. Right. Right. I think that's just as important as being ready to deflect a rebuttal is to be able to express your ideas in a form that rises to the level of an argument as opposed to just a bare face to certain. So Dave, you initially attended film school at Colorado University at Red Rocks carrying on a passion in your family of movies. However, I understand that your side hustle during contract software work at night sort of overtook your original plan to graduate and move on to the movie business. Is that right? Yes. So it was the joint CEO Red Rocks film program. It was a great program. I loved it. It was a fascinating contrast though because while I was interested in possibly pursuing this, not many people know this about me that there was this phase where I was interested in becoming a writer director. I'm taking these classes and there's all these starving artists on top of instructors that many of which had gone to Hollywood or some other place where they were trying to shoot film. It didn't work out for them and they had come back and said, well, this is one thing I can do is I can at least teach you all about it. But just so you know, it's very difficult to very difficult business to be in contrast that within the evenings. I had so much development work. I not only could write code as I was mentioning from earlier, but I had gotten into a lot of the what at the time was big, which was multimedia. There was director. I think it was macro media director at the time and flash flash was kind of coming up big, but also lots of other tools that worked with video. It was again all of these things we take for granted now, but just being able to make something that's interactive where you could feel like you were immersed into a program where you're clicking one thing or another and lots of interaction takes place around it. That skill was very valuable and it was paying me really well such that it became harder and harder to justify trying to work my way through film school. And instead maybe I should stick to this software development because it just seems to keep paying such large dividends for the time I'm putting in. So this takes us to 2008 and this is when you moved to Las Vegas to work in what was the lucrative gaming platform business. So while it was financially rewarding to help create platforms that allowed people to and this is just an example played blackjack on their phones and chat with other players while doing so you said that that wasn't really personally fulfilling, but what did you learn from that period? It's fascinating because when you usually say game designer people think of a video game they may play on PlayStation 3, but gaming as they often call it here in Las Vegas is the software platforms they're doing exactly what you describe where you could play possibly for money or maybe it's social gambling where there's actually some social component to it. But yeah, the non fulfilling aspect of it was I just wasn't really that much into the subject matter. I'm not as much into slots or playing blackjack on my own time and it also didn't feel as productive it didn't feel like I was really contributing in a strong way to the needs of society not that I think that was a necessity just that there wasn't a lot more I could do so whenever I want to do something charitable I would say right a check. But all of that said I made many great engineering friends here and I did feel like it was an exciting time because from a business not your entrepreneurial standpoint I was enjoying a lot of success things were moving up pretty quickly and it put me in a good position for what comes later. Speaking of what comes later we now move from 2008 to 2015 when you receive what you describe as the piece of paper that changed my life what can you tell us about this piece of paper the sounds intriguing. Yes, so a little bit of setup for two years in a row 2014 and 2015 I had gotten blood work that had something concerning me the marker called hemoglobin A1C is well known for seeing if you are diabetic and it had come in at 6.1 in 2014 and my doctor alerted me he said you know this actually suggest you're predisposed. I was a diabetic and that I recognize the word diabetic because it's quite rampant in my family so you know what I think it's just because I've been eating a lot of junk food pushing this deadline around development I'm sure that's what it is the year later 2015 I was stunned it came back at 6.1 again because I thought that I cleaned up my diet I thought that I fixed what I did from the year before so the fact that it came back 6.1 I got very concerned I said I'm going to get a lot of work done. I started to do research and I came across what's called what at that time was called low carb high fat LC HF keto wasn't that big of a thing but it was pretty close to keto anyway. So I thought I'll try this for a little while and so I went low carb high fat and I was stunned at how good I was feeling and felt very confident that I was addressing the diabetes because my carbohydrates were going down diabetes is this is a bit simplistic but basically it's a disease of dysregulation of glucose metabolism and at least in the case of type 2 diabetes and so by just having less glucose I felt confident and I would later be proven right that my A1C would be coming down. Okay while I'm feeling great both my dad and my sister they're getting inspired inspired by what is my success story so far and pretty shortly after I start they start and 6 months later they get their blood work back and they're looking good across the board they're agreeing that this was just a great move for us and our family. I get my blood work after them and that's when I get that sheet of paper the sheet of paper contained all of my blood work which I was excited to see because I knew it was going to look great and then I see my cholesterol levels my total total and LDL cholesterol had almost doubled little more than double I believe I average an LDL cholesterol of around 120 to 130 which if you know anything about it this LDL cholesterol which is sometimes called the fat cholesterol it's supposed to be under 100 that's the recommended level and so my doctor would occasionally nudge me on the 120 to 130 that it be he'd prefer if it were a little bit lower but it had now jumped to around 240 and that just made my heart sank at that point it was very intense for me because I couldn't understand why why would my two first degree relatives not see their cholesterol jump up as much as I did why was either one seeing this massive rise and that's a day I'll never forget is it was November 27th 2015 and I decided I would go ahead and get a second test because maybe it was just a laver maybe there was just some something that happened with the sample so I ended up getting my second test about two weeks later in December 9th but between November 27th and December 9th I become obsessed I can't focus on code anymore I can't focus on hardly anything I have to understand how this is possible and so I start reading from scratch everything I can around lipidology the study of lipids basically it's the science around cholesterol and this weird thing happens where I'm both very depressed you know almost as if somebody had died like I'm just I'm just stricken with fear while simultaneously massively curious because the more I'm learning about this system in our bodies that moves around cholesterol the more it looks like a network the kinds of networks that I've worked on my whole life in engineering a lot of the principles I was just talking about with bulletin board systems that would ultimately apply to the internet the internet likewise has a massive array of objects interacting with each other that is the system that has cholesterol ride sharing alongside it so these two weeks I'm actually losing weight because I'm just eating less I'm afraid of the amount of saturated fat I can say I'm not going to let go of the amount of fat I'm going to do that I'm not going to get saturated fat I'm consuming or at least fat overall is going to increase my cholesterol so I just I get to where I'm almost food phobic and I'm eating probably about half what I normally do and I lose a lot of weight and I'm thinking to myself you know what this next test this next test will be a great test because if it really is all about this consumption of fat particularly saturated fat I know that I'm eating so much less and if that's true then my cholesterol should at a minimum stay the same but probably drop I finally get that test and no it had gone up it had gone up another hundred milligrams per desk liter my LDL was now I want to say 330 340 and my total cholesterol was 425 and this may shock you but I may be the only person ever to have experienced some of my weight loss I've experienced some amount of relief in seeing that new lap the reason is because right in that moment I knew that there was more to the story I knew that it's not that simple that it's simply the saturated fat that was driving up my LDL levels there had to have been something metabolic that was changing around these lipid levels and that's the true launching point was that December 9 test and I was just saying did you check LDL P or APO B at the same time at that at that time I did that was the first point in which I started to get what's known as an NMR or nuclear magnetic resonance test for your listeners that's a test that does go a bit further than a standard lipid panel which is what I was getting what probably most of your listeners are getting the NMR actually breaks out these different particle numbers so LDL P which is what you mentioned is the vehicle for which LDL C which is the cholesterol is found inside of so LDL particle count is considered by many lipidologists to be a much better marker for cardiovascular disease risk than LDL cholesterol because you can have a low level of LDL cholesterol yet have a high level of LDL particle count so that's a low amount of cargo of the cholesterol high amount of LDL particles naturally I'm hoping that my LDL particle count is lower but it wasn't my LDL P is likewise much much higher and my APO B which is the major protein that's on top of that particle which we make it into that also was a lot higher. So just to further give reference I'm now talking about my having lipid levels that are in the top 1% of the population so understandably this would be very concerning to any clinician especially a lipidologist. Yes for sure and there are a group of people that under the same circumstances as you described their LDL C unlike you doesn't really rock it up but their LDL P does and that's why I asked I know you know I know several people you would know their names you know their LDL C didn't experience which you experienced but when they were really seriously doing a ketogenic diet their LDL P doubled and sort of got their attention. Yes and to be sure I want to qualify that while we may be talking about the mechanism I am positing for why I think this happens I always try to take a moment to disclaim that we're still in the area of theory. For sure. So as I would always say continue to work with your doctor much of what I may be describing might give some comfort that this may not be as concerning but still a developing hypothesis. Absolutely. If you don't mind I'll go ahead and posit what I think is going on I believe and this is what was kind of I guess you could say taught to me through my series of experiments that would follow is I would after this is a lot of things that I would say. I would after that December 9th and for the next two three years especially I would continually take my blood and track methodically all the food I was consuming and I noticed first things first that there was a pattern similar to what I just described to you the less I consumed the higher my cholesterol levels went the more I consumed even in this ketogenic diet context the lower my cholesterol went and I found that to be very curious. And over time I started to think will actually maybe this is reflecting how much of the lipids are liberated the lipids being the fat that I'm now powered by is not being powered by carbohydrates and maybe that's what also explains why the LDL cholesterol seems to go up and down with it so this was the beginnings of what I now term the lipid energy model. And so if I'm going to summarize it here's what I think is happening I think for folks like me and not for my dad and my sister I'm a bit leaner and a bit more metabolically healthy they would concede this by the way I've gotten their permission to admit this leaner more metabolically healthy people just simply we're not taking on a ketogenic diet or even an act and diet until it became popular before it was folks who were a lot more say obese and overweight who would just try anything. And therefore my try actins so some of those folks they might see their LDL cholesterol hardly move maybe go up a little bit but oftentimes it would drop especially if they were very overweight only recently would there be folks like me who would actually try intentionally to be on a very low car ketogenic diet and so in being powered by fat the stored levels of glucose in my body that came from carbohydrates would get low enough that my body would then want to be powered more by fat and that includes fat in my own fat cells. And so as that fat would get liberated it would need to get trafficked more so not only are the tissues around my body making use of it more because they're being powered by that but I would need to also package them in my liver and deliver packages them into something called a V LDL V LDL is the precursor to LDL. A V LDL is bloated with the fat that fat in the form of stored stored fat is known as triglycerides and then that would get trafficked around in the body to both replete my fat cells again because they're turning over fat at a faster rate and to also power my other tissues my oxidative tissues. And so in short I posit with this model that we need to use more of these vehicles that includes V LDL which are turning into LDL at a faster rate and thereby leaving more LDL around that can be detected in the blood work. That's what I think is happening and as of now while I may be jumping a bit ahead in the story we now have a lot of published papers around it and we're doing more formal science to elucidate this. Let's talk about one of those papers. You have the concept described in the paper in other places of a lean mass hyper responder. In some ways I don't like that term maybe you'll think of a better one but it's something that appears in particular in a paper that you are part of in January 2022 and was published in current developments in nutrition and the paper was titled elevated LDL cholesterol with a carbohydrate restricted diet evidence for lean mass hyper responder phenotype. So just to clear up the meaning of a lean mass hyper responder would you tell us what that is and what are the qualifications to fall into that category. Yes and that's why it's glad I'm glad we set this up with that model that I just described how did this all come together to where we would identify this very wordy name which by the way I agree it's not the best name but I think we're kind of married to it now because it's now quite commonplace in the community. So this is what happened I'm going to go back to 2017 this is now two years since that faithful piece of paper and these experiments I kept putting out I kept blogging I kept presenting on it and more and more my my blog cholesterol code dot com became kind of a central hub for everyone who is interested in this and so they kept sharing their data over social media with me and I kept seeing over and over again this triad as in these three markers so not just the high LDL cholesterol but a corresponding high HDL cholesterol the so called good cholesterol and low triglycerides these three together were very prominent with me versus my other family members and I would see them haven't even greater prominence be even more extreme especially on the LDL and the HDL with some who were much leaner than I was and oftentimes this is what I was going to do. Sometimes this counted for even more if they were very athletic such as if they were runners or cyclists something along those lines and that's part of what further helped me understand this model because if you have less fat mass then actually you have to traffic it more frequently that's the hypothesis that there's a reason for more global redistribution and repulsion of these fat cells. And so this became exciting because this phenotype of responders seem to cross all of these different ethnicities all these different ages across the sexes it was shocking how ubiquitous this was and how commonplace it was once you hit this level of very tight carbohydrate restriction on top of being very lean and seemingly metabolically healthy and again if you throw in some fitness that exasperates it further but the term hyper responder was a bit too. It's a bit vague because it kind of meant anybody who sees any increase in LDL so I kind of co-opted that term and added lean mass hyper responder so we sometimes shorten it to just LMHR and when I wrote this article in 2017 I honestly didn't know truly how common it really would be and as of today it's still the most common to an on article because it was an explosion it was like I could really feel it within a couple of weeks just how. Much this landed because I had no idea there there might have been a bunch of people who are much more say overweight would say no no I have those cup points I have that triad. Very very high LDL and high HDL and low triglycerides it's a let me tell you what that cup point is for anybody listening it's no deal cholesterol of 200 milligrams per desk leader higher and HDL cholesterol of 80 milligrams per desk leader higher and triglycerides of 70 milligrams per desk leader or lower and just so you know. Those three in isolation are already very rare on their own so it'd be very rare to find anybody with an LDL standing LDL that's above 200 or an HDL above 80 for example so those three together and the fact that so many people were coming forward to report that they had that triad was very cathartic it was it was an extremely impactful experience for me. One footnote I'll throw in though that became very relevant to me in my life later was I was just following it to its logical conclusion I kept thinking you know how this relates back to the energy model I just described and I'm writing this at the time in this article I think this might actually end up applying to children like we don't see a lot of blood work from children because they're not normally getting cholesterol tests but it would make sense it would make sense that they would be more often metabolically healthy and of course many of them would be lean and that became a big deal because I then started getting some parents that were writing and who had children who had reason to get blood work such as epileptics or those with severe type 1 diabetes and also wanting to adopt a ketogenic diet and sure enough they too were exhibiting this lean mass hyperresponder phenotype and that became a driver for me wanting to get the risk data. One of the things I don't like about that label though I can live with it is you know you have the triad that you described and it's a clear you know it's a clear thing it's something that can be measured and you have clear points where it comes into effect you said hdl a year higher like that right but the lean mass part I'm not sure what lean this means when you read these papers it's based on BMI and you can have a very low BMI and be skinny fat most endurance athletes might fall into that category or many do I'd say and you could be very muscular and going to BMI B borderline obese or actually obese and I was thinking that maybe is it the thinness of the person you're after because that's what BMI is really measuring or is it the body composition and I think either it's fine with me but I think it would be good if it was more clear which of those you know with a dexas can you could measure body composition but it might not be what you want it might actually be like you mentioned children might actually be the their thinness or their shape of their body but have you thought about looking at this and see if it holds up under dexa because dexa would allow you to also learn a lot more about the fat composition where it's located and I think it might be useful. Oh I want all of that data I would I would love to just have a large pile of money that I could put out for lots of deeper granular analysis of these lean mass hyper responders but no it's really just those three cup points and my acknowledgement that it's an observational title for the phenotype and for what it's worth there are many such. Of those in science take atherogenic dyslipidemia which is nearly the opposite atherogenic dyslipidemia is characterized by having low HDL cholesterol and high triglycerides with a preponderance of small dense LDL particles now those are the three criteria but there's not actually a criteria on for. The atherosclerosis you don't actually you can have atherogenic dyslipidemia without having atherosclerosis well sure and you can have atherosclerosis without having those cup points for atherogenic dyslipidemia same thing with like PC a OS for polycystic ovarium it another one would be metabolic syndrome metabolic syndrome metabolic is descriptive. But there's actually not technically a metric within those five criteria that is specific to metabolism it's just observational that it does seem to be you know impactful towards metabolism so to be fair believe me in 2017 I wish I could go back to the 2017 me and then like workshop titles a bit more but yeah I this really was one of those kind of grassroots sciencey things where I genuinely did not know in July of 2017. Just how meaningful my article from then and my designation of this would become relevant to me in 2024 no question. We've been talking about these hyper responders and my comment was really about whether the leanness matters and are we talking about leanness or body composition but how prevalent do you think that you mentioned that you sort of blew up you had lots of response and I remember when the paper came out a well known. Author in this area sent me an email instead of you read this paper any basically said I think I'm one of those right and so a lot of people must fall into that category but it's hard to get a percentage estimate you have an idea of how large that population is. Well part of why this is so difficult to estimate is because of how different these populations are so if you go to your typical low carb dot I'll give you a great example David unwin is a doctor out of the UK who I literally just retweeted his tweet a couple hours ago and he emphasized why he is pretty confident he just almost never sees hyper responders he wants to receive hyper responders because. This is patient population just tends to be higher BMI they tend to be over 25 many of them in the 30s and above and so he did just doesn't see this phenomenon but to be fair he doesn't patients aren't usually coming to him if they already are more commonly in a metabolically healthy state right it's it's a skewed skewed population you would have as a physician right but take volican finny they are scientists researchers who were. Very interested in keto as applies to athletes and they themselves have a paper from 2018 on this phenomenon because it was so common in their population that they were studying especially when putting keto athletes against mixed diet athletes or even high carb athletes how common it was for. There being a ubiquity of higher relative LDL cholesterol and the keto athletic group and so because these two don't intertwine and interact as often in a just an average population that's getting examined it's not as easy to determine but what I can say is that we have a Facebook group right now that is focused on the science of lean mass hyper responders and it's population the total number of members in the group is around 11500 right now and I would say. Speculate probably about a quarter maybe 25% are either borderline or full fully lean mass hyper responders hitting all of those cup points and again that's a skewed population as well but that's a big number either way. No and it absolutely this is what's tricky about it is there's just not it's not a really easy way to get a random sampling agreed of those who are adopting a ketogenic diet. It'd be a substantial inexpensive undertaking for a very novel question get I shouldn't even say a novel question I should say for a question that probably people it wouldn't did you use wouldn't be worth the squeeze I'll put it that way well said. So Dave I think our listeners will be very interested in the case report published in frontiers and endocrinology in April 2022 so this paper is entitled case report hyperclosterolemia lean mass hyper responder phenotype presents in the context of a low saturated fat carbohydrate restricted diet and this paper highlights the case of one of those hyper responders who adopted a huge and a diet for management of all sorts of colitis so can you share a little bit about this case. Yes it was great that we were finally able to put a case report out there specifically and especially one for which there was this little detail with not only their diet but also regular lipid testing and getting a CT angiogram at the levels that the patient was at that they were bouncing between 400 and 500 LDL remember I just mentioned that my own LDL was in the test. And so for this patient there LDL is comparable to somebody who has the genetic disease homozygous familial hyperclosterolemia which is a one in a million that it's very very rare to see LDL levels this high and before recently pretty much the only time you was specifically due to a genetic disease that you were born with and for what you would see them at that level so this was important because we also drew a comparison within this case report with what their final standing scan data their heart scans through something called the CT angiogram it showed that this patient had no plaque after a little over two and a half years being on a ketogenic diet at these levels at LDL levels and the 400 or 500s. It also highlighted how saturated fat was not the central determinant of this patient's LDL levels which is a common thought process just like with me early on I thought maybe the saturated fat was what was driving my hyper response and while we think saturated fat is a component of potentially higher levels of LDL we're quite confident is not the central component particularly within this population of lean mass hyperspotters in this case report I think illustrated that pretty well. And those folks how long was that population on an extremely low carb diet. You can see this response relatively quickly and we know this through both published materials and anecdotally within this lean mass hyperspotter Facebook group there's probably I want to say at least a dozen times I've read people seeing it within a month. No I meant how long were they on that diet previous to having the CT angiogram. Oh in the case of this this case report is for two and a half years but when you're talking people plural you know that we have a study of our own that's out of Lunkwis which we haven't. Yes and we'll come to that one that that's really interesting I think. But this was the first this was the first published that I'm aware of this is the first published report of a lean mass hyperspotter with corresponding CT angiography. Right so this individual was basically eating that nutritional plan for roughly two and a half years before the CT. Correct yes. Okay got it. So sort of keeping on this theme given that cholesterol and lipoproteins are remarkably elevated in this group. What do you feel are the cumulative cardiovascular implications over a long period of time with this group. And perhaps nobody knows you've done some work with notable lipidologists. What do they think about this situation and when can imagine getting to see CT a scan and having a good result. And I can imagine lipidologists would still be nervous about a very long term effect that you wouldn't see quickly. What do you think about this and maybe it would just be an indication to continue to check you know continue to be watchful. What do you think. Yeah that is the open question it used to be very early on while I was theorizing about this I would say that I feel optimistic but I just genuinely don't know. And as my profile is grown I started feeling concerned that people were sort of taking my just saying that as instructive in some fashion. So I would say okay cautiously optimistic to let me emphasize the cautiously. And now it's interesting because I almost don't even say that phrase at all because I feel like it still gets taken as too instructive. I want to double and triple down that this is unknown and we're still at the early stage is even for all the work that I feel like we've done. And even for the data that I know is going to be released soon we have something that's published that's going to be coming out the very first published data from this larger trial. We'll talk about in a moment. I think we can't say what the cumulative effect will be. We do know that there is some heterogeneity in the even the population that have familial hyperclustralemia. We know this because one of the major authors that I'm working with Dr. Matt Pudoff along with Karam Naseer who now I'm also working with on another analysis. They publish papers that show those who do have FH who are very high levels. If let's say they have a coronary artery calcification score a CAC of zero then they look no different on their risk level in the future from anybody who has lower levels of LDL comparatively to them who likewise have FH. Now they would qualify but that changes if there is a positive CAC score. So if you have a CAC score that's not zero that's above that then it does get a bit more predictive. The problem is because there was nearly half that had a CAC score of zero and it wasn't predictive when having follow up time. This already starts to say this is just probably a lot more to the story than high LDL alone can be extremely determinative on what your atroscrotic risk is. Almost for sure. I think you're right Dave. Right and I think that to steal man the pro lipid lowering position they would say look we can all agree that's multifactorial. The issue is that if we can feel confident LDL as a component then lean mass hypersponders even if they proved to be lower risk could be even lower risk if they had all the same things the same but they had lower LDL right and I'm happy to acknowledge that they may be correct. The question that I think is an interesting and important one that we can answer quickly is how big a risk are they right now because there are still going to be populations that are going to choose to for go cholesterol lowering therapy. And I think if if we're bringing an answer to them you know let me give you probably the most obvious examples the people who I know who have the highest levels of LDL right now right at this moment are people like this patient in the case report we just talked about where they are. They have a very severe medical reason for why they want to have why they want to be on a key to get really really low in carbs and they're very lean and they're very athletic they might see levels like this patient this case report where it's say 500 600 I know some that are like 700 800 I tell all of them the same thing which is this is unknown territory. Of course this would be considered very concerning you know I can't give medical advice but I think a lot of people in this position would get CT angiograms so that they would at least know where they stand at the moment and maybe there's further follow up past that point of course but do we know enough to say we feel confident you cannot continue with this diet if medication can't bring your levels low enough and that's that's why I became interested in this. I became interested in seeing how I could participate in making this happen getting getting the the research around studying the risk specifically it's just that's the one twist to my story is after 2017 I was trying to get cardiologists and lipidologists who were researchers interested to do this study and I couldn't make it happen so in 2019 I went ahead and and founded my own public scientific charity. It's it's bonafide 5 1 C 3 where we would just raise the money ourselves to pay for the research to happen. So you touched on this a little bit already Dave but back in May of 2022 you publish a paper in the journal metabolites and it was title limit energy model re imagining lipoprotein function in the context of carbohydrate restricted diets so can you just explain a little bit more for listeners what the limit energy model is and then really expand on its significance. Sure so the major factor that we would posit is as you're restricting your carbohydrates further and further this ultimately results in a lower amount of glycogen stores in your liver and as you get below a certain threshold this will ultimately result in a cascade of different components that activate more full body lipid turnover so you have something that we would refer to as hypoleptinemia which we would later publish on late when we got data on this leptin levels come way down this can have downstream impacts on the HBA access and thyroid and you have greater release of these fatty acids from your adipocytes your fat cells. So it's more fatty acids are being liberated from your fat cells that means more of your surrounding tissue can make use of those instead of the glucose that they now have less made available to them because you're lower carbon higher fat that also means though more of the fat that's getting liberated coming into the bloodstream is getting picked up by the liver and as it's getting picked up by the liver it's getting repackaged into triglycerides which are the store form of fat. And then placed into new VLDL. VLDL are apoB containing lipoproteins that the liver secretes a higher secretion of these VLDL are coming back into the bloodstream and they are both repeating those fat cells that are liberating the fat at a faster rate and also powering those same tissues that are using the smaller amounts of fatty acids. And just by the way includes especially the heart cardio myocytes the cells of the heart in particular really like triglycerides off of lipoproteins and they draw a lot of power off of those in particular. And so in fact you don't just become a fat burning machine you become a fat circulating machine and if you're metabolically healthy then that's why this has to work with a larger amount of trafficking a bit more of a network of movement for these carrier proteins to move this fat around a bulk. This is a good explanation now one of the other things I found interesting about the paper published in metabolites is how quickly that journal reacted to the submission and you know the journal says it was submitted in 19 April reviewed then revised then accepted and then published all in 30 days. I was a journal editor long ago and maybe because of the advent of the internet it was internet was not used for reviews then but FedEx. However that's unbelievably fast so they must have a tremendous staff or a team of reviewers as I can't imagine getting it even reviewed in 30 days so it's remarkable. Yeah we're pretty proud of that paper it's one of the most red papers they have and we were going to be very we love being transparent and we were going to be transparent with the reviewer comments which was approved by all within but it is almost no way to say this without a coming off as kind of a humble brag but our concern was that the reviewer comments were so we're positive to the point where it might look like we were doing that on purpose like we were trying to kind of you know signal but it was well received and we were going to be transparent with the reviewer comments which was approved by all within but it is almost no way to say this without a coming off as kind of a humble brag but our concern was that the reviewer comments were so we're positive to the point where it might look like we were doing that on purpose like we were trying to kind of you know signal but it was well received and we were trying to you know and thus far I have to say one thing that I kind of take as its own signal is we haven't had any challenge we've not had a single letter to the editor that has found a corrective point to put forward this isn't to say that I don't think there aren't many more things we need to do to improve on the model where that we may have gotten some fundamental aspects of it wrong but we've intentionally reached out and brought this paper to many lipidologists some of them fairly big names in the field and I I've been impressed that I was going to say that I'm going to say that I don't Christ the I'm going to say that it's been quite a lot that's been acknowledged this far implicitly. So Dave another paper that we'd like to touch on by Dr. Isabel Cooper was published in December 2023 it's a study in frontiers and endocrinology titled Byron Markers and Body Composition predict LDL cholesterol change and lean healthy women on a key to junk diet experimental support for the lipid energy model. So could you please share with our listeners some methods around this paper and then also the findings that are reported in this paper by Dr. Cooper? Yes and I and I'll consider the papers we published that when I hadn't looked at in a while and so I am just more kind of an edit comment I'm hopeful that I don't get anything wrong but I'm going to try to try to quote it from memory. I know this is when I should have anticipated and should have had the paper in front of me but give me just one second I'll see if I can summarize it in a way that I'm pretty confident. So this was a fascinating paper in that it was adult women who were already historically on a key to junk diet and then had an intervention to intentionally bring up the carbohydrates and then actually a further intervention to bring them back to the key to junk diet and it was tracked very methodically all the way through. Really fantastic work because it was already anticipated by the lipid energy model that we would likely see an association between how much their cholesterol levels would change based on their existing leanness and metabolic health and that's what those data showed is that those who had lower BMI the leaner they were the more likely their LDL would go down it would tend to be starting at a higher amount of the amount of the body. So we started at a higher amount and then would go down at a higher magnitude than those who were not as lean but of special relevance to us was also on the thyroid and we saw that while BMI was predictive free T3 was also very predictive how low free T3 went associated very strongly with the change in LDL cholesterol but the two of them together were extremely predictive extremely correlative. Okay, earlier you mentioned funding and self funding and setting up a 501c3 to essentially almost crowdsourced funding for research. I think that's exciting in 2019 just to give it an A and you found if the citizen science foundation could you talk a little bit about the challenges you must have dealt with and establishing a public charity dedicated to propelling scientific research. So I think it was harder than you first thought and not for profits always a harder than they look on the surface. Can you elaborate on this? No question it's so much anybody was considering it definitely recognize that it's a lot of work but I think the part that many don't realize is just how much uncertainty there was around all of this. I didn't know if this would work at all as I'm putting together this charity I'm not sharing with anybody what I'm doing because I want to do it all at once I wanted to announce what we were going to try to do which was to raise money for the study and hey now we have a charity that can take your donations and it's a bona fide 501c3 so your donations are tax deductible but I don't really know how many people are going to reach into their pocket and actually put out money I came from the world of technology. And while things like kick starters were exciting usually you get something like you get a game that you helped to fund you're a kick starter so you you get one of the first devices that came from the kick starter or you and maybe you're you're helping to fundraise for an independent movie and therefore you get tickets to come see the movie. This was unlike anything I'd ever heard before because I wanted to go to the community and say I need at least $50,000 because I think it'll be $2,000 per lean mass hyper responder when I bake in the pricing for the CT and your grams and everything else so I need at least 50,000 and actually what I really want is 200,000 well one of the first advice the pieces of advice that they give you for kick starters is don't ask for anything more than 50,000 that's already a limit there. So it already feels too far away for the people who are contributing make it make 50,000 to be your your scope and then maybe everything else is a stretch goal and here I am I'm saying not only are you not going to get a toy or some kind of product but we're getting data. We're and we've never done this before so we're going to organize a study we're going to work with a bona fide research center so that'll be all on the up and up but we've never done this before this is brand new put your trust in me and your dollars to try to put this together and make it happen and I genuinely didn't know once I got into that Houston stage whether I was going to end up with five bucks or 500 bucks or five hundred bucks or five hundred bucks. Five thousand bucks by the end of the day or by the end of the year had no idea. That does sound like a daunting undertaking with lots of uncertainty but I'm glad it worked out and following up on that describe how you came to partner with the Lungquist Institute at UCLA. I think that might be an interesting story. Yeah we were looking around for how we could best assess development of atherosclerosis with lean mass hypersmonders and pretty quickly we realized the best test was CT angiography doing these CT angiograms yielded very high resolution they've gotten so much better in a short time so used to be that to get a CT angiogram you had to experience as much as say 20 milisievers of radiation as a frame of reference year to year living a year of life just doing nothing at all use you get about 3.5 milisievers give or take from the sun and from background radiation a mammogram I believe is something like 0.5 milisievers and a chest x ray is I think a lot less than that so it's a substantial amount of radiation dosage and now they're down to where I myself have had two CT angiograms and they were two milisievers each. So it wasn't a big ask to see if we could get participants for the study to get these CT angiograms given how much resolution they have to detect not just calcified plaque like we discussed earlier like a CAC but also non calcified plaque at a spatial resolution of 1 millimeter or even less in some cases. That's amazing that's like really excellent data to detect if they are rapidly developing atherosclerosis and we need to find somebody who was an expert in CT angiograms and part of who helped us who really like laid down why they were so good and made that pitch was Dr. Matbudof we got in a meeting with Dr. Matbudof he explained not only were these scans great but the original intent was for this to be. We have a 5 year study we figured it have to be 5 years to get meaningful enough data he pointed out that no it actually 1 year is more than enough time especially at the exposure levels were describing if the LDL cholesterol if the LDL particle count of the APOB is all at the super high levels that we've been describing up until now given the present limit hypothesis we should for sure see a signal of very rapid developing plaque in our participants with CT angiograms in 1 year's time and. So that was it like luck was looks like the one we want to work with in Dr. Matbudof sounds like the guy to take up the charge sounds a good connection absolutely what is the current state of the foundation and you right now do you have a collection or projects it's currently funding. We have completed the original scope of this first study that I went to crowd fun which is for the one I just mentioned for these participants they've all had their second scans and we're now funding or at least raising money for a second study a sister study to the lean mass hypersponder study which I'm calling the triad study because it's going to be a more relaxed criteria then lean mass hypersponder is it's for example the HDL we're going to allow for being lower. So we're going to do the triad test higher and possibly more risk factors basically the first the first one we're doing was more restrictive in that you couldn't have existing cardiovascular risk factors it already was difficult to get through an IRB to say we're going to study these folks who have very high levels of LDL cholesterol who refusing treatment to find out how high risk they are and I think we now have enough data that we can go back to these same IRB and say we now want to do a trial on folks who are. A more at risk than our original you know studies participants makes it makes it more real world it makes it more likely you know that's a larger population you'd see you apply to more people so following up on that how how do you see and the foundation evolving how would you like it to evolve. I would love frankly I would really love to just see this model play out all over the place not just with ours but with others because crowd funded science is bringing us answers were frankly we're just not likely to get otherwise because there's pretty much and I was told this early on there's pretty much two channels to research funding one is of course the coveted NIH which is government funding but you're kind of at the whims of whatever they determine is worth funding. Or some form of business model related funding there has to be some company involved there has to be some interest in typically that means there's some product that's going to get sold so when pharmaceutical companies are interested in a drug takes a lot of money to get to that first pill that's ready to go to market and therefore a lot of expense but there needs to still be something that has a return on that investment and by definition we are returning to the market. So I think that we're not going to get to the market and we're trying to just get good data to get to the answers and so I think that we're proving this works we did succeed at crowd funding that 200,000 I told you we've raised much more than that since that announcement and we've I think managed to achieve pulling the soft through a lot of good graces for example we we have no admin overhead we don't take any money personally nobody gets compensated who's a part of the money. So I think that's one of the things that we're going to do is we're going to do a lot of this organization the only overhead we have our third party services like credit card processing or hosting or something like that but that allows us to correctly advertise that it's you know it's practically like a tunnel you're donating to us which goes straight to the research. I know you touched on this a little bit earlier and I also know that you're eager to share some news about a study that your team has just completed on 100 lean mass hyper responders which subjects received a CT and geogram to establish a baseline coronary artery status and then another one a year later so could you describe the findings in terms of atherosclerotic plaque in your group compared to the Miami heart study group and also just talk about the findings of that study in general. Yeah I'll have to kind of set the stage a little bit more because the study that I've been describing up until now the one that the initial one we've crowdfunded for which I'll just call the lean mass hyper responder study it's original in points were longitudinal and just against themselves so there's no control group. It's 100 scans on these on those meeting our eligibility criteria so a hundred of them all getting one scan and then getting a second scan one year later against their own timeline so whenever we fly them to Lunkwist they get their scan and then their schedule to come back a year later to get their second scan and then we're look at a population level at what their plaque differences are and as we were starting this we knew it'd be difficult to get a control group that's attached because we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan and then we're going to get a second scan heart study. And the Miami Heart Study, in that study, they have 2400 participants, much more than our 100, but they're only getting a single scan. So it's cross-sectional. And then they follow up. Well, that's fine. I'm still excited about the prospect of being able to do a match analysis where we actually take our initial hundred scans and look at them against a matched control group out of the Miami Heart cohort. And that's what we were able to do. That's what this first analysis that got reported on was able to accomplish. Is once Caramnaceeer, who's the principal investigator of Miami Heart, was able to authorize the sharing of their data with Lunkwist, the statistician within Lunkwist then went forward to see if she could put together a match. And indeed, was able to put together an excellent match. Basically, there were of our 100, there were 80 that matched the age requirements of the Miami Heart cohort. ours was more liberal. There was a bit more restrictive. And so of those 80, once that was isolated, she would then go see if there could be a randomly acquired group within the Miami Heart cohort that could become the matched control that is closely as possible matched age, matched ethnicity, matched, cardiovascular disease, risk markers, et cetera. And it's extremely tight. It's very impressive. The average age was 55.5 in both. The ethnicity is a perfect match across the way. The blood pressure, inflammatory markers, they're all like nearly identical. It's extremely close. Probably the most notable difference is the BMI is lower for our group, but that's not surprising, which kind of bears back to the model and so forth. But also both groups had very high HDL cholesterol, lower triglycerides. Our cohort was a bit more pronounced, which isn't surprising. But here's the important part. The LDL, indeed, was very different by design. The LDL for the matched cohort is 123, which as I mentioned earlier, is like right in the average. The LDL levels for our 80 for this match analysis was 272. So again, we're well into the top. We're actually in the top 10% of the top 1% of the population. And the average time for our cohort is 4.7 years. So 4.7 years, an average LDL of 272 milligrams per dust liter. And once the match was done, the plaque was not statistically significantly different between both cohorts. Interestingly, the cohort from our study, the LEMAS high-prosmotors actually trended toward lower plaque overall. There were more that had zero plaque than the Miami heart group. And there were less that had plaque in double digits. I believe ours had total plaque score of just one that was in the double digits. Whereas they had, I want to say something like four. Now, I want to immediately follow up by saying there's still not a statistically significant difference. And therefore, people shouldn't overinterpret that because the only reason it's relevant information is if it was trending in the opposite direction. I think many would assume that the LEMAS high-prosmotic cohort may not show a statistically significant difference in plaque, but they were on their way. Like that was already in the work. So maybe that they would be lower risk, but they even so, they were already showing a breakaway from where the Miami heart cohort came in. So that's kind of a bit of a summary. But that was the first glimpse ever of a decent size number of these people that I've been speculating on for eight years now that I'm one of. And what their corresponding plaque levels would be at baseline, at least, and how that would compare to another baseline group that's in a typical mixed population, but also with likewise low cardiovascular risk markers. What is interesting? Will the results be published soon? Yes, it's actually in fact, it's funny. I thought there was a chance it might be published before this took place before we were recording, but I'm pretty sure by the time this is released, it'll be out and published. That'll be great. So all of a sudden, you've managed to bring your love of film back into your life through the documentary that you're working on. So can you tell us a little bit about that? Yeah, it's pretty exciting. Jen Eisenhart is, she's also been long in this business of being a documentary and she's filmed a lot before she also filmed fat fiction. And a friend connected us and we started deciding to capture a lot of what was going to take place as it happened regarding both this study and going into this background that my story and how this all came about, it's being put together right now. I think our first footage around, I want to say, the beginning of last year. And it's been kind of exciting because basically it's following not just this study, but all of these individual stories of people going on a ketogenic diet and particularly those folks that have had efficacy who like Nick Norwitz, like Jen Unwin, who's another person we interviewed, they have particular medical reasons for which a ketogenic diet is of special relevance, but also who are dealing with this factor, this extraordinarily high level of LDL cholesterol and whether or not this is going to be a high risk for them. And I think it's going very well. Obviously, a lot of it's being written as it's happening, including this final analysis with the longitudinal data because beyond the imagine analysis, the piece still yet to come is that comparison of the first hundred scans with the second hundred scans. And while I want to continue to manage everyone's expectations that I do believe there'll be an increase in plaque as there would be with any group of 55 year olds, will it be a pronounced increase? Will we see the kind of levels that we would expect with the lipidiposis? Will this documentary is capturing that in real time, including these findings? All right, so we're going to close our time together by asking the obvious question every film student should be asked. Your favorite film is the 1995 crime classic, the usual suspects directed by Brian Singer. So we're going to ask you to defend your choice. Yes, I really enjoyed that film for many reasons because I think it is a great example of set up and payoff, which I think all the best films, all the best stories really can, you've probably heard of Check Off's gun. Generally speaking, if you're a very careful story teller, you are excellent at rewarding the audience over and over again for not only the setups they see, but the setups they don't. And I think the usual suspects does a really good job without spoiling it. There's almost an entirely different experience in watching the film the second time around because now you're watching more for those things you might not have noticed the first time. Well, it's a fantastic answer. I have to have to check that film out. I think I haven't seen a film in a movie theater since the original Star Wars. I think it was 1976. I found the audience unbearably rude. So this would be a film to watch, I think, on a theater. I'll concede it. It hasn't aged well with regard to both the director and one of the actors in it, but if you can set that part aside as a piece of film work, it's quite excellent. Sounds interesting. Well, Dave has been fantastic chatting with you today about the work you're doing and thank you so much for joining us on Stem Talk. Thank you for having me. Absolutely. I appreciate it, Dave. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. So that was such a great conversation with Dave. I really think that the work he's doing with Citizen Science Foundation is a really interesting avenue to pursue and I really do believe that the foundation's collaborative spirit is refreshing as something that's really needed in this field. I agreed on and I hope that the foundation continues to be impactful. It's off to a good start. We certainly need more research funding opportunities beyond only those provided by the government. A group you can. So if you enjoy this interview as much as Ken and I did, we invite you to visit the Stem Talk webpage where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes at StemTalk.us. This is Don Kanegas signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stem Talk. Thank you for listening to StemTalk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others. So please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, StemTalk.us. There you can also find more information about the guests we interview.