Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host Don Conegas and joining me to introduce today's podcast as a man behind the curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that sucks all the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Hi Don, great to be here. So our guest today is Dr. David Geary, who is a cognitive developmental scientist whose wide-ranging interests are particularly focused on mathematical learning and evolutionary biology. So David is a curators, distinguished professor and a Thomas Jefferson Fellow in the Department of Psychological Sciences and interdisciplinary neuroscience program at the University of Missouri. David's book, Male Female, the evolution of human sex differences has been described as a landmark text that provides a comprehensive evolutionary model to explain sex differences. David's research on children's mathematical development resulted in a merit award from the National Institutes of Health. He has also served as a member of the president's National Mathematics Advisory Panel and was appointed by a president George W. Bush to the National Board of Directors for the Institute for Education Sciences. But before we get to today's interview with David, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk and we are especially appreciative of all of the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher and other podcast apps for the widiest and most lavishly praised field reviews to read on Stem Talk. As always, if you hear your review read on Stem Talk, just contact us at StemTalk at ihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk t-shirt. Today, our winning review was posted by John Cordell. The review is titled The Best. It reads, The Most Informative Podcast I Know. I love it. Well, thank you, John Cordell, for your very short but very flattering review. And thank you to all of our other Stem Talk listeners who helped Stem Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now on to our interview with Dr. David Geary. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Hi, welcome to Stem Talk. I'm Don Kanegas, your host and joining us today is Dr. David Geary. David, welcome to the podcast. Thank you. Thank you for inviting me. And also joining us is Ken Ford. Hello, Don and hello, David. Ken? So, David, I understand that your family moved around quite a bit when you were young, before finally settling down in Northern California when you were about 11 years old. So is that right? Yeah, my stepdad was in the military, so we moved around quite a bit. And I moved around to Fairmount before then. So I think went to about six schools before I finished high school, something like that. Wow. And although you're kind of nerdy and quiet as a kid, sorry for saying that. That's fine. And I was too. You struggled as a student elementary school. So do you think that's because your family had to move around so much when you were younger? Yeah, I was a solid CD student back in the first few years of elementary school. I think part of it was the moving around. Part of it was I had some ear infections when I was younger. And so I actually had very poor hearing for a while. It's better now, but it made it hard to kind of know what was going on in class. And I think even if I knew what was going on, I didn't, if I remember crack, I didn't really seem to care much. And by the time you reached middle school and high school, you were doing much better in school. So when and how did you first become interested in science? Yeah. So freshmen in high school took a general science course taught by a physics teacher. And so it is basically a physics class. And I just really enjoyed it. I did really well in it. And you know, much better than say Spanish or other types of classes. So it was just something about that approach to knowledge that really, really intrigued me. Sent to Clara University is a Jesuit school in Silicon Valley. I've driven right past it. Why did you decide to go there? What was the draw? Yeah, it's a nice place and great, great university. And of course, I put a lot of thought into it and decided to go there because my best friend was going there. So there wasn't my parents didn't go to college. And so I didn't really know how to go about picking one place or another. And so you know, I want to go in there. When you showed up on campus, when you first were there, perhaps as a freshman, did you know already that you were going to major in developmental psychology? Or were you like most students and sort of bounced around until you found your niche? Yeah, I was pretty clueless. I wasn't exactly sure what I wanted to do. I know I was interested in some type of research, but I wasn't sure what that was going to be. And I don't think I actually declared my major until, maybe, as a junior. So can you share with listeners how you went from working in an auto part store to getting a master's degree at California State University and clinical child and school psychology? Yeah, sure. So I went to Santa Clara. I actually had to work during that time, sometimes full time during that. But so it was a lot of hours. But anyway, I still managed to graduate early. So knew I wanted to go on to something else. I had an interest, actually, in animal learning. But the program that I was interested in actually was closed. They weren't accepting any more students. And so I just looked around and found this program in clinical child psychology. But I had like six months before it started. And a friend of mine got me a job at the auto part store. Yeah. So before you earned your master's degree, you actually went to work at the school psychologist and counselor. So why did you decide to enter the PhD program at the University of California Riverside? Yeah. So I get tired of helping people, basically. You know, it's I had always wanted to go into a research oriented program. But the program that I initially wanted to get into, as I said, was closed. And so I wound up in this and this other program, which was a very good experience for me. Then I went back and applied to PhD programs. And was interested in something called hemispheric lateralization. So the left side of the brain processes for most people, language related information, visual spatial attention, more control by areas at the right side and so forth. So I was interested in that and the development of that over childhood. And so there was a person working at Riverside who was doing that kind of work. And that's that's why I went there. After finishing your PhD, you had a couple of university positions before landing at the University of Missouri in Columbia. I understand that you were drawn to Missouri because of its interdisciplinary evolution group, at least in part. Can you talk a little bit about that and what that group is like? So I originally wound up in Missouri because my ex-wife has relatives here and wanted to be here. But I wound up here at Mizzou and developed an interest in evolution behavioral ecology while I was in graduate school at Riverside. And ran into some of the anthropologist, paleontologists here on campus. And essentially got reading lists from them, talked to them, and really kind of started to educate myself in the field. Right now we have an interdisciplinary evolution in social sciences group, which has people from my department, anthropology, anatomy, pathology, history, biology. So it's a very diverse group and we have a very, very interesting interdisciplinary speaker series. And you seem to have had two primary areas of research focused on Missouri. One area is cognitive development and that's especially as it applies to math, development, and children. And the other area of research is evolutionary psychology. So can you talk a little bit about how these two areas became the focus of your research? So when I was at Riverside, my original dissertation plans was to look at hormonal changes during puberty as related to potential sex differences and changes in lateralization of processing different types of information. But that fell through for institutional review board reasons. And so I wound up working with somebody else doing work on mathematical cognition, basically doing mathematical modeling of how people solve. And in this case, just complex arithmetic problems. So that's how I got in the math part. And I had the background in school psych. And so I was interested in kids learning and learning problems. I started to apply those models to kids who are having learning problems. But my real interests really were in sex differences and evolution, which I learned more about, as I said in graduate school. But at the time I got here, there was no evolutionary psych. What there was was controversial. And so I decided to play it safe. So well, I'm just going to do my standard cognitive development work until I get tenured. And then once I get tenured, I'm going to do all of this other stuff that might irritate people. But at that point, it's too late. There's nothing they can do about it. That might be one of the few benefits of the tenure process. Yeah, I agree. You've long had an interest in intelligence, as you've already mentioned. I wonder if you could briefly summarize for the listeners the key factors that we think determine human intelligence. Yeah, that's a great question and a pretty complicated one. And it depends a bit on what you mean by intelligence. When I think of intelligence, I think of the kind of efficiency with which you learn new information and understand new concepts. And so there are questions going all the way back, four million years to brain evolution and increases in brain size and how that might have been related to the ability to adapt to novel circumstances. And then questions about the development of intelligence as kids are proceeding through life. The work on that suggests that a lot of it's inheritable. But there also are important environmental constraints on reaching your potential, or there can be important environmental constraints on reaching your potential. So defining and measuring intelligence has always been quite controversial. So do you have any thoughts on this and why that is? Yeah, defining it is kind of controversial. I mean, people have gone back and forth, but I think most people would agree that it's just the ability to deal with novel information, to figure out what's going on and to kind of fair it out general patterns. Psychologists have measuring intelligence for a long time. In the standardized measures, I don't know, are actually pretty well developed. So I don't think the measurement itself is controversial. The outcomes are sometimes controversial. Hmm, that makes sense. In the 90s, you wrote some papers that made a distinction between evolved forms of cognition, such as language, and other forms of cognition that are more dependent on schooling, such as reading and arithmetic. Can you elaborate a little bit on this research? It seems pretty interesting. Sure, thanks. Yeah, that was actually one of my first evolutionary papers. I had this other research program in math development, and I knew, especially since we were focusing on kids that were struggling, that it doesn't come easy to kids, at least to some kids. You know, it's a very abstract, very procedurally based, and so forth. But at the same time, there were this educational fad going around, called hold language and hold math. Essentially, you immerse kids in a classroom or environment where you provide them reading materials or math related materials or whatever, and they're going to acquire that knowledge in the same way, they learned how to speak, you know, comprehend language, walk, or whatever. And it just didn't work for one. The question was, you know, why doesn't it work? I mean, it's a good point that, you know, kids can learn language without any formal instruction at all. And yet a few years later, they struggled to code words when they're trying to first learn how to read. And so, I actually thought about this quite a bit, try to figure out, okay, what is going on here? And it occurred to me, based on a talk, I'd attended on language evolution, actually, that the difference is the difference between evolved competencies that have skeletal, but inherent, intentional biases, perceptual biases, and kind of brain organizational biases that make sure they develop as long as kids get kind of species typical experiences for language, just kind of talking to people, playing with their friends. But if we look at something like reading or mathematics, these are evolutionarily novel skills. I mean, mathematics is still developing. And the goal of universal education in these areas is even more recent, maybe 150, 170 years or so in the US. And so, there's no reason to believe that the processes and mechanisms that have evolved over quite a long period of time that kind of get kids on the right track to learn these primary skills are going to be the same ones involved in learning the secondary ones. And so, I made that argument, the distinction between the primary and the secondary, and then laid out an argument as to why treating secondary skills as if they were primary was going to fail. And it did. You recently wrote an article about how there is a built-in scaffolding that helps a child's mind learn to talk and use tools and even how to play. And there are no built-in scaffolds, however, for learning how to read, write or do math. So, can you talk about how this insight has led you to your interests in evolutionary educational psychology, which is just to explain to the audience as a study of how the evolved mind is adapted through schooling to meet the demands of the modern world. Right. So, that goes back to my earlier distinction between primary and secondary abilities, primary being kind of evolved abilities such as language, attention to faces, and so forth. But even these primary skills aren't, they don't come out fully formed in kids. There's early perceptual and attentional biases that provide experiences that then feed into these more complex skills that then allows them to get adapted to their local social group, local ecology, and so forth. So, there's a fair amount of plasticity in those systems. And I think it's that plasticity that allows us to piggyback onto them and adapt them to learn to read, write, or do other academic skills. So, we know from brain imaging studies that reading and writing are really mapped onto the evolved language system with a few other things. The key difference is it takes attentional focus, what's called working memory, to make those mappings. You explicitly have to kind of organize kids' behaviors, attention in ways that they wouldn't naturally do themselves. So, evolutionary educational psych, which is a term I coined a while ago now, is looking at not only the primary, secondary distinction, but also looking at things like motivation, you know, what a kids motivated to learn about and the cognitive systems needed to learn secondary skills. So, kids, you know, if you kind of lose on their own, what are they going to do? Well, they're going to play socialized and do a lot of things that they find fun. And all of those things will provide them experiences that will teach them about how to deal with people. It'll improve their language comprehension, their theory of mind, ability to make inferences about others and so forth, but don't teach them how to read. So, you've been looking at the way children come to understand math for a long time. And I think this is a really interesting topic. In the mid-90s, you wrote the first of your four books, and it's called Children's Mathematical Development. And more recently, you had a paper about a study that showed preschool children who struggled to understand the cardinal value of number words and numerals, appeared to be at risk for starting their formal schooling several steps behind their peers. So, can you give us a key takeaway from your nearly 25 years of investigating children's mathematical cognition and learning? Sure. So, why don't I start with the number word one? And that was a longitudinal study funded by the National Science Foundation. So, we took kids when they're not quite four or so. And we followed them for four years. We assessed them 17 times on a variety of different things, including on something called the approximate number system, which is thought to be an evolved intuitive sense of quantity. And then we also looked at their competencies in a number of just kind of secondary skills, counting recognition of numerals, and so forth. One question was, how does this kind of evolved primary number sense contribute to the early learning of this secondary mathematics? And then our other major goal was to figure out, okay, of the variety of early quantitative skills evolved or learned that kids know during the preschool years, which of these is really central to their readiness for learning mathematics when they start first grade. Because we know if they start behind in first grade, they're very likely to stay behind. The bottom line on that project is that this early evolved number sense does seem to contribute early on to kids, perhaps early conceptual understanding of the quantities represented by number words. One refers to one thing of anything, four to four things of anything. But once they get that, mathematics seems to take off on its own and become disconnected from its primary base, and becomes a very, very symbolic, very structured discipline, which is why it's so difficult. The important finding for this particular study was that kids who didn't conceptually understand number words before they were about five or so. So a year before kindergarten, they were behind and in first grade, significantly behind in first grade. And this is controlling parental education, intelligence, executive functions, and a number of other potential confounding factors. And so it really seems to be the core thing that they need to pick up during those early years. And they need to pick it up earlier than most people thought was necessary. That is interesting. You are currently the lead investigator on the MU Math Study, which is supported by the National Institutes of Health and the National Science Foundation. Can you give us an overview of this study? As I understand it, this study is focused on mathematical development from the preschool years all the way through high school. So it's got quite a large scope. Could you tell us about it? It's actually multiple studies. One of our studies was kindergarten to ninth grade longitudinal study. So we follow kids for 10 years in the system. I don't remember how many times. Over that time, that study finished the preschool study that I just mentioned just finished up. We're just kind of finishing up our last publication on that one. Right now, we're focused on high school algebra because that's a real sticking point for kids. There's really three core stumbling blocks when we look at math development. The first one is the early number knowledge, as I mentioned. The second one is fractions, which we're not really looking at because there are a lot of other people doing that. The third one is high school algebra. That is a real tough one for a lot of kids. What we're doing there is we're assessing kids at the end of sixth grade, on a variety of prerequisite math skills. We'll do all sorts of cognitive assessments, working memory, visual spatial abilities, and a number of other things. In seventh and eighth grade, as well as looking at attitudes and anxiety about math and get information on their family background. We'll get information from teachers and how well they're attending in class. And then in ninth grade, we've developed a number of cognitive measures to look at their skill at certain core algebraic competencies, like conceptually understanding algebraic equations or how functions map to two dimensional space. And so we want to figure out, okay, what is it that is going to predict which kids are successful and which kids are not successful in these different areas of mathematics. And then we'll also look at their performance on the state of Missouri algebra test, which they're going to have to pass in order to graduate from high school. And we're working with the schools on that and we'll develop a screening measure that'll identify kids at the end of sixth grade who are at risk of failing that particular test. So as you mentioned earlier, you also became interested in sex differences around the time you were working on your book about math development. And subsequently, you wrote a book on sexual selection and human evolution. And I understand that you're now working on a third edition of the book, which you hope to have finished by the fall. So can you tell us a little bit about this research? Sure. As I mentioned previously, I actually became interested in sex differences in graduate school, but kind of had to put that on the back burner for a while while I was doing these these other things. In sexual selection is Darwin's male-male competition, female choice that he wrote about in the 1871. And it seemed to be a perfect way to study human evolution because you have, in a sense, different selection pressures for males and for females. And so we have literally more than 100 years of research on human sex differences that psychologists have done, but there's no real organizing framework to it. It's just a bunch of knowledge without a theory to pull it together. And so I thought that this approach would be a way of pulling some of that information together in a more coherent framework. And you wrote a paper that focused on human cognitive sex differences that illustrated how sexual selection can result in different sex differences in the brain and cognition. And also how these differences appear to be related to mitochondrial functioning. Can you share how this led you to propose a taxonomy of sex differences in human condition dependent cognitive abilities and also underlying brain systems and their development? Okay. Couple, couple of questions here. So one, one of the interesting things about sexual selection is that it leads to trait elaboration. So if we think of PFAS, we have the PCOX. They have this long train or tail. And the P-hands are, you know, it's much, much shorter there. And so the P-PCOX have to look pretty in order to be chosen by the, by the females. And to do that, you know, they, they grow this colorful tail and they display it to the females and so forth. And one of the things that these types of traits is thought to indicate is the underlying health in condition of the male. So if the male is a little bit sick or whatever is going on in poor nutrition, then that trait will be compromised more than other traits. So body size might be a little bit smaller, but the train will be much smaller and dollar. And so this makes it more difficult for males to cheat and also gives females reliable information on the underlying condition of the male. There is an evolution biologist in Auburn who suggested that, well, maybe what all of these elaborated traits are signaling is underlying mitochondrial functioning, the efficiency with which cells produce energy, uh, but it's also involved in a number of other things, including immune functioning. So for, so, my argument was, well, let, let's take what we've learned from these other species and say, okay, if that's true, then if men are better at, say, visual spatial abilities, which, which they are, and girls are better at language abilities, which they are, these traits are elaborated, then if there are insults to these, there's toxin exposure, there's chronic early stressors, or there's nutritional problems, then the sex that has the initial advantage should have, should take the biggest hit. And one of the books I wrote actually reviewed that literature and and showed that, you know, that does in fact happen in a lot of cases. So things like prenatal, cocaine exposure seems to disrupt girls, language development, more so than boys. Interesting. Yeah. You've also looked at the evolution of sex differences in creating trait and age-specific vulnerabilities. There are many things that one can imagine in the world that would probably undermine a person's well-being such as disease and premature birth, as well as, as you mentioned, pre-imposed natal exposure to toxins. Can you talk about what you've learned in how some of these exposures, and you've touched on this, but how some of these exposures affect males and females differently? Right. So let's take another example to set it up a little bit better. So males are taller than females that's almost certainly related to an evolutionary history of males beating on each other, male-male competition, much of the growth occurs during having lessons. So more of the male's cellular energy, so to speak, kind of linking it into the mitochondria, is going into skeletal growth relative to females. And so if there are nutritional or health problems during that time, we see that male's height is more severely affected than as females. So it's like, well, you have this elaborated trait. The cost is you have to put all of these resources into it. And if you don't have the resources at the time, you're going to fall short relative to sex-specific standards. And so we've taken that. I've showed that it works in a number of other areas. We're looking at that right now with binge drinking, so kind of acute alcohol poisoning. Our preliminary results suggest that females who are binge drinking a lot are having deficits in face processing, where they normally reading facial expressions, where they normally have a pretty good advantage over men, but it disappears. And then men usually have advantages in more complex visual spatial abilities. And it looks like they're not having face processing deficits relative to other guys, but they're having difficulties with visual spatial things. So that kind of is like, again, the better you are at something, the more likely you are to lose it if there's problems. And so we're working to replicate that right now. So last year, you had an article in psychological review that argued that overall efficiency of mitochondrial functioning is critical to general health. So talking about brain development and functioning, for example, as well as age-related changes in health and cognition. So can you talk about your view that mitochondrial functioning provides a plausible basic biological mechanism that essentially underlies the relations among all of these phenomena? Right. So there's really interesting and well-documented correlations among cognitive tests and academic skills and a variety of things. So if you're good at one thing academically, you tend to be at least above average and other things. So they're all kind of positively correlated, which is one thing. And it turns out that these positive correlations extend into the lifespan, general health, and cognitive aging. So people who do well on cognitive tests when their children have a longer lifespan than other individuals, and they have slower cognitive decline, at least a lot of them do. And if we look at the kind of other end of the spectrum, we have cognitive aging. The body is then working as well as it was. And so everything starts to decline, including some cognitive skills, kind of your ability, how quickly you can process information. For instance, it gets a little bit slower. But it turns out that that slowing is correlated with all sorts of other changes, including your balance, your strength, your grip strength, your cardiovascular health, so forth. So there's something common to all of these phenomenon that kind of not only involves the brain, but involves the heart, a number of other things. And so in writing that article, I was thinking about that and what is common to all of these systems. And why would they all kind of function together and decline together? And it occurred to me that the mitochondria might provide the link. This is because the initial pool of about 100,000 or so mitochondria that you get, you know, that conception gets distributed more or less randomly among all the cell lines that will become the brain, the heart, and all of these other organs. And so if there's any beneficial mitochondria, you know, how it's functioning or determines or whatever, it's going to show up in all of these different systems. And so it was a proposal then. Well, let's take this a little bit more seriously than it's been taken in the past. And this might be a way to try to understand all of these things with one basic phenomenon. Yeah. Yeah. They are. They're at the heart of the project that you have done with ketone ester supplementation for divers for cold water for cold water to increase the heat generated in a mitochondrial biogenesis. Yep. Wow. Wow. So on an earlier stem talk, I think it was episode 67, we interviewed Doug Wallace. He's one of the pioneers in mitochondrial research. And he and others have shown how mitochondrial haplotypes have adapted to the environment with some mitochondria becoming better adapted to colder environments by increasing uncoupling between the complexes of the electron transport chain, which increases heat production as we just mentioned. These mitochondria then would produce less ATP for a given amount of energy delivered to the cell. Are these haplotypes then at a greater risk for decreased intelligence due to their decreased mitochondrial efficiency? That's a good question. I don't know the details of how that is working. So I'm not sure I can give you a great answer on that. The mitochondria are very flexible, so to speak. So even though you have the same initial pull, they do become adapted to whatever systems they're in at the time. So I could imagine that you could have both the additional heat producers as well as the energy producers in a few really energy demanding organs such as the brain and the heart. Yes, because certainly if you just look at the geography of the world and you do not see a diminution of intelligence in colder climates, they're probably experiencing increased mitochondrial biogenesis where an individual mitochondria might be truly less efficient to generate more heat, but they have more of them. So some whole genome sequencing studies have suggested that several hundred genetic lists I associated with intelligence might explain five to ten percent of individuals and so one interpretation of these results was to just that the environment is by far the largest determinant of human intelligence. So how might these findings be integrated into your mitochondrial hypothesis? Right. Yeah, so lots of lots of work going on right now trying to identify the low side that are correlated with a variety of outcomes, not only IQ, but whether you stay in school and so forth. Most of these are in fact, I think probably all of them are just looking at small additive effects and they really don't have the computational power right now to look at interactions between genes. And so a lot of there's a lot of kind of missing heritability based on these studies and it could be that the sequencing just isn't deep enough and it's not getting all of the low side, but it's probably the case that there are interactions in there that just aren't getting picked up yet. And so that that that would be my guess. If we look at behavioral genetic studies, we do find that kids growing up in difficult environments, the variation in their cognitive abilities has a much stronger environmental component to it than a heritable component to it. And as you move into more favorable environments, the environmental component becomes smaller and the heritable component becomes larger. It exactly where that kind of trade out off is a probably a gradual sort of thing. So I think growing up in living in difficult circumstances could be socially stressful, could be nutritionally stressful or whatever certainly can result in you not developing your your full potential. And so that's an environmental that that's probably the best evidence for environmental effects is kind of tamping down your potential. There's been some interesting twins studies that that illuminates some of these topics as well. Right. Yeah, quite a few twin studies on these and in fact most of the heribilty information on things like cognitive abilities, personality and so forth come from twin studies, the looking at specific low-sys and more more recent approach. And as related to mitochondria, there are a variety of things that can undermine mitochondrial functioning, including energy production but also control of cell damaging oxidative stress. Lots of toxins can bind up in these complexes and the electron transport chain, poor nutrition. Obviously can interfere with it as well. In that case, the environment is again compromising your ability to reach your your full potential. And I don't think we fully understand exactly what's what's going on there. Do the sexually dimorphic differences in cellular antioxidant capacity translate to differences in mitochondrial function and intelligence over the lifespan? Yeah, good good question. That was part of my psychological review article. In the empirical kind of base for that is if we look at say average men and women boys and girls and intelligence, it's pretty much same. There's not a big difference. But if we look at the distribution of scores, we see more males at the low end and more males at the high end. One explanation for that that more male variability is the X chromosome. So anything that is deleterious or slubrious on the X is going to be more strongly expressed in males. I suggested that in addition, maybe mitochondria are important. And this is because the mitochondrial DNA are only inherited from mom. And so if there are any genes that are harmful to males, but neutral or even positive for females, there's no way for evolution to remove them because it's going to be pastel down only through through the females. So we could have mitochondrial gene variation building up that kind of compromises males and you just can't get rid of it. And that could possibly explain more males at the low end. On the high end, I suggested that well, the this electron transport chain is there's about 13 mitochondrial genes. If I remember correctly, it involved in that, but but there's hundreds of nuclear DNA genes. And so it is an interaction between the mitochondrial and the nuclear genes that is important. And if males are at risk for deficits on the core mitochondrial genes, we might expect more compensatory nuclear DNA to kind of balance that out on average. If that's the case, then there there should be a group of men that are particularly robust cognitively, particularly as they move in into old age and they should be physically pretty resilient. And there is such a group. If you look at really old guys that are well functioning, they tend to be better functioning than really old women. But whether it's linked to mitochondria and specifically different patterns of nuclear DNA genes is not clear yet. I mean, that was one of the predictions of the article. So why haven't mitochondrial approaches to chronic neurological diseases, such as Alzheimer's, for example, result in improved outcomes? A lot. I'm not an expert in this particular area, but I've read a little bit. There are a lot of attempts to develop mitochondrial centered interventions to reduce oxidative stress to increase cellular energy production or do a variety of other things. And the results have been mixed. There's been some successes in animal models and some positive, but also some negative trials with people. And so it's, you know, we'll see. But it's promising. I think part of the problem is a very complex system in and of itself interacting with a lot of other things going on within the cell, but also getting the right substrate to the mitochondria and so forth. So I think it's not straightforward to do that. But I think it's really promising and it might might be helpful. I think the other possible problem is even if you have developed an intervention that rescues mitochondrial functioning, it's being implemented on people who have Alzheimer's disease or other sorts of problems, which makes perfect sense. But even if you rescue the mitochondria, you may already have sustained some type of other neurological damage at higher levels. And so you may not get a complete rescue of the whole phenotype. I think there's more and more work, as you noted, looking at mitochondria in the context of these diseases. Toward the early days of Stem Talk, we interviewed Dale Bredison and discussed he has a protocol. It's a large protocol with lots of elements, but several of those are such as the ketogenic diet are squarely aimed at the mitochondria. Right. Right. Stem Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research lab pioneering groundbreaking technologies aimed at leveraging and extending human cognition, perception, locomotion, and resilience. Speaking of the modern world as Don mentioned in her question, back in 2010, Discover magazine ran an article with the headline, If Humans Are So Smart, Why Are Our Brains Shrinking? What a great title. The article quoted a number of scientists about their theories on why the human brain is getting smaller. And you were also featured in that article where you attributed our shrinking brains to a kind of a version that you might call idiocracy theory. And this sort of loosely connects to the 2006 film by Mike Judge. Can you share your views on this? Yeah. Good movie. I enjoyed it. Yeah. And that was a bit tongue-in-cheek and also thinking about my ex-mother-in-law, it's like, well, that fits that explains that really well. Right. So a couple things going on. The brain has increased over four million year span. It tripled in absolute size and tripled in size when you control for body size and then started to you know, decline in size, you know, with the advent of agriculture around that time. And there's some debate about that. We're also less physically robust, a little bit smaller than we were previously. And so that could explain part of the changes in brain size. The other possibility or in addition to his, you know, life is easier when you have, you know, a more stable food supply, you have settled villages and so forth. And so the selection pressures for whatever the brain is doing are a little weaker. And so, you know, just like when you have processed food, the, you don't need really tough teeth and you kind of get a regression back from that. And so it's possible that that's happened as well. So one argument for the Idiocracy theory is that women and men with higher levels of education per create later or even not at all. However, that wouldn't necessarily explain the largest decrease in brain size that seemed to occur around the agricultural revolution. Is there evidence that recent differences in procreation amongst those with higher levels of education as a serious concern with respect to the intelligence of the future of humans themselves? Yeah, well, you know, going back, you know, 15, 20,000 years, it's not necessarily that the more competent people are having fewer kids. It's the one possibility is that the mortality rates of the children of less competent people were declining. And so it's kind of working at the other end of things. There's an interesting pattern of the last 200 years with the demographic shift, as you probably know about where infant mortality rates really began to drop about 200 years ago. And then there was a number of other changes occurring over that time. And as infant mortality rates dropped, people had fewer children because you have two living, you know, kids and adulthood, you don't have to have five kids. You can pretty much have two or maybe three. The wealth individuals kind of started that decline in number of kids earlier than the less well off individuals. And what you tend to see there is a lag of a couple of generations. So now we see the lower socially economic status individuals are starting to show that the same thing, having a smaller family size. So it just lagged a little bit. In terms of who's having kids, for guys anyway, there is a positive correlation between income and the number of kids they have, mostly because kids, guys who drop out of school are much less likely to get married and not have any kids. So there's still kind of a small positive effect there. For women, if they just get an undergraduate degree, it's fine. But a lot of women who go on to, you know, get a medical degree or PhD or whatever, a lot of them have fewer kids. And it's largely because they just delay having kids before they delay starting. So in a 2009 study, you concluded that as complex societies emerged, our human brains became smaller because people did not have to be as smart to stay alive long enough to percure it. Before this period, from about 1.9 million years to perhaps about 20,000 years ago or so, the size of the human brain grew substantially. So can you talk about the forces that were driving our brains to grow before the rise of agriculture? And also you're finding that population density is actually related to brain size. Okay, right. Yeah, so this was a study I did with a former graduate student of mine. So we looked at changes in cranial capacity over the last two million years or so. And we find, of course, what everybody else finds is it increases until fairly recently and it begins to drop off. There are a number of hypotheses about exactly what was driving that change. One of those is adaptation to climate variation. So seasons are mark on soon, you know, dry season, wet season, or winter, whatever. We have to really begin to think ahead and plan for those changes. Another argument is the development of hunting skills, another complex skills involved in kind of managing the ecology, which actually takes quite a bit of time. You know, the men don't peek in their hunting outputs until 35 or 40 or so, if they're living in a traditional environment. And the one we we favored was social competition. So that as populations increase, the per capita resources available for each individual is going to decrease. And as you have the per capita decline in resources competition becomes becomes more intense. And you add that intensity in there and often, you know, population crashes, which happened frequently throughout human evolution and even in the developing world up until about 200 years ago. And if you looked at individuals who are more socially influential, had better access to whatever resources were available, they would suffer less mortality than the individuals who weren't quite as socially skilled. And so you'd have a kind of a repeating cycle where the socially more more competent, the ones able to get more of whatever is important, whatever resources are important in that ecology are less likely to suffer mortality when these periodic crashes yet. So that was our argument. And we came up with a measure to kind of estimate population density for all of the hominid skulls that that we were using in our analyses. Anyway, we found evidence for both the climatic and the social hypotheses. So they concluded that there's probably a number of important things going on there. Could you elaborate a little bit on the population density issue? One can imagine that being a strong driver. Could you talk a little about that? Yeah, well, that's kind of known as the Malthusian trap. So you get a little better at getting resources out of the ecology. You know, our ancestors began to develop horse-fisticated tools, shelters, predation risk were probably lower. They're doing lower cooking probably low level horticulture and so forth. So all the kind of external risks to life of all the external mortality risks would decline to some extent, which is good. But one effect of that is that populations increase. And as populations increase, the pressures on the existing resources increase as well. And so now you have increasing competition for a limited number of resources, whatever it is that that's available in the ecology, as I said. And if you repeat that process over and over and over again, you would have selection for whatever it is that gives you an advantage in terms of gaining access to resources over other individuals. On the side there, so if we look at the hominin brain expansion, say just sticking to Africa, and if it was a totally ecological environmental sort of thing, then other species that were living in the same areas as our ancestors were at the same time should have shown the same increase in brain size, if it was a purely kind of external environmental factor. And that's been looked at for some old species of baboon. And while our ancestors were increasing, these other primates were not. So it was something unique to what was happening with our ancestors that was driving it at least in part. Over the past 20,000 years, as you've mentioned, the average volume of the human brain has decreased from 1,500 cubic centimeters to about 1,350 cubic centimeters. And that's a lot. Essentially our brains have shed a mass about the size of a tennis ball. Is this shrinkage found in all locations around the world and in all populations? As far as I know, it's found all over. We, the specimens we were looking at were from all over the world and we found, we found the same pattern throughout all these different locations. That's interesting. So kind of circling back to intelligence as we were talking about earlier in the podcast, can you describe why you believe the available evidence supports the notion that our smaller brains equate to less intelligence or perhaps less capacity for intelligence? Yeah. Well, there's interesting work on that. So if you look at novel problem solving, the ability to kind of come up with clever ways of getting food or whatever, and you look at it across primate species, keeping humans out of it, you do find a correlation between these novel problem solving skills and absolute brain size across species. But if we look at it within species, say people, the correlation between brain size and intelligence is much weaker. It's positive, but it's much smaller there. So it's more probably about the organization and the efficiency with which a couple of specific brain systems are working. That's really interesting. If total brain size is shrinking and it appears to be, do we know that the specific structures associated with higher intelligence or memory are also shrinking? For example, when interviewed on Stemntalk, Susanna Herculano Houssell argued that the number of neurons in the cerebral cortex is perhaps the best predictor of cognitive abilities across species. If folks are interested in that, I recommend checking out her interview. She talks about making a lovely brain soup and measuring the neurons. Right. Yeah. So as I said, if you look at this across species, that's true. It is a pretty strong correlation. If we look at it in people, higher intelligence is one brain system that what we typically think of intelligence, explicit problem solving, figuring out things is actually a network of regions that are involved in the front of the brain and parts of the back and in the parietal cortex that work together to allow you to focus on something and allow you to mentally manipulate and think about stuff. The memory systems are a little bit different areas of the brain. But in any case, it probably is true that the number of neurons within these areas is important for whatever skill they're subserving. I don't know if there's any way to tell whether there have been changes in the number of neurons as we go. Over the last 20,000 years, it's possible that absolute volume has decreased, but we've maintained the number of neurons or maybe the number of neurons hasn't decreased at the same rate as the volume has. Yes, that explanation springs immediately to mind. We look across species. Some species have incredible neuronal density and you have in a small brain. Right. David, is there evidence that mitochondrial function has changed since the agricultural revolution coincident with our current state of idiocracy? Okay. Good question. Yeah, I don't know that it has changed. I mean, it's a very evolutionarily old and evolutionarily conserved system. So I don't know that it has changed or if it functions differently. Now then it did then. I suppose if we looked at people living in traditional contexts with a traditional kind of energetic loading, they exercise more than we do and maybe eat a little bit better, at least in some ways, we could look at mitochondrial functioning, but that would probably be a function of experiences and diets and stuff like that. So I would imagine it probably hasn't changed much. As we've touched on, rather depressingly, humans have roughly since the advent of agriculture become weaker, frailer and perhaps dumber. Certainly our brains are smaller. There are lots of theories on this topic and it's fashionable and many circles in which I travel to be unconcerned about our transformation as an animal, but I'm less sanguine regarding where this is all leading. And if you think about how rapidly technology such as AI, which is my field, is developing, and will likely continue to develop, how do you see this playing out? I mean, is there a worst case scenario with regards to technology offloading more and more processes and evolutionary pressures on our brain size and cognitive function? Sure. Yeah, a lot of things come to mind there. The first one is there's now more than seven billion people in the world. And so even though we're frailer and smaller brains, we're doing pretty well just in terms of numbers. But at the same time, it means that if a lot of us had to make it out in the woods, live in the wild, it wouldn't go well. That's for sure. Yeah, I have some colleagues here who are very smart, IQ-wise, but I think they'd be dead in a matter of hours if they had to make it out in the woods. They're just, you know, we've kind of moved away from that robustness. And plus, they don't have the developmental experiences to know what to eat and what not to eat, how to hunt, and so forth. Go to Starbucks and just look around the room. Yeah. Yeah. A lot of the early technology, the computer algorithms, and so forth, became very good at doing what we've talked about before is evolutionarily secondary skills, doing computations, forest, mathematics. I mean, they could solve different equations very quickly, much more quickly than people can, and so forth. So a lot of what we, at least initially, were offloading with stuff that we had to learn in school. From what I can tell, it's now developing into a much more sophisticated and getting into more evolved primary types of systems, you know, mimicking facial expressions, voice recognition, and so forth. So it's getting interesting, for sure. And offloading those, it really depends what it is that was driving our competencies to begin with. If it was social competition, then that's always been with us. I mean, there's always going to be difficult people to deal with. There's always going to be thinking about, you know, how to get the next grant, which is a competitive sort of thing or a publisher should to do the next podcast. What are you going to do? I mean, it's dealing with people is complex. And that might be a little bit more difficult to offload onto AI, although I suppose some AI, if it gets sophisticated enough, could then kind of take the place of some social relationships. Well, that's already happened. Yeah. If you look at humanoid robotics, the likely killer application will be exactly that. It will be lonely people playing with their robot rather than dealing with a human. Yes. Yes. I know. Yeah. Yeah. I know what you're talking about. And yeah, I think that if you're lonely, there's ways to deal with that. And it kind of pushes you to develop your social skills and to get out there and deal with people. If you have an easy way out, I'm not sure it's not necessarily a good thing for a lot of people. Right. We're increasingly controlling our environment. That's right. So rather than just adapting to it, we're changing the thing to which we adapt. And some of these technologies, I'm a technologist, so I'm not a Luddite, but I think we need to look at these technologies through the lens of whether they diminish our status as a human, as an animal, or whether they're beneficial. Well, right. So the early technology, technologies of our ancestors, tools, cooking, fire, and so forth, changed the ecology, changed the diet, the nutrition. We could extract out of it, so forth. The result was we were less physically robust. Our teeth are less robust. Life is easier. And so more people make it. And so it's, you know, we become frail as a result. Yeah. Cooking was arguably a good development. Well, yeah. No, I'm leading us to absorb our nutrients better. Right. Right. Yeah. No, a lot of these things are, have been beneficial. But I assume when I think about these things, with an evolutionary perspective, that there's always a cost. There's always some type of trade off. And I would think so. Yeah. And that's, I'm sure it's going to happen with technology or has happened. So your book, male, female, the evolution of human sex differences has been described as the first comprehensive evolutionary model to analyze sex differences and how they evolved by means of sexual selection. So can you elaborate a little bit on this book in the concept? Sure. So as I mentioned previously, you go back in psychologists, some in studying sex differences. Some of the, I looked at these earlier. I mean, there's publication from 1910 and earlier than that. So well, well over 100 years, literally thousands and thousands of studies. So a huge database on cognitive sex differences, physical sex differences, developmental sex differences, sex differences and disease risk. I mean, all sorts of things. And you know, it's useful information, but it's not organized in any particular way. There's no theoretical rationale or organization to it. So in male, female, I start with the evolution of sexual reproduction, which is critical. Why reproduce sexually? You're giving up half of your genes. And so there's a big cost there. So that's a huge benefit. And then I go through and cover sex differences, you know, competition for mates, make choices and other things parenting and investment and offspring, so forth. About a third of the book is just total basic biology, non-human sex differences and really kind of setting it up. It's like, okay, this is how it works in nature. And there are some very basic principles that we can apply to insects, to fish, the birds, to mammals and explain a lot of things. And there's no reason why we can't use those same principles to explain human functioning in a lot of different areas. And so I set up those basic principles and then take this huge trove of knowledge that people have put together over the decades on sex differences and parenting on hormonal influences on all sorts of things and organize them based on these basic principles that work with other species. And so in the new edition, I'll start from a little bit on natural sex. I'm going to start from the evolution of sexually reproduction, cover a couple chapters on non-humans, cover human parenting, especially dads, which is interesting, mate choices, you know, what a men want, what women want, competition, these days versus competition when Genghis Khan was around very different types of things. Look at sex differences of emotions, motivations, development, infancy, play patterns, brain incognition, all the way to learning in school, the effects of, you know, prenatal exposure to toxins. So it's kind of trying to pull it all together in a single, under a single thesis. Fantastic. So David, you give an interview a few years back to the Guardian about your book, the Evolution of Vulnerability, which explores these sex differences in health and development. And in the interview, you said, and this is a quote, people talk about cultural factors creating sex differences. I think it's the other way around. There's pressure to disconfirm the way people are. Cultural hype tries to make the sex is more alike, which is stressful for boys and girls and men and women. So can you elaborate a little bit further on this quote in this concept? So kids are going to create their own environments in part. Of course, parents are important. But if you cut kids off on their own, they're going to form friendships. They're going to find certain play activities more interesting than other activities. So if we look at kids between two and three years of age, we begin to see rough and tumble play. So, you know, hitting, pushing, wrestling, so forth, which we see in lots of mammals, especially in male mammals, with a fight in adulthood. But in any case, boys do it much more than girls do. Girls shy away from it. They're a little more risk averse. And so from a comparative perspective, it's not surprising at all that boys would find these types of activities fun. But from a cultural perspective, the argument is that, well, boys do this because they're following norms that they're told either implicitly or explicitly that this is what boys are supposed to do and therefore they do it. And really, the observation that this is what boys do isn't taken as a causal explanation. When really they have backwards, boys are doing this on their own. You're not causing them to do that by the description that, well, this is what boys do. This is what what girls do. I'm sure you get lots of blowback on that from your colleagues in academia. Yeah, I have. And thankfully, I'm pretty socially insensitive. And so, it's, you know, yeah, but yeah, I have a time, especially when I've given public talks, gotten some blowback that is irritating. And so the way I deal with it is I just don't give these kind of talks to social science conferences anymore. I just stay in my office and write the book or do the work. Yeah, the average person would have no trouble appreciating what you're saying. But it's only a problem when you engage with a social science group or academia in general, I think. Yeah, yeah, yeah, it takes a PhD to get it completely wrong. Yeah, I teach an undergraduate course here, Mizzou, on sex differences. And my students, it makes sense to them because it explains their experiences. But some people want the world to be what it's not. And so our very aggressive about it, if you point out that hey, you got this wrong. Yeah, I'm glad you're writing about it at least in teaching it. Right, thank you. So you are perhaps the first academic to frame biological sex differences in terms of their vulnerability. I understand that you believe this approach could actually transform science and medicine. So how so? Yeah, again, we get back in trade-offs and we can look at the peacocks tail or men's height, for example. So the traits that have given you advantage in terms of competition or make choices, cost more to build, core cost more to maintain. And therefore, and you know, it kind of gives advantages, but they're also more vulnerable to disruptions. So if you have a 5,000 square foot house, and you have versus a 1500 square foot house, and you have a certain amount of BTUs to keep it warm. And then, you know, you get laid off or you're going part-time and you can't quite buy as much. You can still keep the 1500 square foot house warm, but you can't maintain the temperature of the 5,000 square foot house. So it looks great, but it has higher building costs, higher maintenance costs. And therefore, if something goes wrong, it's going to go first. And so what I laid out in this other book, Evolution of Honourability, is they said, okay, well, let's look at the physical traits, the behavioral traits, the cognitive and brain systems. One sex has an advantage over the other, and it's meant for some things and it's women for some other things. And if this basic argument is correct, then if we look at basically the horsemen of the apocalypse or what gets every species, it's nutritional stress or famine, disease or plague, and then war, kind of social, the stressors of social competition. You expose people to those stressors, then males, boys and men should show decrements, you know, in traits A and B, dis disproportionate decrements, and girls and women should show disproportionate decrements in traits C and D. So as I mentioned, the late prenatal problems cocaine exposure or even pre-matured, as long as it's not too premature, seems to have a bigger effect on girls language development than it does on boys language development. So there's a lot going on during that time, the language system is more complex, more highly developed in girls, you're putting a lot of resources into it, and just at that time when it needs all these resources to get to the girl specific level of competencies, you're disrupting it by giving a cocaine or poor nutrition or whatever the case might be. And boys language development is more not as much as going into it at that time, it's kind of more drawn out, it never gets as good anyway, and so the relative hits are smaller for boys and for girls. So you've been in the news recently for developing a new way of measuring gender inequality. So you and Hayesburg Stoet of the University of Essex in the United Kingdom released what is referred to as the basic index of gender inequality, and you all describe the index as a new measurement tool that is fair to both men and women and presents a simplified but more accurate picture of people's well-being, the measurements like the world economic forums, gender gap index. So one of the key findings of your report has been that men and women in developed nations are generally equal overall, but that if there are any disparities, they favor women. Can you talk about how the index came about and also some of the key takeaways from your research? So Hayesburg and I have been collaborating for a while on some large scale international data sets on achievement, focusing on math and science achievement, but reading occasionally as well. And in looking at these large data sets, we have at times looked at measures of what what people will call gender equality. So the number of women who are in parliament, the number of women who are getting college degrees, how much they're working, workforce participation, and so forth. So that's fine, but they're not really measures of inequality or equality per se. I mean, they're measures of the social educational and political advancement of women, which is good. But in these same measures, they also have a bias to them. They're picking out indexes that are important to women's groups. So number of women in Congress, for example. Okay, that's fine, but you could have just as easily said, well, why don't we look at the sex difference in the number of people who are killed on the job or are homeless or whatever, which would, there's more men, in those areas. And that they also look at things like lifespan. So living is seems to be an important thing to most people, men and women. And so in the widely, one of the most widely used ones, they say, well, if women are living five years longer than men, then we've achieved gender equality. If women are only living two years longer than men, then women are disadvantaged. And they have a long explanation for that. And they also look at other indices and say, well, if women are doing better than men, say, in going to college, then we're going to call it even. We're going to cap the score at one. There's no negative scores where men are disadvantaged. So in the existing literature, there's a number of biases in terms of how they code things, and in terms of kind of what they focus on and what they ignore. And so we just wanted to come up with something that's very simple and can be applied across countries and across the sexes and ways that I think makes sense. And we just said, well, what's important for most people in their life? And we thought, well, one, you want to be healthy and have a long, healthy lifespan. If you live to 80, but you're sick for 20 years before you pass away, that's not a long, healthy lifespan. A long lifespan was not a healthy one. Educational opportunities are important for everyone in the world now. And then we added in life satisfaction. So it could be that, as I mentioned, you could come up with all sorts of different ways of figuring out, okay, who's doing better? You could look at workforce participation. You could work at, look at risks of severe injury and death. I mean, you could come up with hundreds of different things, some of which are more applicable to women, some of which more applicable to men, some of which applicable in developed nations, but not developing nations as strongly and so forth. And so you have to make all sorts of decisions about that. And we reason that, well, to get around that, when we just look at how satisfied people are in life, and that way they can wait whatever it is that's important to them, whether it's workforce participation or having working in a safe environment, and that will be reflected in their life satisfaction. Basically, what are your educational opportunities? What's the likelihood you're going to have a long, healthy lifespan? And are you satisfied with whatever conditions you're experiencing? So we just wanted to boil it down to these three different things. According to your new index, the two most gender-eglitarian nations in the world seem to be Italy and Israel. The United States comes in at number 61 out of the 134 nations. Can you talk a little bit about how it is that Italy and Israel had such a great performance in this index? We were looking at the equality of these educational, satisfaction, and lifespan outcomes, which isn't necessarily the same as quality of life. So men and women could be equally miserable, but they're equal on these outcomes. And I think there's been some confusion there. Yeah, I'd have to actually look up the the sub-scores for Italy and Israel. But in any case, most developed nations, the differences between men and women are pretty small overall. So pretty equal. The disparities are typically come in with shorter lifespan for men. Perhaps the most counterintuitive result places Saudi Arabia as the third most gender equal nation in the world. And I suspect a lot of people had erased eyebrow when they read that one. Right. Yeah. And again, equal does not necessarily mean satisfied, you know, having a high high quality of life. So in a lot of places in the world, including Saudi Arabia, wealthy men are polygamous. They can have, you know, multiple up to four wives, which means, you know, every guy with four wives are three guys who are probably never going to marry, which makes for a very miserable life for most of those guys. And so we hear a lot about suppression of women's rights in countries such as this, but the difficulties that men have in these men who aren't wealthy and well connected are essentially overlooked. So yeah, they're equal, but not necessarily high quality of life for the average person. Right. The notion of equality is probably confusing to a lot of the people when they read this because they'll see it as beneficial as opposed to equally miserable. Right. Right. And in highly developed countries, you know, such as Europe, US, Israel, it is both reasonably equal and beneficial. But there are places where it's equal and it's, those nations have a long ways to go for it's for the well-being of its citizens. Yeah, it makes sense. So David, I know that you're also working on a variety of projects and evolutionary psychology that range from the study of social signaling and mate quality to sex differences and face perception. Can you talk a little bit about those projects? Yeah, so the social signaling was a project the one of my former graduate students Ben Weingarde did while he was here in graduate school. And his idea was that, you know, we have conspicuous consumption. So a lot of people like to flaunt their status by driving expensive cars, wearing expensive clothes and so forth. It's basically status displays. And his work was focused on Wein's partner as a status display. So if you're seen around campus with an attractive guy or an attractive girl, then that would be kind of a signaling type of thing. And so that's essentially what he demonstrated in a series of studies. And it's true for both men and women. Very interesting. And then sex differences and face perception, that sounds really interesting as well. Yeah, so right now a postdoc that worked here developed a nice emotion detection face processing task that looks at how quickly you can identify a happy facial expression or an angry or sad or whatever facial expression it is. So we get accuracy in reaction times on that. And we've validated the task and we're using it in this binge drinking and vulnerability study. So as I mentioned a while ago, that women typically do modestly better than men on this. But binge drinking women lose their advantage. Is it thought that oxytocin levels play a role in that? You know, there's a lot of research about oxytocin and increasing the level affecting. Yeah, yeah, I don't know too much about the oxytocin work other than, you know, it does create some biases in processing. But I think it's very context dependent. And I'm not sure how strongly those effects replicate. It could be that they do. I just haven't read up on that literature. So David, you written four books, are in the process of co-editing five books and have published close to 250 articles and chapters across a wide range of topics, including cognitive, developmental, and evolutionary psychology, education, and medicine. So other than obviously spending a lot of time in front of the keyboard, what do you do in your spare time? Sleeps. Yeah, yeah. Well, my wife locks me out of the house in the morning and doesn't let me back into late. And so I have nothing else to do. Now, actually, I started Taikwondo when my son was six, started together. And he's now 29, and we're still doing that. So I go two, sometimes three times a week, work out, have friends there, and kind of it's a good, good exercise and a kind of good break from the academics. Which is important. It could be useful if you give many more talks. That's true. I'm ready. The next song I go. Prov Maggara or something. Yeah, we do a little bit of that too. Well, David, it's been fantastic having you on the podcast. Thank you so much for joining us. Great. Thank you for inviting me. I enjoyed it. Stim talk. Stim talk. Stim talk. Stim talk. So that was a lot of fun. And I have to say, especially love the conversation about the Idiocracy theory. It does indeed seem to me at times that the modern world is shrinking our brains. I don't understand. Oh, it's shrank already. Yes, that was a really fun interview, Don. I have a lot of respect for David. Partly because he's published some unpopular findings, but they were findings that he felt confident were backed up by science. On college campuses today, there are groups that have become quite good at intimidation and suppressing dissent. I liked his observation that he has been blessed with a sufficient amount of social insensitivity to not worry too much about what certain groups think. We need more academics willing to stand up to social pressure. I agree. If you enjoy this interview as much as Ken and I did, we invite you to visit the Stim talk web page where you can find the show notes for this in other episodes. Stim talk.us. This is Don Carnegie signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stim talk. Thank you for listening to Stim talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others. So please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website Stim talk.us. There you can also find more information about the guests we interview.
