 Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hello, I'm your host Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that selects all of the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Today we have Dr. Rudy Tansy, who is best known for co-discovering all three familiar early onset Alzheimer's disease genes. In addition, Rudy's lab was the first to use human stem cells to create three-dimensional human brain organoids and three-dimensional neural galeal culture models of Alzheimer's disease, which became known as Alzheimer's in a dish. Better watch that dish. These models were the first to recapitulate all three key Alzheimer's disease pathological hallmarks and have made drugs screening faster and cheaper. Rudy is the director of the Genetics in Aging Research Unit, as well as the director of the Henry and Allison McCants Center for Brain Health. Rudy is also a co-director of the Massachusetts General Institute for Neural Degenerative Disease at Massachusetts General Hospital and serves as the Joseph P and Rose F. Kennedy Professor of Neurology at Harvard Medical School. Rudy has published more than 700 research papers and is one of the top 50 most-sided neuroscientists in the world. He is author of decoding darkness and co-author of two books with Deepak Chopra, Super Brain and the Healing Self. Before we get into our interview with Rudy, however, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the double-secret selection committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher and other podcast apps for the widest and most lavishly praise-filled reviews to read on Stem Talk. If you hear your review read on Stem Talk, just contact us at stemtalkatihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk T-shirt and then you will be the cool person. Today, our Weenie Review comes from a listener named Sean. It reads, Your podcasts led me down some great paths. The recent Feldman interview was tremendously informative as was the Jeff Volek interview and Keto in cancer. Of course, there is lots of work still left to do in terms of educating the general public. We are an unhealthy population. Your work is changing narratives and improving people's lives. What a great review, Sean and thanks to all our other Stem Talk listeners with help Stem Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now onto today's interview with Dr. Rudy Tancy. Stem Talk, Stem Talk, Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Hello, welcome to Stem Talk. I'm your host Ken Ford. Rudy, welcome to Stem Talk. Thanks. Happy to be here. Very glad you're here as well. I understand that you were quite the curious child and started playing the accordion when you were just seven years old. Your dad, however, walked into the room one day and threw a Jimmy Smith album on your table and offered you some advice. So what did he say? Well, you know, I grew up in Rhode Island in a tiny community where, you know, you're a kid and you play accordion. I actually liked the accordion and my father was a jazz fan. So he gave me a Jimmy Smith, him and B3 Jazz organ album and he said, do you want to keep playing accordion? And I said, yeah, like it. And he said, okay, maybe we'll get you a monkey in a cup too. And then I listened to the album and I'm like, wow, this is the same type of organ that I hear and all the bands I was listening to back then. Like, you know, yes, and Santana and, you know, others. And I said, yeah, I think I want to play organ and so my father set me up with first portable organs and then by the time I was 15, I had a Hammond B3 and to this day on the side, I played that Hammond B3 professionally with rock bands like Iroh Smith and others in the studio, not not gigging this is studio. What kind of accordion were you studying? Oh, I don't remember that. The keyboard accordion or a button accordion? No, no, no. It was a keyboard accordion with buttons on the left. Right. He bought on the right and there was 120 bass, you know, extended. You know, I would love to get one again now. It's such a beautiful instrument. I like the the Cajun accordions, you know, the Daitonic accordions like they use there. I had one custom made, but I don't play it enough to be proficient. Oh, I would have no idea how to play that. You mentioned Jimmy Smith or I mentioned Jimmy Smith and he really, really helped to popularize as you know, the Hammond B3 and for our listeners, the Hammond B3 when paired up with a Leslie speaker is still a unique sound that hasn't really been replicated by synthesizers, at least to my taste. It just doesn't sound quite the same. No, I mean, I do have probably the best Hammond B3, facsimile in a synthesizer, which is the Nord NOID, but still not the same. But you know, any classic rock guitar player and I played with Vichy Blackmore from Deep Purple. I've done albums, three albums with Joe Perry from Aorus Smith. I did Aorus Smith album, two solo albums with Joe and others. And you know, rock guitarists love to have the Hammond B3 behind them. Yes. You listen to great guitarists like David Gilmore from Pink Floyd, a Mark Notha from Diastrates, the main keyboard you, the main thing you hear behind them is the Hammond B3. It's just a match made in Evan. Yes, it's a, it's a unique sound in my view. So Rudy, as a youth, you were also interested in science and medicine. And I heard perhaps from one of those proverbial little birdies that you participated back then and what was known as the Westine House Science Talent Search. I remember that. How was your experience with that? Well, I didn't win a prize. I got honorable, honorable mention, but it's weird because the project I picked and that I've been relevant to my research much later, I was speculating that in diabetic hypertensive retinopathy, patients who have diabetes with hypertension, that the reason why they had degeneration of the retina was that the iron in the blood was a reactive metal and causing oxidative damage in the eye. And I just speculated on this as a kid, I was 16, 17 years old. And it turns out that's probably true, but at the time, because it was just shameless speculation and my dad, I was just purely empirical based on case studies. It wasn't really hypothesis driven mechanism based science. You know, it didn't win a prize. But to this day, I still study reactive metals and oxidative stress in its role and inflammation and diseases like Alzheimer's, which is my main topic of study. That is interesting and prescient for one so young to hypothesize anything about that topic in my view. You mentioned you're from Rhode Island. I understand that you're from Cranston, Rhode Island. I am. You know, and I mean, you would never be able to do this today because of HIPAA and security was. And so, my parents started the first out service medical transcription company. And so they would have hospitals in Rhode Island and Massachusetts, including mass general, you know, send the recordings of the doctors and the cases and they would type them up. And my job as a kid was to photocopy those reports. And of course, I would read them. And it was actually reading through the reports that I got the idea for the Western House Science Talent Search. Today, I can show you when you're able to say you read those reports, but that was a long time ago. My wife is also from Cranston, Rhode Island. I think the opposite side of Cranston, she's Cranston West. Oh, there are rivals. Cranston East, Cranston East Thunderbolts versus Cranston West Falcon. Great rival. And I'm from East Cranage. So it's... Well, I went to school in East Cranage originally, actually. I went to Rocky Hill. Oh, yes. Rocky Day. I know Rocky Hill. Yeah, I went to Rocky Hill from 5th to 9th grade. And actually still stay in touch with them and support the school. That school, more than any other, really shaped my academic career. And then I went to public school, back to public school after Rocky Hill just as a... It was a long commute from my parents. It is. Yeah, Rocky Hill has shaped many lives in a positive direction. So after high school, how did you end up at the University of Rochester? What was the connection there that made that happen? Well, at the time, and this was 76, the idea of genetic engineering and recombinant DNA and gene splicing, terms we haven't even used anymore, like gene splicing and genetic engineering. We've just come into the fore. And Rochester had really the greatest concentration of pioneers in that area. Fred Sherman and Gary Wilson, Harry Taber, Frank Young, Ceyda Zane. And that's what I wanted to do. I had this romantic notion that I was going to be a geneticist doing this new genetics and gene splicing. And at that same time, there was a band on this type of research in Cambridge. Because when it first came out, I guess the folks who ran Cambridge thought that it might lead to Frankenstein. So at Harvard, there was a band for a while on this type of research. And it all worked out well because I got waitlisted at Harvard and decided, well, I was upset that I got waitlisted and I decided not to be on the waitlist. And I said, I'm going to University of Rochester. They have better genetics, you know, curriculum there anyway. That makes perfect sense. As I understand it, your grandfather had died when he was only 45 years old. And your father was only 17. And then your father died when he was 45 and you were 17. That's amazing. That kind of motivate you toward a study of genetics and that line of work. You know, the probably hereditary risk factors associated with heart disease was passed from one generation to the next. Was this one of your motivations? You know, I can't say it was. I was here to death and in my 20s I went, I was proactive and already went to go see my late 20s of cardiologist. And as soon as I could check out my own genetic risk factors I did. And I very proactively take care of my own cardiovascular health to offset the risk, you know, conferred through the generations from my grandfather to father. But no, it didn't. I mean, it's interesting. Even Alzheimer's, my grandmother got Alzheimer's disease after I decided to study Alzheimer's. So it wasn't, I was probably either. Yeah. Well, they both are fruitful things to study in so many ways. Earlier, you mentioned being sort of slightly annoyed with Harvard for weight listing you, but you ended up going to Harvard medical school for a PhD. How did you decide to forgive them and how is this all worked out? Well, I mean, I said, so what really happened was I, I don't know if we're going to talk about the work I did with Tim Gasella on Huntington defining the. We will indeed. Yeah, but it's always after that work. I was actually going to go to Yale for human genetics and I applied to Yale and Yale and I got in and I was going to go there and then some folks who like Joe Martin who was a chair of our department at Mass General and Jim Gasella who is my mentor said, you already, you know, you know that you know lots of the newest human genetics already. In fact, we had the chair of Yale human genetics come to learn from us and you trained, you taught them this, this new human genetic stuff that we're doing. Why don't you apply genetics as something else and they convinced me to wait a year and instead apply for neuroscience programs and Harvard had one of the best neuroscience programs. It was weird because back then, you know, it wasn't like a system like we do now. I only applied to Yale when I wanted to go to human genetics and then when I decided to delay a year, I only applied to Harvard for the neuroscience program. You know, now it is you apply to 50 different things and make sure that your backups back then it was just like, okay, I'm going to go to Yale. I think it was a little simpler back then indeed. So yeah, so that was so I really, you know, wanted and I'm pretty sure when I worked with Jim Gasella that I coined the term neurogenetics because I can't find any reference to being used before I named Jim Gasella's lab at Mass General, the neurogenetics lab. Mainly so that we would get our deliveries delivered to us and not to the general genetics department at Mass General Hospital. And so I may have actually invented the word neurogenetics and I call myself a neurogenesis today. Well, it's a pithy term and speaking of Jim Gasella, this is a perfect segue. As I understand it, this was 1983 or above then and you're around 20 years old at Mass General working with him. And you were part of a group of researchers that were the first ones to discover a specific disease gene family studies at the time and showed the Huntington's disease gene was linked to a polymorphic DNA marker that maps to human chromosome for this is really interesting. Well, if you move back, it was actually 1980. Oh, even earlier. 1980 I was playing in a band to make side money and I was playing at a club near Mass General and we stayed at that hotel overnight and I said, what am I doing? I need to get serious about my life. Just can't just have fun playing with a band and I went to Mass General to look for the job board, you know, human resources closed and there was this job, you know, including the common DNA and Southern Blots and you know all the stuff that not like a handful of people in the world know how to do is very customized genetic engineering protocols, you know, transferring DNA by Southern Blots and purifying restriction enzymes to cut DNA to find DNA variants of polymorphisms. So, 10 out of Jim Gassel, who at the time was 25, I was 20 was look, he was finishing his PhD at MIT with David Hausman and he had figured out how to find single copy pieces of DNA that could be markers in the genome and the idea was to use those to find a disease gene, which is mundane now, but it had never been done. And he was looking for a postdoc to set up his lab and I somehow convinced him to hire me and he hired me on my birthday, which was September 18th, couple of days ago, he was having my birthday and now my birthday. I got that job and I was so excited and then you know, we in our book called decoding darkness in the first chapter of it's many about Alzheimer's with the first chapter is how you couldn't buy anything back then to do human genetics research. You had to Jerry with everything. I mean, I we would go to Walmart or came out and just pick out house household stuff and Jerry with it to do everything we had to do it. There were glorious times. It had to be MacGyver, you know, and just figure out how to get DNA transfer it and from gels and we it was we found the first dozen DNA variants ever in the human genome, picked them out randomly, not a 70 million of them know. And we got extremely lucky and that we pulled out 23 pieces of I mean 12 pieces of hay from 23 hay stacks and we found the needle needle being the variant that co segregated with Huntington's disease. We found the Huntington's gene in miraculous time against all odds and Jim became known as lucky Jim for that. And that really that single study published in nature, first time a disease gene was found using genetics really then stimulated the entire human genome project and the excitement. That we could use genetics to figure out diseases that were otherwise completely mysterious and I that for that reason I nominate Jim Gasella every year. The Nobel Prize Committee asked me to nominate someone and I nominate every year Jim Gasella and I hope for one day. You'll see that he's the guy who really stimulated the genetics revolution and human genetics and I was just happy to be the hands and be a part of it. That's a great story and thank you for sharing it. Let's move forward now to 19a 7 when you discovered the first Alzheimer's gene you named it emaloid precursor protein or a pp because it essentially makes emaloid and the mutations in that gene cause a rare form of early onset Alzheimer's with near certainty by making too much emaloid in the brain as I understand it. So now we know that emaloid is something that can occur in the brain a decade or two perhaps before symptoms. Can you tell us about the paper that came out in science that detailed this discovery. So going back to when I was going to go to Yale for genetics in advance of that I was already prepping to do by genetics thesis that Yale which I then instead did it Harvard but now it had to be more neuroscience based. I was in the neuroscience program that was a year later so I decided that I was going to use genetic variance on chromosome 21 I was going to build the first end to end genetic linkage map of a human chromosome and I picked chromosome 21 because it's the smallest and I would get done the fastest and then of course chromosome 21 is present in three copies rather than a normal two copies in down syndrome subjects and when I read in science magazine news and views article by Jean marks. It said down syndrome subjects or patients inevitably get amulet plaques and Alzheimer's pathology my middle age I speculated there would be an Alzheimer's gene there is no Alzheimer's gene known yet there would be a chromosome 21 and since the down syndrome patients got amulet first I speculated there be a gene on chromosome 21. It was going to make the amyloid and it was going to cause Alzheimer's and when I brought that to the department heads Harvard in the neuro biology department and I said I want to do this for my thesis they said that is just shameless speculation upon shameless speculation your student you're going to be safer than that that's way too high risk no and you know I was you know a stubborn kid who played in a rock band and I said no I'm going to do it and I found a down syndrome lab at children's hospital which I'm going to do it. Children's hospital with David current to late David current and he allowed me to do that in his lab so here I am ironically I isolate the first it turned out to be right the gene was on 21 that made amyloid I named it amyloid precursor protein to this day now amyloid is now agreed upon to be the cause of the disease there was a first Alzheimer's gene but ironically the first Alzheimer's disease gene was isolated at children's hospital and Boston because it only to down syndrome. Another really interesting story it illustrates how one couldn't have really planned for that sequence you know you seem to have taken advantage of in a good way of the opportunities that I presented you and it is it's a path that one couldn't map out beforehand. Yeah I think my mantra in science from the very beginning was and regarding the word research some folks emphasize the word re meaning go back to what's already been done and replicate it and incrementally advance it I've always been much more ambitious about emphasizing a word search and wanted to do something new out of the box not being afraid to take risks and you know within reason you have to have a career we can't totally create this stuff but you know but that's been basically the study of the research. The story of my entire career is high risk high reward projects including my very first you know the project and different my doctor thesis and Harvard which is to find that first I was. Yes that does sound like a risky thesis project and I'm very happy for you that it worked out well in your book decoding darkness you write the few real nightmares on earth compared to the terror wrought by Alzheimer's disease that's certainly true many of us have seen it in. Our own families are relatives can you give people a sense of the book I mean it has the title is also a really appropriate title I think you tell us a little bit about your book. Yeah well decoding darkness was my first book and the three books I wrote after that were all New York Times best sellers decoding darkness did not sell that great because you know it was it was a little bit more scientific but it was my favorite book and it was meant to tell the story about how we found the Alzheimer's disease. And the real stories the politics the so proper is the serendipity the mistakes that turned into discoveries you know it's meant to show that discoveries never a straight line and I hate when people apply revisionist history be a neat story and instead of telling the real story of how you got to the truth through a jagged zigzag line full of mistakes that they try to just then you know homogenize it and and sterile. And sterilize it and make it look like everything just worked out just right here was hypothesis and then this work and I said you know I'm going to write this book and I'm going to interview everybody friends and not so friends of mine in the field take all have this say to say how did how did we really find these disease genes these Alzheimer's genes and some much better story that way and you know they're embarrassment and there are mistakes and there was deep dark side of the soul involved but you know I think especially young butting scientists need to know. It's okay to make mistakes and as long as you learn from them don't obsess on them and move forward. That's a great message we have a large audience of young scientists postdocs and PhD and MD students listen to the podcast and that's one of the reasons we talk about people's life course because it's never a straight line and there's a lot of serendipity involved and I'm glad you talked about that and your book sounds wonderful. As people age we become more prone to memory lapses I mean I think everyone is aware of that I've heard you say I believe that memory loss as well as some diminishing of our general cognitive abilities sort of inevitably comes along as we age in the same sense as a 65 year old or in my case a 69 year old can't play basketball anymore with young people perhaps college students it just wouldn't work out for me. But when people start to have memory lapses they typically nervously sort of obsess about whether they've got the Alzheimer's gene or whether Alzheimer's is in their future based on how long a person lives however only 5% of Alzheimer's genes guarantee the disease 95% predisposed the person to Alzheimer's which means that lifestyle must have an awful lot to do with avoiding the disease or kicking it down the road ways can you tell us more about this. Yeah so the three early on set Alzheimer's disease genes all of which are involved with discovering the first one was the Emily because approach an APP and then please know one and please know and to those two ladder genes are the make the enzyme to cut the APP to create the amyloid so you have to substrate and the enzymes and those mutations unfortunately guarantee Alzheimer's disease by 60 years old often under 50 years old but they're rare there may be 2% of cases and then you have an Alzheimer's gene. The first one is the APP which is the most common late on set risk factor and about 2% of the population have 2 copies of APP for which dramatically increases risk by about 14 fold but doesn't guarantee the disease it does seem to guarantee that you'll get the pathology in the brain in a normal lifespan but once you get the amyloid pathology and onto the tangles and the inflammation you know it can take a decade or three before you get symptoms so I like to think of APP for homozygates. Double copy is pretty much a guarantee for the pathology but it comes later in life so that you may pass away of other causes before it transforms into clinical symptoms of the disease so that's that 5% number that where you have the guaranteed pathology and then if you live long enough guarantee disease but in the vast majority of the new Alzheimer's genes including the ones we have found since then and there are now almost a hundred of them all control neuro inflammation inflammation is the big one. The biggest killer of neurons and synapses in the brain and as we age inflammation becomes more and more rampant throughout the body so I played basketball I played soccer and cause I played basketball while I was a scientist I played for 30 years 5 hours a week full court ball right up until the pandemic and you know my knees got shot from that and I'm getting a knee replacement 5 days from now I'm going to get my right knee total knee replacement. 5 days from this interview not looking forward to that but what I'm saying is that inflammation not only hits the body and our knees and get in his rear and tear there but it hits the brain your lifestyle your mind asleep you get quality of your diet are you exercising all these things affect the rate of neuro inflammation in your brain and you know everybody a lot of people experience brain fog as we call it recovered that is neuro inflammation and so you can get a sense of how you're going to get a sense of how intense inflammation can cause brain fog or confusion you know even if it's temporary but this happens at a chronic and sub clinical level and most people and then they suddenly don't have the band but to remember everything and you know they get stressed out because they can't be like Google and remember every single name and frankly you know in past generations people didn't expect to memorize everything but now because we have social media and we're constantly on Google and out AI tools that can tell us everything we need to know we expect to be the same thing we expect to be Mr. Google and AI but we put so much pressure on ourselves to to maintain and retain and recall so much information we stress ourselves out that causes more inflammation in the brain so you know there's a difference between that and and actually on set of all sizes is what I want to say. That makes sense and you know you and others have been quoted as saying that people age prematurely when they stop learning new things and just in everyday life we sort of see that you know some folks when they retire for example don't take up challenging new activities they sort of just don't and they do seem to age very quickly and I've heard you argue that the harder something is to learn the better it is for your aging brain something challenging we've had other guests some time ago. When I showed See a pics I found a Berk со a but sound fun it wasn't a cool thing on night one was a strong advocate for things like dance or learning a foreign language thinks they're reciprocated challenging I'm What determines the degree of dementia once Alzheimer's disease begins? The answer is the same. It's the loss of synapses So here you are with a hundred billion neurons and trillions of synapses maybe tens of trillions and inflammation and acute attacks on the brain due to aging and how you're living your life including genetics in our 60 different Alzheimer's disease that determine your threshold for neuroinflammation. Well, neuroinflammation removes synapses So inevitably as you age synapses get lost. So it's our job to It's kind of like money coming out of your bank account If you have too much money coming out of your bank account, what do you do? You make money and save money The comparison for that in the brain is you need to make more synapses So that you have synaptic reserve like visors in the bank visors in the brain because the more synapses you make The more you can lose before you get into trouble So the way you build up synapses in the brain is very simple you learn new things The more things you try to learn and it doesn't always have to be something like intense like a new language or a new musical instrument Could be a new hobby. It could be watching documentaries or reading nonfiction books and learning new things as long as you're learning something new You're making new synapses and all learning is based on Association with what you already know so when you make new synapses as you learn new things They connect with existing synapses because you're the new information is being associated with the older information That's already in synapses already integrated your neural network So you're not only reinforcing your neural network and the synapses you have you're building new ones and creating new pathways around that And those pathways create resilience So when we talk about resilience as we age there's two forms of resilience resilience one is that you know despite aging and the onset of pathology You may remain cognitively intact that could be because you have a good diet the limits inflammation But could also be that despite the inflammation you made so many new synapses by learning new things That you can afford to lose more than most people before you get into trouble That's a great way of describing it I think you know We've been talking now about some of the genetic basis for Alzheimer's and when you first started looking into Alzheimer's In the 1980s not much was known and it seems like we've come a long ways in many ways and yet there are many mysteries still remaining regarding Alzheimer's I wondered if you could give us just a quick Squirt about what you see as the principal advances and as I said we've discussed some of them the genetic basis for Alzheimer's And could you tell us what you see as the biggest mysteries regarding Alzheimer's? You know it there must be some fascinating questions that you want to ask and resolve in the next few years To be really honest a lot of the mystery Has been solved the media still tends to want to create controversy and debate because that's what sells papers and gets you clickbait on the internet But it's now pretty clear and this is what genetics taught us the first gene said amyid plaques the amyid deposition beta amyid is sticky material Causes a disease and then we had two decades of confusion in debate because When we put those early onset Alzheimer's genes that we and others discovered the app to presenones who put those mutations at the mice They would make amyloid and eventually there'd be enough neuro inflammation to get the synapse loss and it have cognitive issues But the mice did not make the other key feature of Alzheimer's disease the neurofibulary tangles these filaments of Tristed filaments of the talpro team that accumulate inside of neurons and kill them from within So people said how can amyloid cause the disease all eugeneticists who say amyloid causes the disease How can it be if the mice don't get tangles fast forwarding? Guess what we now know mice cannot make tangles They have the wrong forms of the talpro team So a lot of much to do about nothing But it did lead to massive debates about whether it's plaques or tangles mice just now we know that mice don't have the right forms of the talpro team to make the tangles and so the big breakthrough came in 2014 When we created Alzheimer's in a dish we created a 3d human Neurocell culture But where we're growing? human neurons and a gel-like matrix that mimic the brain we put in the mutation So now they human neurons making amyloid and a gel-like matrix that mimic the brain and sure enough and that system in four weeks You got amyloid plaques Weighted and up weight another week or two and you get the tangles block the plaques and the amyloid then you don't get the tangles So that was the first proof of concept physically that said amyloid does cross tangles If you finally do it in a human system and that first you know human 3d Cultural model of Alzheimer's disease we published that in nature in 2014 and that kind of rested the debate But then there was a new controversy people said okay amyloid can cross tangles and yes the genetics say that amyloid causes this disease But wait a minute we had all these clinical trials and patients and we lowered the amyloid But they didn't get better and that caused more controversy and debate especially in the newspapers Oh the they're wasting your tax dollars chasing amyloid No, here's the fact Amyloid is to Alzheimer's disease as cholesterol is to heart disease Just like brown and goldstein won a Nobel Prize for studying an early onset family with heart disease But a rare mutation it was fully penetrant guaranteed the disease and That mutation was in the LDL receptor and an increased cholesterol did that mean That oh if a patient has congestive heart failure and needs a bypass all we have to do is lower their cholesterol now The early onset fully penetrant mutations and genetics teach you what to prevent Not what to treat those mutations we first discovered in the 80s and 90s and the early onset gene said amyloid comes early It takes then a one two or three decades for that cascade to finish before you have enough Neuro-inflammation to cause enough cell death and synapse loss to get the disease by that time simply Hitting the amyloid is a decade or two or three too late So I like to say the genetics taught us that amyloid is a match the lights The brush fires of tangles that spread and propagate what can strike the match genetics infection air pollution all kinds of things once you have the brush fires of tangles Not until they triggered the large forest fires of neuro-inflammation Do finally have enough cell that and synapse loss to get this disease So it's not no surprise that the majority of late onset Alzheimer's disease susceptibility genes that Inquire risk but don't guarantee the disease control Neuro-inflammation and a pain and it was my lab that's discovered the first Alzheimer's neuro-inflammation gene as well back in 2008 Stem talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition A not-for-profit research organization Investigating a broad range of topics aimed at understanding and extending human cognition locomotion Health span resilience and performance I remember the 2014 paper when that came out in nature I think it was and you mentioned it earlier that had a huge splash I remember people that weren't even working in the field and you know having anything to do with Alzheimer's We're sharing the paper and I know that you received a lot of attention for that paper There was a write-up in time about it You know it time puts out this list of 100 most influential people and Rea Shriver Shriver wrote a really very nice little blurb about your work. I thought it was it was very nicely done Yeah, it was it was kind of fun to get on that hundred most fun about getting on the time 100 list was going to the time 100 gallop And you know getting to meet the other people on the list that year and Christopher Nolan my favorite fruit movie maker was on the list And I just you know kind of pigeonhole them at the bar and was talking about interstellar and all his movies Bobby to the point that he got to look tired But but that was that was a lot of fun and you know that to think about the The Alzheimer's in addition to this culture model It did two things It basically validated the amyloid hypothesis that says yes Amyloid does cause the tangles and then that causes the cell death and the combination of the amyloid and cell that triggers the neuro inflammation Starting with the microglial cells and then you get the disease and the first microglial Alzheimer's gene is CD33 which we found back in08 and in fact even in08 when we found that was the first full genome-wide Association screen of Alzheimer's families we had conducted because we had gotten funding to do that From a very forward-thinking foundation cure Alzheimer's fund who also funded cure Alzheimer's fund and Boston also funded the The 3d Alzheimer's in addition model So you know everything started coming together about the course of this disease And that's why I like to say does not a lot of mystery left because we know the disease begins one to three decades before symptoms Amyloid deposits which could be a result of genetics where you make more amyloid or you don't clear it as well And that amyloid over time causes tangles and I those tangles spread Why don't you have a tangles like the pre-ons they spread and propagate and if that's all that happens you won't get the disease We know that because we have once in a while a resilient brain A postmortem brain of someone in the 80s who died with no cognitive issues But to the amazement of the pathologist is full of plaques and tangles and you say whoa This is Alzheimer's. No they were fine And then the question the answer is always the same about why they didn't have Alzheimer's disease symptoms No neuroinflammation. It is possible to have genes that protect you against neuroinflammation So in terms of the mystery the mystery now is how do we get the right drugs And treatments into people at the right time To end this disease to nib it in the bud and I have to tell you this is the most exciting time And Alzheimer's ever because now we finally have a clear path for those who are reading the literature and not reading the newspapers and Getting stuck on clickbait. It's very clear that amyloid causes this disease that tangles propagate the death Diner or inflammation must then cause the massive cell deaths that leads to dementia If you want to stop this disease then stop amyloid the faster you make amyloid in your brain The sooner you get Alzheimer's disease. That's clear now And so for younger people Let's stop the amyloid early detected early and safely and fordably stop it early for those who already suffer with the disease Let's try to put out that fire and help them as much as we can Let's try to crawl the neuroinflammation and stop the Reimpaging of death and synapse loss in their brains. That's the path forward So I think a lot of the mystery is actually gone at this point And you know when I just turned 66 two days ago and people say a lot of my friends are retired to say you're gonna retire I'm like are you kidding like every experiment? I've done in my life since 1982 and Alzheimer's has led to this moment This is the most exciting time I'm more excited now than I was a grad student isolating the amyloid gene Right because now there's finally a chance to finish the story in the next few years And that's what I'm gonna do that's the lowly mitologist That's what we're gonna do in my life Well everybody is pulling for you in that regard But a dreadful disease and really does need to be ended In 2019 you had another interesting and important paper that investigated the cross-talk between Michael Goliol Receptor cd33 and Trem two these two genes have been associated as you mentioned one of them earlier with the risk of all Summers disease and I've heard you refer to these genes or I think I read it in the paper as Ian and Yang Can you talk about why that is what do you mean by these two genes or any Yang and tell us about the significance of this study Yeah, I mentioned it back in 2008 Where we carried out the first full genome wide association screen and Alzheimer's families the main gene that came out This is gene cd33 and time magazine called that discovery one of the top 10 medical breakthroughs in a year And we were laughing because like we don't know idea what this gene does so new Alzheimer's We didn't know it did and then a very talented scientist and my group on a greet you had a paper in 2013 and neuron first Where she showed that cd33 is the switch on the Michael Goliol cells to tell them Instead of being nice housekeepers clearing the amyloid fact You know, I'm just taking up the amyloid and eating it and clearing it and by the way That's what the new Alzheimer drugs that would just approve do the chembie and the casson look their immunotherapies that trigger the Microgoliol cells to eat the amyloid with cd33 as it turns out we found out in 2013 Tell us the Michael Goliol cells. You don't have to eat amyloid and clean anymore Just spit out proflamatory cytokines and cause neuroinflammation So it switches the Michael Goliol cells from helpful housekeepers to killers and Later five years later the trim 2 gene was found as the second microgoliol Alzheimer gene at decode genetics and trim 2 is the opposite what an ana published in 2019 this paper you just Referred to that they in a year trim 2 tells the Michael Goliol cells keeping in the amyloid keep you know Keep common carry on don't cause neuroinflammation cd33 does the opposite and we looked at the first talk between these two And the reason why these and there are many other receptors and an Intercellular proteins that are part of this pathway where you constantly have these microgoliol cells and the spectrum between housekeeper and killer Clearing amyloid or inducing neuroinflammation. Why? Because microgoliol cells are the main defenders of the brain did a first defense while they're cleaning up the amyloid And they're eating the amyloid because the trim 2 is telling them to do that the cd33 is creousin as they're eating If they eat dead neurons that say a few neurons died with tangles because of the amyloid inducing the tangles and they eat some dead neurons That's a signal to them that there may be an infection That doesn't have to be an infection They were programmed by evolution to assume this infection if they're eating dead neurons These signals are called damps, right? So there's two ways to get a microgoliol cell to become a killer They eat an ashyl microbe like a bacteria or virus that's infectious that's a pamp or they eat a dead neuron Where they assume that that neuron died with infection either way instead of housekeeping They bring in their ramifications that are cleaning up the bryan amyloid They become a me boi and they shoot out throw inflammatory cytokines like a death star And they tell them astrocytes to get involved and they cause widespread neuroinflammation Why to wipe out that part of the brain so the infection to perceived infection What does doesn't spread and so today these microgoliol cells didn't get the memo The realifull 80 or 90 years old That we do get plaques and tangles as we get older and they cause them cell deaths But when they sense that cell death They assume it's an infection just like they did a hundred thousand years ago And say wipe out just part of the brain And it's that process because it's 10 times more cell death and synapse loss Then the original plaques and tangles and now you finally start to fall into the symptoms of cognitive impairment and dementia Hmm That's very interesting and you describe it very well Last year you had a paper in neuron That the press in your words sort of made a hash of or a mess of physical exercise has been shown to reduce amyloid beta in various Alzheimer's disease models but is imperfectly associated with amyloid burdening humans and The underlying mechanisms that account for this really have not been lucidated as far as I know irisin is an exercise induced hormone quite an interesting one actually in this paper You revealed for the first time a cellular and molecular mechanism by which exercise induced irisin Attanguates amyloid beta pathology I'm sure everyone wants to hear about this paper with a lot of our listeners are avid Exercisers and so if you could tell us about the paper and his findings and how was it reported in a way that caused a lot of confusion And so I've made a mess of the description of your findings and how much of this is relevant to humans in your view Well, the backdrop for that paper in neuron which was the first author of that paper Well, the made author that paper was say whom Troy who was also the first author of the first author of the nature paper under the first Alzheimer's treaty model as well He was also the first author and science paper we had in 2018 on how exercise induces neurogenesis the birth of new neurons in the brain and how that Emiliaates cognition and Alzheimer's mice So the backdrop for this study was that you speak them in my colleague at Dana Fabra first discovered this protein This little peptide called irisin named after the Greek god or goddess iris And it's secreted by muscles when you exercise and then there was another paper in cell by my close colleague Sam Cecilia in 2005 that said if you give mice running wheels Alzheimer's disease transgenic mice to give them running wheels and the exercise Deamnoid is dramatically removed and so the new paper in neuron basically put it all together What we showed is that irisin when is produced by muscles as your exercise enters into the blood is actively transported into the brain We showed it binds a receptor on astrocytes and when that happens the astrocytes are less likely to become reactive In other words, even if the microglial cells are upset and telling the astrocytes to become reactive and neuro inflammatory They stay chilled out and the astrocytes instead spit out an enzyme Called neprolycem that enzymatically Degrades the emily So there's all these different ways the brain has evolved to make sure you don't have too much amyloid in the brain You you want some amyloid beta protein it plays a role in the brain But you don't want too much of the amyloid in the brain because that's going to trigger the tangles And the Alzheimer's cascade so the brain can export the amyloid beta protein out actively through the across the blood brain barrier it can get the microglial cells to eat it which happens You know with the right diet and with the sleep But could also get the astrocytes especially during sleep or exercise to enzymatically breakdown the amyloid Where I said the press got it your press then took this and said okay, then Alzheimer patients just exercise and they'll get better Well again, you know Exercise is great. It's a great idea for Alzheimer patients and inducing the the new neuron sub-birth and neurogenesis will be helpful But at that point clear any amyloid is still a little too late That's something you want to do much earlier in the disease. So we had to try to set that straight I can see how that would cause the confusion I mean, I can imagine the interpretation Anyone who works in science irrespective of the part of science But particularly in your part, you know, you deal with this throughout your career with sometimes well-intentioned media Misrepresenting the situation in a way that leads to confusion and and people taking actions that are probably not helpful You're writing a new book and I think you're doing this one on your own you've done some marvelous books earlier with deep-hat Chopra and That's an interesting topic itself. How did you ever meet him by the way? Oh, so back in 2010 I was invited to give the it was the first time I gave a public lecture of this type And I was invited to give a talk at Ted Med which was to Ted for medical stuff and the session was on aging And I was I talked about the biology of aging in my talk deep-hat Chopra talked about aging and spirituality Quincy Jones the musician talked about being an aging musician and staying active and Frank Gary to famous architect talked about aging and staying active as an architect was a really cool session and literally This is embarrassing but later on I was in hotel Del Coro and I was in the bathroom and deep-hat Chopra was You know and the other stall there in Orgurinal to be honest and And you look so into me and he says I really enjoyed your talk So tell me is the brain a noun or a verb and I said well, it's a verb, but I would really rather talk outside um So when we started talking we had this I I always had this idea to write a book on neuroplasticity and the amazing ability to brain to regenerate even after a stroke and so yes So we wrote this book the first book and wrote together a super brain and book did extremely well It's so I don't know I think it's a million copies now and then that led us to do two more books together to also best sellers But you know um the last book we published there was a trilogy The last book we published in 2018 was the healing self about the amazing powers of the immune system to both protect you but also how inflammation could hurt you and in the last part of that book We talked about a lifestyle plan to limit the amount of inflammation in your body and brain and I had So this is kind of crazy because the same time that book came out I had an album a record album come out with Joe Perry various other artists Ringo stars sons axe darky and we recorded it at Johnny Depp's house at a studio and the book and the album came out the same day And I was had to do things for both of them and I had to give a book talk on the healing self and I said how can I I was literally in the shower And I said how could I summarize this action plan for reducing inflammation and the brain and as I thought about it I came up with the acronym shield which is sleep H handling stress I Interactual others e exercise L learn new things d diet And um I put it on twitter and it went viral and now there's been I don't know tens of millions of views and various videos not just for me but for others and shield kind of became a thing of its own so finally I when I I decided to write my own new book on shield but we call brain shields that will go into this stuff But it eminitive from you know just the basic pillars of health around getting enough sleep It's during sleep that you clear amyloids from the brain handling stress, you know chronic stress causes inflammation staying interactive with others that stimulation That you need for the brain lonely this increases risk for us Exercise we talked about the benefits of exercise learning new things We talked about having to make new synapses and diet we haven't spoken about But diet I think the main thing to remember is what's good for the gut is good for the brain Sam's authority and I and others Dave Holtzman be published numerous papers now showing that if you Positively affect the gut microbiome of off-time as mice that again you get those microglial cells to clear more amyloid And that's the name of the game for reducing risk so you can use your if you keep your gut microbiome happy With a plant-based diet a lot of fiber Somehow that triggers in the brain the microglial cells to clear more amyloid and be less inflammatory And I'll just finally say that Dean Ornish who's very famous for his cardio diet He and I published a paper about a month ago on a lifestyle intervention trial for Alzheimer's that was based on shield And it was a small trial only 50 patients 20 weeks But we got incredibly positive results for a small trial that says we need to keep going and this was a plant-based diet Vegan diet. I sent we sent them a device. I invented that helps him to meditate that uses light flashing and Music that I produced we had them be interactive we had them direct to size we monitor this sleep and We got time. He's also too good to be true in terms of cognition and amyloid biomarkers And so we're gonna do a bigger study now based on that So I think shield you know has his legs and we're gonna do more in terms of clinical trials But also I want to write this book and get the information out there In terms of your own thinking how do you bring together? You know, we've talked about a lot of different aspects of Alzheimer's disease How do you bring it together in a sort of a comprehensive model in your in your thought process? We've talked about some length the benefit of anti-amyloid therapies applied early on you thought that that could be quite beneficial And we're all hopeful that that's the case and you also acknowledge that the accumulation of amyloid is not necessarily Pathological or at least not directly leading to symptoms in all cases and it sort of the emilyd burden as you mentioned earlier Doesn't completely predict cognitive function and cognitive decline and many of the components to shield such as learning and cognitive stimulation Have been suggested to have little or no effect on the amyloid. So You've painted a really good picture here and I'm wondering if there's a way to pull it all together in your view or is this a work for the future or am I missing the thread that pulls it all together? Well, the only missing thread is If you have amyloid in your brain It will trigger the tangles and a neuronal cell death and you could be Extremely rare person where that does not trigger neuro inflammation to microglial cell state shield out And you don't get the symptoms of Alzheimer's But the vast majority of people if you have amyloid is going to trigger tangles And eventually that process is going to trigger neuro inflammation and eventually there'll be enough cell death and synapses to get the disease So Once you have amyloid in tangles It's a matter of what you live long enough To get the disease. It's not a matter of whether it's when so if you were lucky enough to not get amyloid and tangles in your brain Until you're quite old and you're going to die of other causes then You know if you did live if lifespan was average of 120 or 130 Unfortunately, I think most people would have enough amyloid and tangles and inflammation with very few exceptions to get this disease It's part of aging and early onset Alzheimer's genius the first ones you discovered get your dysdysseas in your 40s and 50s in some cases in your 20s Down syndrome subjects get it middle age if you carry two apoi four variants You start you have high-risk for the disease in your 60s. So as it continual So I think that what this says is that the path ahead is twofold We need to carry out early prediction of who's at risk based on genetics and family history Based on that we need to know when to carry out early detection Let's see if you're starting to make amyloid plaques in your brain for some people you need to stop looking when they're 20 or 30 or 40s Others you don't need to look to live 50 or 60 depending on genetics in your family history Then once you know that you have to do something about that amyloid that started to accumulate or even before to accumulate your genetic says You're guaranteed to get Alzheimer's amyloid. Let's hit it now We're going to need early intervention will need drugs that are safe and affordable So in a democratized manner we can provide protection to everyone now this shield in the meantime shield is aimed at both clearing amyloid And stopping inflammation the shield lifestyle plan and the lifestyle intervention trial we did shows that it might it has legs But in terms of drugs the only two approved drugs out there for clearing amyloid by immunotherapy So they're very expensive and they're not particularly safe But they at least provide a proof of concept that removing amyloid if you do it early enough is good for Alzheimer patients Now if you ask how many people in America today should they have the now available blood test To tell them they have amyloid in a brain. Yes, there is a blood test that mirrors pet scans and brain imaging to tell you if you have amyloid in your brain How many people with that blood test would find out that have amyloid in their brain and at high risk for Alzheimer's disease one or two Maybe three decades from now that number is 15 million people Five zero 15 million people in this country don't have Alzheimer's disease Clinical symptoms would already have the pathology in the brain brewing we need to provide them with interventions That are safe and affordable to nip that in the butt to bring that amyloid back down to stop the tangles from spreading To crawl the neuroinflammation. So this is what my lab focuses on now I haven't a novel drug. I've been developing for 20 years that lowers the amyloid production We'll be going into phase one trials next year It took 20 years and about 25 million dollars of NIH funding and funding from foundations like a cure-alsamist fund to get there But the other thing we've done and this came from a from work. I did but a company I co-founded as co-founding SAB head amylox amylox came up at a repurposed drug Two drugs repurposed together for ALS that was approved a few years ago Quovalibrio now the phase three fail sort of drug was withdrawn But it did help a lot of people and the company still giving it to about a thousand ALF patients Who benefited from it and they're getting it for free But anyway that that company provided the proof of concept you could screen known drugs that are already safe And create combinations of them that are multimodal and synergistic to hit different pathologies at once And create new drugs from existing repurposed drugs and I've been doing this now for seven years Using the Alzheimer's in a dish model over the last seven years and about five million dollars of funding from cure-alsamist fund We've screened every known drug we've screened over two thousand three thousand natural products And we have a list of which ones stop the plaques which ones prevent the tangles down stream of the plaques and which ones Curl the neuroinflammation and which ones get those microglial cells to eat more amyloid and we're using combinations That was now in clinical trials quick go no go trials and I'll send my patients to say is this combination doing in a patient But it didn't the dish by tracking their pathology when they're on the drugs based on blood-based biomarkers We have blood test that can tell you are we reducing amyloid Are we reducing tangles and inflammation and you can use those biomarkers to simply ask in a short six-month trial At these drugs getting into the brain and doing in patients what we saw in the dish based on blood-based biomarkers So that's the bulk of my work right now is to find These repurposed drugs and natural products because the pathway to patients is Two-thirds shorter if you have known drugs that are already safe Sure, this is trying to do a new drug that has to be proven safe So I have one new drug that is basically the last man standing in the world for a drug that can turn off the tap Remember all these other drugs we hear about are clearing the amyloid after it's there It's like a sink full of water the brain full of amyloid the existing drugs A road of rooter right they clear the amyloid but the amyloid already there and are already across problems I'm developing a drug that turns off the tap early on and That drug we hope someday will be to statin the same way you take a statin to hit cholesterol It's a prevent heart disease. This would be to statin Equipment to hit amyloid to prevent Alzheimer's So that's why I'm more excited than ever about our work Yeah, I can see that have you discovered any particularly promising existing FDA approved drugs or Neutraceuticals that seem to be beneficial given the large screen you told us about yes over 300 of them Between natural products and approved drugs. We have over a hundred in each category ones that drive the microglio cells to clear the amyloid ones that prevent the amyloid from inducing the tangles and spread and ones that simply chill out the microglio cells From becoming neural inflammatory and we're choosing from those combinations So when I talked at the NIH we funded the novel drug we came up with that was called a gamma secretase Modulator where we learned how to make that drug based on the presinoidogen So we discovered a 90 1995 it took that long to get there They said you know, it's a new drug We we would rather you don't as an academic Sparta to the And in other words apply for the The clinical trial so they said either license it to a company or start a company So I started a company a new company A new recommendation back in November of 2022 called active pharmaceuticals on the scientific founder for disclosure I have equity in the company defect. I'm into NAMO like I should say I have equity in that company is too And that company's developing the new drug But right now we took the six or seven best repurposed you know known drugs and you would never predicted these believe me You would never said oh, I bet you it's this drug of that This is agnostic we screen and see what works you would impact you wouldn't affect any of these drugs based on hypotheses or just predictions I had to come to start a screening So we took those six or seven best drugs and made combinations of those and they had been tested and Alzheimer's mice right now as we speak And the ones don't look best for hitting what we think they should hit in mice Those would then be put into clinical trials and patients for the next step to say are we hitting the pathologies? We expect to with knowing the purpose drugs and if they work the pathway To get them into into patients because they already know it and say for being you know literally too through it shorter than normal That makes perfect sense I'm sure you have people hounding you for what are the most promising so far because you know Alzheimer's is just such a widespread problem Well for the drugs we we stay quiet because we don't want people taking a described drug You know awfully no, you know until we know But you also look for natural natural. Yes. Yes really yeah for the national products It's different for national products. I do share it with family and friends I share it with the local football team the patriots. I share it with people in need Say and look I take these personally. I'm getting older to consider to be safe by the FDA We see combinations of these Help clear the amyloid or stop the tangos and inflammation. I share it with family and friends I have a when I do that I have a huge disclaimer It says this is not clinical He's we have no clinical evidence. They work yet. We're planning to clinical trials in the future This is lab-based evidence. I take them personally. They're deemed to be safe, but who knows? So I have to put that disclaimer there. This is not advice from mass general for Harvard And I share with family of friends. I share it with my rock star musician friends who need help and it's amazing and anecdotally and again never substitute anecdotes for clinical trials But anecdotally, I've gotten so much amazing feedback whether it be an actual football player an extra rock stock Who did too many drugs into 70s or and all the person who's having memory issues? anecdotally, I'm very inspired to do the trials and get to South there because we're seeing You know, and of ones saying that they're feeling better and you know, I'm one of those out of ones and I know I know how much better I feel I'm having my knee surgery That's weak. So I was told to stop all my supplements You know in advance because you never know what they do So I haven't been on these supplements now for since the beginning of the month And I'm fine, but I feel the difference. I feel the difference in sharpness and focus By not being on them. Well now that you've thoroughly teased our audience You should probably tell us about the natural products that you find most beneficial. Well, I You know, I like to do that in an email with a disclaimer Like in other words, I think each person who gets to this has to have the disclaimer. So I I Yeah, after after discussing this with master, but they said look don't publicly announce these things You can provide it in a written email with a disillusioned email me Our tansy at mgh.harvard.edu I'll send you to list with a disclaimer, but I do it carefully now because you don't want to just think you take this People do it willy nilly and they might say oh tansy has clinical evidence I don't have clinical evidence. I like to do it. I like to do it in writing. You know with that disclaimer But you know, this is something that um, I just you know, I've been working with the patriots from nine seasons and This is my 10th season where I just had a meeting with them last week where I update the list every every year and say These are the natural products that might help with these poor guys who are getting bangs on the head every day Who are increased risk for tangles and inflammation and no guarantees I don't have the clinical evidence, but spend nothing here to Rufus Uruq as you can take in the morning to try to offset What's happening in your brain with all those bangs that are ahead every day? No, I'm glad you're doing that. It's a big problem in football and other sports as well So I have one last question You are the only scientist I know who plays with rock bands and Is a prolific scientist is I want to make sure the our listeners understand that you're not just goofing off Your prolific scientist hundreds and hundreds Hundreds of publications. I think six 700 maybe articles Over 165,000 scientists right and and for the non-scientists that's very prolific production and yet you've just mentioned the patriots You have two super ball rings for your work with them So you're pretty unique and the theory on stem talk, you know the whole idea of the show is for the double secret selection committee Which I chair and all votes are unanimous the idea is to select some of the most interesting people working in science and technology And the selection committee obviously did its work So um would you tell us how do you manage to accomplish all that you do you have the same 24-hour day that the rest of us have You know, I guess I do it in spurts right so you know there was that time between 10 and 2018 where I wrote three the three New York Times bestsellers and that took a lot of my time And it was also doing that time. I was recording records with Alice Smith and Joe Perry and others and and that took time And then my science was going on because luckily I have really good people working with me I run a unit of 10 labs with 70 people who are my own lab and then like and then around 20 Finish writing the third book with Deepak show where I said man, I got to get back to enough of this enough Rock and roll enough books, you know, I still have my research going I was publishing papers But I said okay now it's no sort of grindstone. I'm not writing any books I'm gonna stop during the studio stuff and in music I will continue to help the Patriots I was on the sidelines for games and I said no sort of grindstone and I got back to the lab and only did that and all my Activity was an excel sheet some data and it paid off. I mean this this year alone. I think I just co-authored my 35th publication just this year alone that didn't happen in 2016 while I was writing books So you have to know when to you know do something new and you have to also know when to say hey, I have to get back to business And you don't do it all at once you you do it out in periods of time As your intuition and your your own, you know body and brain and mind and spirit tell you and so right now Yeah, I'm you know, I still work on my studio. I'm writing some music for some people who are for engineers who record me in my own studio You know, I'm no longer doing the sidelines for the Patriots but I'm being with them by zoom to help them with brain health I am going to write the field book because it's due and I think I can help people But it's all about just you can't do it all at once. You have to do it in periods of time in spurts And you have to always know when your top priority Must come back to the fore and that is science science research for us I can genuinely say despite having done all of these different things in my life Nothing makes me happier than a very large excel sheet that almost crashes my computer But a fond of eight where I can sort data. That is my greatest joy outside of my family Well, you've managed to do quite a lot and you're working in spurts model I think is a good guide for many others as well And this has been great fun Rudy. Thanks for coming on this show. We've been looking forward to it and we appreciate it Thank you. It's been a really fun conversation. It has been thanks again Stem talk is done to stem talk stem tank talk stem talk Rudy is quite an interesting fellow He has two Super Bowl rings place keyboards with bands like the arrow Smith writes books with deep pack Chopra And somehow finds time to run an absolutely thriving lab and make very important discoveries that are really driving a deeper Understanding of Alzheimer's disease as our listeners know Stem talk is about long form conversations with some of the most interesting people in the world of science and technology Rudy is a fascinating character and an excellent scientist So the double-strict selection committee found him to be a perfect fit for stem talk perhaps more importantly He has really done a great job of spreading the word about what we can do to maintain brain health as we age There is a helpful podcast interview with Rudy on the Harvard magazine website that you could check out If you want information about steps to take to maintain brain health We'll be sure to link to it in our show notes. This is Ken Ford signing off for now until we meet again on stem talk Thank you for listening to stem talk We want this podcast to be discovered by others So please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website stemtalk.us There you can also find more information about the guests we interview You