Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host, Don Conegas, and joining me to introduce today's podcast is a man behind the curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that selects all the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Hi Don, great to be here. Our guest today is making a repeat appearance on Stem Talk. Dr. Tommy Wood, a UK Transphysician who is now a research assistant professor of pediatrics in the University of Washington's Division of Neonatology. He was our guest on episodes 47 and 48 when we did a two-part interview with Tommy. So back in February, Tommy gave a very popular talk at IHMC's lecture series about the components of building and preserving brain health across our lifespan. And so the Double Secret Selection Committee thought it would be a great idea to have him back on the show. And his lecture, Tommy touched on ways that we can maximize the health of developing brains, the things we need to consider if we suffer from an acute brain injury, and also how to maintain a robust brain for decades as we age. And once again, our conversation with Tommy was so long and wide-ranging that we have again split his interview into two parts. So in today's episode, we will be talking about the importance of metabolic health, especially as a way to protect ourselves from COVID-19. We touch on Tommy's work at developing accessible methods to track human health and longevity and also his research as an assistant professor of pediatrics at the University of Washington, where he studies ways to increase the resilience of developing brains. In part two of our interview, we talked to Tommy about his continuing research into lifestyle approaches aimed at improving health span and lifespan as well as physical performance. We also have a fascinating discussion about the physiological and metabolic responses to brain injury and their long-term effects on brain health. So if you listened to our earlier interviews at Tommy, you might remember that he received an undergraduate degree in biochemistry from the University of Cambridge before obtaining a medical degree from the University of Oxford. And after working as a doctor in Central London, he moved to Norway for his PhD work and then to the University of Washington as a postdoc. Alongside his academic training, Tommy has coached athletes in a multitude of sports, anywhere from weekend warriors to Olympians and world champions. He is outgoing president for the Physicians for our Ancestral Health Society, a director of the British Society of Lifestyle Medicine, and sits on the Scientific Advisory Board of Hint-Suppreformance, which includes developing performance optimization strategies for Formula One drivers. And as if this isn't enough for Tommy to do, he is also a visiting research scientist here at IGMC. So as you can see, we covered a lot of ground with Tommy. But before we get to part one of our interview, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Sleshing Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the widiest and most lavishly praised filled reviews to read on Stem Talk. As always, if you hear your review read on Stem Talk, just contact us at Stem Talk at ihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk T-shirt. Today, our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker, Windsor 4. The review is titled Brain Candy for Science Junkeys. The review reads, I first ran across Stem Talk when I was checking to see what was up with Dr. Peter Atia. I ran across the very first podcast by Stem Talk. I immediately subscribed and took a deep dive into the archives, a who's who of names I could not wait to hear. I was suddenly lost to my wife for several days as I binge listened to many, if not most, of the episodes while doing my yard work. This kept me from being accused of anti-social by my wife and made my property look better than ever. For those who complain, Don and Ken are scripting, to me it shows preparation, and for that I am grateful. Well, thank you so much, Windsor 4. Anytime we can help someone with their spouse, family or friends, we're definitely more than glad to help. You have given our listeners another reason to tune to Stem Talk. It can not only improve your brain, but also your yard, so I'll have to take that into consideration as well. So that was a great review, wasn't it Ken? Yes, it was, and we really appreciate all of these wonderful reviews. And now onto our interview with Dr. Tommy Wood. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Hi, welcome to Stem Talk. I'm your host on Konegas, and joining us today is Tommy Wood. Tommy, welcome back to Stem Talk. Hi, thanks for having me back. And also joining us is Ken Ford. Hello, Don in Hello Tommy. Welcome back. So Tommy, since COVID-19 is at the top of everyone's mind right now, I'd like to start by asking you about an editorial that you and a colleague recently wrote. And in it, you point out that it is becoming increasingly clear that underlying conditions associated with suboptimal metabolic health appear to be associated with poor outcomes and patients with COVID-19. And considering the nature of these underlying conditions that include obesity and hypertension, you argue that lifestyle-based approaches to protecting ourselves from COVID-19 are likely to be one of our best tools in addressing this ongoing pandemic, as well as in future pandemics. So can you give our listeners a summary of the key points that you made in that article, which is a great article, by the way? Sure, thank you. This is an editorial I wrote for a new journal called Lifestyle Medicine with a friend of mine and colleague, Gooman De Johansson, who's an ER physician in Iceland. And he has an increasing interest in expertise in immunomotabolism, so the intersection between metabolic health and immune function. And if you look at pretty much any data source that's currently available, there's a suggestion that those with the BST metabolic disease, those conditions that you mentioned, they have a worse outcome in patients with COVID-19. And if you look at previous literature, it's been less widely publicized, but you see the same thing for various strains of flu, H1N1, swine flu, as well as previous SARS and MERS, which are the coronavirus, which are sort of preceded SARS-CoV-2. And in people who have metabolic disease, as well as with aging, you see this change in how the immune system functions. So you have a down regulation of the adaptive immune system you have changes in T cells, certain T cell populations decrease, and you also get a relative increase in the activation of the innate immune system. And what happens, or what seems to happen is that you get a slower initial response to an infection, so you don't mount a proper response to clear it. But then later you get a much larger sort of compensatory response to the virus. And this may be part of the cytokine storm that we hear about, which often happens as a second phase of the disease. So this happens in metabolic disease, and there was a group who have significant expertise in biological age who also wrote a paper, or as currently a preprint, talking about COVID-19 as an emergent disease of aging, and these changes kind of converge in metabolic disease and in aging. And so in this paper or editorial, we make the argument that if you want to prepare for future pandemics, obviously we're thinking about a vaccine development testing throughput, bringing a pipeline to respond to whatever the future pandemic is going to be, and some people think it's most likely to be a strain of flu rather than a coronavirus. On top of that, you need to try and improve the metabolic health of your population if you want to maximally reduce the morbidity and mortality. We talk about lifestyle medicine, and that's kind of the current, best accepted term that covers the idea that sleep, stress, diet, and movement, and social connection, all those are key to health, like we talked about last time on the podcast. And we're certainly not the first people to say this. This has definitely become more and more publicized that these metabolic diseases are associated with worse outcomes. And I've found it interesting because it's been some pushback by other people who say that it's targeting or discriminating against those with poor health, but that's certainly not the goal. And when this comes out, there'll be an accompanying editorial by the editor in chief who says the message is actually quite positive, and I believe that's the case. You know, there are a huge number of tools and the strategy is many of which we'll talk about today. I believe that you can use to improve your metabolic health. And I think it's really important to be agnostic to those tools because so many people will have different things that they want to do or that they might want to change to improve their health. And there's many things that they can do to do that. And one problem with lifestyle medicine is that in the US, particularly it's associated with the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, which is very dogmatic towards a plant-based diet. So we make the argument that there actually a wide range of dietary tools. It always comes down to dietary wars, but we argue that there are multiple different ways to skin this cat, and we should be agnostic to that and have all those options open. However, to make this happen, I think we need a better combination of digital health tools and better education and implementation and health care systems. So it will require some kind of significant investment and process to sort of get these ideas and the help to the people who need it, sort of as part of this future pandemic preparedness, as we called it. Makes perfect sense. So Tommy, when we interviewed you a few years ago, you had just become a senior fellow at the University of Washington, and we're in the process of moving permanently to the US. And when we asked what brought you to the States, you said, and this is a quote, a girl, well, we know that you ended up marrying that girl who turned out to be a Elizabeth Nance, who is a Claire Booth, loose assistant professor of chemical engineering at Washington. And we interviewed her on episode 71 of STEM Talk. Love that STEM Talk interview as well. In addition to you guys getting married, you've also written papers together. So is it safe to say that the two of you get along really well because you spend a lot of time together from professional to personal? Yeah, yeah, we do absolutely. We get along very well as you'd hopefully expect. So yes, since my last, it would be bad if news would stink in a lot. Who also worked together by the way. Yeah. It would be bad. So luckily, none of that. But yes, since those last on STEM Talk, we've got married. We've published a few papers together, submitted several grants together. So I can safely say that she's my most important collaborator in pretty much every area of life. I love that. So congratulations to you guys as well. You know our research assistant professor at Pediatrics at the University of Washington in the division of Neonatology. Her focus is on ways to increase the resilience of developing brains, really interesting, and important. And you also look at ways to treat neonatal brain injuries. Can you give us a quick overview of your work and then we'll talk about some things in more detail? Yeah, absolutely. So the majority of my academic work has focused on investigating how the neonatial brain responds to injury and then ways to treat those injuries. And most of this I do in animal models. And one strength of the neonatal brain injury field that I really like is that there is a wide range of complementary animal models, which we can then use to find a treatment or examine a process across multiple species before we try and translate it to humans. And I think that's lacking from other areas of neuroscience. Well, like we talked about last time, most of my work in the last few years is focused on developing ferret models of brain injury. And now we have successfully developed a wide range of reproducible models that really depend on the life period or the type of injury that we want to study. So we can look at premature birth. We can look at brain injuries at full term. So perinatalist fixiel problems during childbirth. Or we can look at pediatric and adolescent traumatic brain injury. And as I spend more time working in these areas, what's become really interesting to me is how these things might interact over time. So what happens if you're born prematurely and you get a concussion on a football field just 20 years later? Or does your early life brain injury alter susceptibility to things that might be exposed to later in life like your diet? Or if you're an athlete and you get a concussion, does that change your susceptibility to another injury later? Or if you're exposed to hypoxia or altitude, are you then more or less susceptible? And these are kind of the questions that I really hope to dig into in the next few years. Fantastic, Tommy. And so when you give talks, you'll often start by giving a disclaimer, which says, many of my best ideas are stolen. What do I like? So when you're looking for ideas, what are some of the best places that you like to visit? Yeah, yeah, that's true. And I think when I spoke at IHMC recently accidentally said that most of my ideas are stolen, which I don't think is true. It was a bit of a slip at the time. But I try not to actually steal and would much rather give credit to the people who inspire me. And I hope I'm usually successful at that. But I'm really lucky to have a rich network of friends and colleagues that approach problems in different ways. So the first thing I do is try to make sure that I learn from each of them as much as I can. I also try and read quite broadly because you never really know where inspiration is going to come from. But at the same time, it's also important to realize that whatever bright idea you think you had has probably been had by several people before you. As they say, there's nothing new under the sun. And I think that's just a part of life. This is one reason why I really enjoy delving into the literature from several decades ago. I think there's a huge amount of important physiology in biochemistry work that was done in the 50s, 60s and 70s. And a lot of that is really starting to see a revival now. But we think it's new ideas. But actually, people were looking at it a long time ago. I do like to use social media as a tool just to kind of follow interesting research because that sort of it's more likely to pop up quickly there. But I think it's also important not to fall into an echo chamber of all the people who you agree with on a certain topic. So I try to embody or sort of use the words of Dudley Field Malone who supposedly said, I have never learned anything from any person who agreed with me. And I don't think that's true all the time. But there is a huge amount you can gain just by following people who have different ideas to you. The downside then is that you have to sift through a lot of stuff that you really disagree with and then not try and mount an emotional response to it. But overall, I think there's benefit for doing that. I like that a lot. So when we interviewed Elizabeth, she said she can't stand to look at your computer because you have so many windows open at one time. I have to say I'm guilty of that as well. So I feel a little bit better knowing you do that, Tommy. She said that you're constantly reading paper after paper after paper. And then it makes her dizzy look at your computer screen with all the tabs of windows. So can you talk a little bit about your research methods and how you go about collecting material? Because in this day and age, we know this overabundance of information that's thrown our way just being able to sort through everything is tough. So it'd be great to hear how you do that. Yeah, absolutely. And I learned during my PhD to not make myself feel like I have to stay up to date on every topic that I'm interested in because that way lies just complete insanity. But so there is some method to the madness that Elizabeth sees. So I'll keep tabs and website pages and papers organized by topic and grouped into a process that I'm working on, which at any one time is probably multiple papers and grant proposals that kind of like grouped together. But it definitely looks a little overwhelming to begin with. And I did actually have a friend and colleague recently joke that I must keep all my tabs and processes open in order to create some additional cognitive load because otherwise I would just be too productive. So that's what that's what might be happening. So some of it is a little stochastic, which is a fancy word for random. But one interesting thing that I've noticed about myself over time is that I've changed the way that I sort of engage my brain to remember things. So if you're a student, as an undergraduate, I sort of had to remember all these, all of these facts. So you have to be able to regurgitate them in an exam. But now I focus less on remembering facts and I remember where the information is. So if I just have a small snippet of an author or a title of a paper or something, contents, and then I need to go back and get that information as much easier for me to find it. So I find myself remembering where things are rather than what things are. Makes sense? Yep, indeed. And that seems to be remembering where things are, seems to be the current trend. Otherwise, people's heads are essentially empty. Your current research interest, as we've started to discuss, include the physiological and metabolic responses to brain injury and the long-term effects on brain health. In addition to this, you are also working to develop easily accessible methods to track human health performance and longevity, three topics of great interest here. And that's quite a wide range of interests. And we'll talk about some of them in today's discussion, but could you give us sort of the 100,000-foot impression of this? Absolutely. This is one of the best parts of my current job, which is that I can essentially work on anything that I find interesting. And at some point it's going to come relevant to all the other things that I do, or at least I've seen that happen again and again. So I'm also fortunate that some of my previous work with athletes and those trying to optimize health and performance led me to some of my current consulting work, which is where those aspects of tracking health and longevity in an affordable manner at scale are happening so kind of separate to my former academic work, but certainly quite relevant. Because when you look at things at the forefront of longevity or aging research, this could be either tracking methods or interventions. Actually, they often become relevant to treating either the neonatal brain or other brain injuries. So I've certainly seen that with ketones, NAD, all these other factors that we've started to see become sort of cool in the anti-aging space. While on the face of it certainly seems like a collective variety of unconnected interests, I do think that doing each one makes me a better scientist in the other ones. The downside is that this often causes raised eyebrows in former academic circles where you're a junior faculty and you're supposed to only cultivate one area of expertise and if you're publishing multiple areas, they think that that means that you don't know what you're doing or you don't know what you want to do or who you are as a scientist. But I'm very lucky that the people that I work with, particularly my division chief at the University of Washington, they have also have very broad range of interests and they see the importance of drawing on multiple fields. And I think we're starting to see the benefit of that in our research in the lab. That's fantastic. And so it's kind of going on that theme. As a neonatal neuroscientist, you work mainly with newborn babies with brain injuries, but you also work with football players and Formula One race car drivers and you can work with people with Alzheimer's disease. So most people who specialize in brain research as we've been talking about will pick an area like neonatal or Alzheimer's to focus on. You however seem to be more interested in looking at the brain from cradle to the grave in it across a wide spectrum of different individuals and different professions and applications. So why is that? So the simplest answer is because I find all these things interesting and I want to do all of them. But in reality, I think there's a huge risk in siloing research based on a single diagnosis or disease. And that's particularly true in neuroscience. And when we look at the treatment of neurological diseases as a whole, there hasn't been a significant step forward in disease treatment essentially for decades. So the last truly innovative thing that came to the clinic was the triptan drugs for migraines in the 90s. So we've been talking 30 years since we've had a true improvement in our ability to treat neurological disease and we're still left with nothing for multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, multiple other neurological conditions. And as analytical techniques improve and the complexity of the information we have increases is very easy to just assume that our theory or model of a single disease is the right one, but we just need more data in order to understand it. And I think that this is the wrong approach. There's brilliant essay that I often refer back to written by Euryla Zebneck in cancer 7 2002. It's called Canobiologist Fixer Radio. And he describes in hilarious detail what it would look like if biologists took the current approach to undersigned disease and applied it to fixing an old broken radio. So for instance, there's this section where several groups of researchers look inside the radio and they see that transistors, resistors and capacitors are different colors. So they spend their entire career seeing whether changing the color of a resistor affects the way the radio performs, which is obviously complete nonsense. But this is what I think we're doing in a lot of basic neuroscience. We're there fiddling with the color of resistors and then wondering why we can't get the radio to work. But the colors do mean something. They do mean something, but the internal workings don't change. So instead, I justify my broad range of interest because if you're looking at multiple mechanisms of brain injury across the lifespan, you're forced to look for commonalities in the themes that give you an overall picture of the system and what the system requires both in health and disease rather than becoming hyper focused on a single mechanism. So I think we need more of this to try and find meaningful answers for those with neurological disorders and that's how I tie together all those different periods of life and different types of injuries to try and find some kind of commonalities. It makes sense to me. In the talks you give, you often bring up Maslow's hierarchy of needs as a way to sort of explain to people what a brain needs. Can you go into that just quickly for our listeners? Yes, I think that that's a way that we can sort of better connect or create a framework of what a brain might need in order to sort of have long term, long term health. And there are multiple different ways, theories to do that. But I use Maslow's hierarchy of needs because it was developed to give an overview of the broad range of things that humans might need for long term health. So Abraham Maslow was an American professor of psychology and in 1943 published this paper called A Theory of Human Motivation, which included this hierarchy of needs, which most people display as a pyramid. At first at the bottom you have physiological needs. So that's food, water, warmth, rest and safety needs. And you have psychological needs, that's belongingness, love, self-esteem and then self-fulfillment needs at the top, which is things like purpose and achievement and creativity. And you know, lots of people are debated as to whether this is really the final framework or whether these things change over time. And I don't think that really matters because it just sort of gives us an idea to put together things that might be important. So I've changed it from a pyramid to a three-legged stool for the brain of the things that the brain needs for long term health. So those things are materials. That's like energy substrates and building blocks like oxygen and glucose. Security, so that's protection from injury or treatment for injury and then protection against any kind of noxious exposures. And then connection and that's kind of broad, but it can be both between cells but then also to the external world and having some kind of stimulation to bring all these things together. So as a stool, the idea is that each leg is potentially equally important. And if you're missing one leg, it's a lot harder to maintain balance on just the other two legs. So I have no idea where this is the best model, but I think it's a nice place to start to explain what it is that a brain needs for optimal long term health. It's fantastic. And Tommy, you've said that you find recent brain age studies to be particularly fascinating because they are just now beginning to show how fetal and neonatal exposures affect adult aging. So can you give us a summary on what these studies are showing us? Yes, and this is a relatively new field because we're only just now able to start looking at comprehensive data from neonates and how that's associated with outcomes in adults. For instance, the first premature infants who had significantly improved survival, they were born in the 70s and then there were more improvements in care in the 80s and 90s with things like surfactant and better ventilation. So these people are only now in their 40s and 50s. So we're only starting to see some of the signal there. But in general, people who are born prematurely seem to be at increased risk for almost every chronic Western disease, so heart disease, type diabetes, obesity, chronic kidney disease. And then we don't really know about cognitive decline or dementia. Neonatal exposures such as maternal infection, which could be a urine-etract infection or the flu while you're in utero, while your mother's pregnant. These are associated with an increased risk of a number of neuropsychiatric disorders like autism and depression. And when you look at this in terms of aging, we have some data on people who were in utero during the Dutch famine during the German occupation in World War II. And those people seem to have older looking brains relative to people who are the same chronological age but weren't exposed to that while they were in the womb. And there are some small studies that show that people who are in their 20s and 30s now and they were born prematurely, they show more rapid brain aging and shorter telomeres compared to people who weren't born prematurely. And telomeres aren't a great measure of aging but everything seems to look like it's going in that direction. If you're born prematurely or you have some of these exposures in the womb, then you age more rapidly later in life. And what we don't know yet is whether this is a permanent epigenetic effect that occurs very early on or whether it creates an increase of susceptibility to later things like the environment or lifestyle that then may precipitate faster aging. At the same time, if you're exposed to these things in the womb or you're born prematurely, can we intervene early and then change where this happens over time? And that's something that I hope sort of myself and my colleagues will help to figure out. So Tommy, let's step back for just a second and talk about what goes into growing a brain. And we know that when we are born, our brain takes up about 75% of our metabolic rate. So maybe a good place to start is describing the energy needs of our brains, when we're especially in the developing brain. As a species, we take a very significant risk to have the brains that we have. And I know you've had Stephen Knai on the podcast previously, he's talked about some of this. The human brain is incredibly complex and very metaphorically demanding. But at the same time, when your born, your brain is essentially useless, you are just like this complete inanimate lump. That means that you have to rely on essentially everything from your parents whilst this brain develops. And that takes a huge amount of time and energy. In order to support the brain, we have to have a very significant energy store to fuel it, which is why humans are essentially the only primate that have fat babies. This is basically our buffer to make sure there's always energy available to supply the brain. While people often talk about glucose being an essential energy source for the brain, in reality, that fat store is there to be turned into ketones and then ketones also give a very significant proportion of the brain's metabolic needs. And so last year, you published a paper about the potential use of exogenous ketones for neonatal neuroprotection, which starts with the idea of ketones being essential for the newborn brain as you've been talking about. Can you talk about the role of ketones in brain development specifically? Yes. So as I'm sure most of the list does know, the use of keystgenic diets and exogenous ketones for brain injury is a very promising and active field of research that even you guys are actively involved in. But if you look at neonatal brain physiology, the developing brain will basically take up as many ketones as you'll give it and by motor equivalents, at least 60% more than glucose. And this relationship is pretty linear, so it'll basically take as much as it can get. That's the cause in the fetus and then also after birth and there are two mechanisms that ensure ongoing ketone production in the neonate. So the epithelial cells in the milk ducts of the mother's breast tissue, they actively synthesize medium-chain triglycerides from glucose in the blood and then those are secreted into the milk. So after being fed, even though that comes with a significant amount of carbohydrate in the breast milk, they have MCTs, so those will be continuously being converted into ketones. And alternatively, between feedings or part of the reason why we have fat babies is because breast milk doesn't necessarily appear immediately or there's going to be some time in between it. Those fatty acids are going to be released from the adipose tissue and they're going to be turned into ketones. And newborn babies enter significant fasting ketosis essentially in a couple of hours. So in other words, newborns are prime for ketosis. Yeah, exactly. Which is why I'm very interested in ketones as a neuroprotective agent for babies with brain injury because if any brain is ready to take advantage of the neuroprotective effects of ketones, I think it's the neonatal brain. Makes sense. Ketone bodies play a major role in the central nervous system during myelination. Not only a source of energy but also a source of carbon for lipid biosynthesis. Can you talk a little bit about the significance of this and try to tie this together for the listener? When I was first looking at ketones for neonatal neuroprotection, this particular fact was something that was new to me and actually probably the most fascinating thing that I found. And even back in the 70s, Hans Krebs, who I can, whose work I like to quote as often as I possibly can, his group described the fact that ketone uptake in the developing brain was at least on par with glucose, like I mentioned. And they suggested that they provide at least 50% of the metabolic energy demands of the neonatal brain. This has since been revised down to about 10 to 30% because some slightly later work showed that ketones are preferentially used as synthetic precursors mainly for the reduction of saturated fats and cholesterol. And so if you want to grow a large brain, you need to make a lot of saturated fat and cholesterol and ketones that are the main precursor for that. So if you think about anything that's not water in the brain, about 70% of that is fat. And a significant proportion of that is cholesterol, more than 95% of which has to be synthesized locally. And so, if you look at the natural rate of the fat, the fat is also synthesized locally. So if you look at neonatal rats, who are very similar to humans in this respect, if you give them ketones, those ketones will preferentially be used as building blocks, synthetic precursors to build the brain, and then glucose will get used for metabolism. So if you're thinking about ketones both in terms of development and in terms of brain injury, it's one of the potentially most important aspects because if you have an injured brain, you have to repair the area of damage and you're going to need new building blocks. And everything that we see from the developing brain is that we preferentially use ketones to make those building blocks and then we can use that to repair an injured area. That's the idea. In addition to ketones, unsaturated fats also play a major role in brain development. Can you elaborate on this a little bit? Yeah. So, when again, you're looking at the things that accumulate in the brain as you grow it, unsaturated fats are a crucial component. And so these are generally split into two subtypes, polyunsaturated fatty acids, you might think of the omega-3s and the omega-6s, and then mono unsaturated fats. And basically all the way during development and then continuing for years after birth, there's a linear increase in these unsaturated fats in the brain. So the most important ones being DHA, which is a long chain omega-3 fatty acid, a raccoid ionic acid, a long chain omega-6, and then oleic acid, which is a mono unsaturated fat. And the timing is slightly staggered, so DHA is maybe more important towards the end of pregnancy, and then a raccoid ionic acid becomes slightly more important after birth. But unlike the saturated fats and cholesterol, which are sort of synthesized locally in the brain, most of these need to come from an external source. So they're going to come from the mother, from the placenta, during pregnancy, or they're going to come from the diet or the breast milk later on. In general, these are going to come from animal foods, although it is possible to synthesize some of these from shorter chain omega-6s and omega-3s with the FADS genes. But there's a huge potential for diet to then play a role in terms of how available these are. So tell me what about what the mother eats. The maternal diet also plays an important role in infant development, as we know. And you've spent a lot of time studying the work of the late Sheila Inness, who was a tireless researcher and proponent of the nutritional needs of babies, children, and also expect them mothers. So what are your key takeaways from her research? Sheila Inness, a pretty much single-handedly pioneered the early research into polyunsaturated fats in the infant brain and development, including the effects of maternal diet and the composition of the breast milk. She was originally English, but then spent the most of her career at the University of British Columbia. What I particularly enjoy about her work is the fact that she spanned everything from basic work and cell culture to small and large animal models and then human clinical trials. There are very few people who have the skills and the interest to really translate all the way from the most basic research all the way to actually improving outcomes in humans. And I give a lot of respect for that. And she did a lot of work showing that the maternal diet directly affects the fats in the breast milk. So particularly when fats make up a significant proportion of the diet, then the composition of the breast milk in terms of fat content pretty closely follows what's in the diet. And about a third comes from the recent diet, so what was maybe in the day or the day before. Two thirds come from adipose tissue, which again is usually stored fat that you have previously eaten, so to diet plays a huge role there. And one of the main takeaways from her work, for me, is the critical importance of DHA, again, this long chain omega-3 fatty acid. She showed that it makes up about 10% of the fats in the infant brain and in certain neuronal synapses, so right where the neurons are talking to each other and makes up almost a third of the fat in the membrane. And then very importantly, and something that's becoming, I think, increasingly important because the Western diet is she did a lot of early work showing that dietary little layer acid, which is an omega-6 acid can compete for DHA and for uptake pretty much into any cell, particularly into the developing brain. And that's something that I think we probably need to be more aware of. Yeah, and you mentioned little layer acid, which is a polyensaturated omega-6 acid that is one of two essential fatty acids for humans. And since the early 60s, the amount of linoleic acid in Americans has increased dramatically, is also increased dramatically in women's breast milk? Is that a problem? I think it is a problem, and potentially quite a large one. The average Americans consumes about 6 to 14% of their calories from little layer acid. And as a result, like you said, the little layer acid in our adipose tissue and in the breast milk has quadrupled roughly since the 60s. And if you look at the amount that we're eating on average, you compare that to say the mass eye, who are hunter-gatherers that have a relatively high fat diet, they get maybe up to 2% of their calories from little layer acid. And when we look at the available studies on little layer acid being essential, some people say about 2% of calories are necessary, but it's probably as low as 0.5%. And the confusing part of this is the phrase essential, because it means something very specific in nutrition. It means that you can't synthesize it yourself and you have to get it from food. But it doesn't necessarily need the mean that you need a significant amount of it for health. So for instance, if you want to study how essential a certain omega-6 fatty is, so like little layer acid, you remove all the other omega-6 fats from the diet, and then you add back just a little bit to see what can reverse symptoms. And it's usually skin symptoms that you see either in rodents or in humans. But much like the other essential fatty acid, which is alpha-lidinolena-c acid, is shorter chain omega-3. These two mainly act as precursors for the more important longer chain fats. So alpha-lidinolena-c acid becoming EPA and DHA, or little layer acid becoming a record on a acid. So I would argue that most of the function of little layer acid in the diet as an essential component is to be a precursor for the longer chain, a record on a acid, which we can synthesize. So, even if little layer acid is essential in a biochemical sense, we probably need even less of it if we're consuming a record on a acid, which you would get if you'd have a small amount of animal foods in the diet. And even then, we're probably eating several times, 10-20 times more than we would be getting in traditional diets. And over time, this becomes a problem. Again, like I sort of alluded to earlier, it's because it competes with DHA for uptake into pretty much every tissue of the body, and DHA is pretty much an essential component of our brains, and particularly our mitochondria. Stem talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research lab pioneering groundbreaking technologies aimed at leveraging and extending human cognition, perception, locomotion, and resilience. In the lecture you gave at IHMC, you talked about how many people may be suffering from a day loose of processed oils that have become really a staple in the modern diet. And I find a lot of confusion on this. In fact, we've received email questions about this for the Ask Me Anything episode. We did maybe, I don't know, three or four months ago. So when it comes to processed oils, what do you see as the primary issue and what's your advice on this matter? I really understand why people get confused about this, and it always seems to come back to LDL cholesterol and heart disease. We've been told for decades that replacing saturated fats with plant oils like canola, sunflower, soybean oil reduces LDL cholesterol, and therefore this reduces our risk of heart disease. So why is true that these oils can reduce LDL cholesterol if you replace saturated fats with them? And there is some epidemiological data suggesting that this is associated with reduced heart disease risk. The randomized control trials don't really agree with that. And either they show no effect or a potential for worse outcomes in those consuming more of these oils. So the Sydney Diet Heart Study is a good example where they replaced animal and saturated fats with high, linear, rare-cattered content, sunflower oil and sunflower margarine. And that seems actually increased mortality and increased heart disease rates. So in the first instance, I think there's been a conflation between proximal outcomes and long-term one, but I would argue that it's probably mortality and disease risks that people care about more. But in reality, there's so much more to this scenario than just cholesterol and heart disease. I do think one of the problems, particularly when other people are maybe trying to refute the claims that these vegetable oils are bad for our health, is that there's very loose terminology being used. So people will say that plant oils are pro-inflammatory. But in reality, that's not necessarily true. So if you feed people soybean oil, they're not going to have this big sort of increase in the inflammation that you can measure. There's no big increase in CIP or these other things like you would get if you had an infection. However, when these fats accumulate in our cells over time, they can interfere with normal inflammatory processes because they compete with other fats for normal production of normal signaling molecules, particularly those that are anti-inflammatory. And again, that comes by competing with EPA and DHA, the longer chain of omega-3. And again, I've said a couple of times in neonatal brain injury, Linleic acid increases or competes with DHA for uptake into the brain and then that increases the susceptibility of the brain to injury. So we've done that in neonatal rap models. You feed them with a diet higher Linleic acid, the DHA in the brain decreases, which she learned is also showed in pigs. And then if you injure that brain, you get an increased injury. Similarly, if you have a diet higher Linleic acid, again, this is in the lab in rats. And then you make that hyperglycemic or diabetic. The combination of the two is much worse than just either one alone. And this is sort of looking at damage to the heart. So just in the short term, you probably can't see any negative effects, but in the setting of any kind of inflammation or injury, then it seems to really worsen the outcome. And I think this is important because the average person is consuming a lot of these and is also on the spectrum towards pre-divities, diabetes, metabolic syndrome, which is incredibly common. So I think this is really relevant over the lifetime. But it is a really complex topic. And some people have tried to boil it down to things like the omega-6 to the omega-3 ratio, but that's also a bit of an oversimplification because some omega-6s are essential for health. And we were taught about that. A record on a acid in the brain is incredibly important. So I understand why people are confused, but I think that my advice is fairly simple and it's just you should cook your own food. The majority of these in terms of exposures come from restaurant and processed foods. You know, that's where most of these oils go. And you've heard about during COVID-19, there's a few people go to restaurants. There's been a crisis in soybean oil because the restaurants just aren't using it anymore because people don't use it at home. So if you're at home, you can cook things in some olive oil, avocado oil, coconut oil. These are going to be better in terms of their content of these omega-6 fats. If you're easing out, avoid fried things, particularly deep fried things. And I don't think you need to worry about this huge amount. You know, if you have control over the majority of your food and is cooked at home, then most of this problem disappears. So Tommy, DeCosa, hexanoc acid or DHA is a type of omega-3 fat. And since our bodies can only make a small amount of DHA, we need to consume it directly from food or as a supplement. And there have been studies that have shown women who consume 600 to 800 milligrams of DHA daily during pregnancy reduce their risk of early preterm birth. So that raises a question. So what about low DHA and an expectant mother? Does that raise her risk of having a preterm birth? That does seem to be the case, particularly in women at high risk of preterm birth. And that's the setting that we see these trials being done. This process is regulated to a degree. So there have been some nice studies, again in hunter-gatherers looking at the consumption and content of these fats in the mother and then how much gets transported over to the fetus. A racadonic acid seems to be always actively concentrated. So the level is always higher in the fetus in the mother. But DHA is more tightly regulated. So if you're a mother with a lower DHA and take a tribe that has no seafood intake, then the placenta works harder to try and increase relative DHA transport into the fetus. But if you're a coastal dwelling group and you eat more seafood, then actually you get less relative transport across. So the placenta is working really hard to make sure that the right amount of these fats are getting over to the baby. But I think there is a point where there's where it's going to be too low and there could be some negative effects. And again, part of this is, I believe, is that a premature birth is often associated with some kind of inflammatory process so that can be either in the mother or in the placenta. And DHA and some of them are tablars at DHA are very important for resolving inflammation. So if you're at risk and you don't have enough precursors or because you're low and they're all being transported over to the fetus so it gets enough DHA, then that may contribute to ongoing inflammatory processes in the mother which then precipitate a pre-temporth. And reducing pre-term birth is critically important because depending on how prematurely a child is born, they have about 30 to 50% chance of dying or having a severe disability. So what recommendations do you have for expectant mothers in terms of reducing premature birth? In reality, this is quite a tricky question to answer because it's impossible to know whether you're going to have a pre-term birth. Around 90% of births in the US go to full term which technically is more than 36 weeks. But this does leave nearly 10% being born pre-term and the rate has been increasing recently from the mid-9% to now, I think it was 9.93% last night checked. And the more pre-term you are, the greater your risk of later death or disability. The current limit of viability is around 22 weeks which is basically like 50% of the way through. But we particularly worry about extremely pre-term infants who are those born before 28 weeks and they will have a 30 to 50% risk of death or disability later in life. There are a number of risk factors that are potentially modifiable so being overweight or obese or underweight, smoking, alcohol, illicit drug use infections like I talked about so this could be sexually transmitted infections, urinary tract infections, viral infections. So certainly there's benefit to treating infections when they come up or being up to date on your vaccinations if you need to be stressed. It is a big factor which may or may not be modifiable depending on where it comes from. There are some other things that are also very important that are going to be non-modifiable. So ethnicity is important. Native American and African American women are more likely to have pre-term births and there's this very sort of new and fascinating area of research going into why that might be. And there are some thoughts behind this continuing epigenetic signature of the stress that these people have experienced as part of their histories in the US and that is part of what changes the inflammatory status and changes the increase risk of pre-term birth. In age you obviously can't change but being under 18 or over 35 increases your risk. Socioeconomic status and lack of social support also play a role but that's probably going to again be through stress or lack of access to healthcare. So it's really hard to say what somebody should try and change to reduce their risk but of course if you have the ability to change those dietary factors to make sure that you're just as healthy as possible before you get pregnant or early in pregnancy then your risk will be much lower. So let's transition to talking about preserving brain health. At your talk at HMC you got your biggest laugh when you quoted something that Ken once said which is humans have roughly since the advent of agriculture become dumber weaker and more frail. So why is that? Well, I think the simple answer is that we've used our big intelligent brains to engineer all the difficulty out of our lives. I think it's almost ironic that the process of evolution and the environmental stresses that our physiology is actually built to expect has created this fabulous brain that's then able to remove those stresses such that it negatively impacts our health and cognition and that's what I think we're seeing. So if we are indeed becoming dumber and weaker what do you think we can do about that? So I think this brings us back to the things that you might say our physiology expects. You know what are the things that a brain needs to be healthy and a supportive environment is important so diet and sleep. But I also think you need to start bringing in these stresses that we've been exposed to throughout our evolution and now essentially gone. So frequent movement and physical exertion, cold or heat stress and significant cognitive stimulus. So most adults are just on autopilot all day, working at home and you know if you think about sort of novel stimuli to the brain and the body those really seem to be lacking and that's where I think we can start to intervene and bring those back in. Yes I agree. I gave a talk recently and in the question and answer period I suggested that it would be good to strive to become better animals and to recognize that we are animals and a small percentage of the audience was a gas hearing that they had anything whatsoever to do with animals. I think it's right along the lines of what you've just discussed. Yeah I think we just have to accept and acknowledge who we are and where we came from and try to build some of that back in. Indeed. As you've pointed out in your lectures each of us is issued a single Mach 1 brain that needs to last a whole lifetime. You know our modern lifestyle probably isn't helping us much in this regard. So the question that I think many folks have is how do we prevent the brain from declining over time, prevent the decline and also even slow the decline if the decline turns out to be inevitable. I think some decline is always going to be inevitable. I don't think we're at a stage where we can significantly impact the maximum longevity of a human but we can certainly make sure the brain functions as well as possible for the majority of that time. This is where I bring up that three-legged stool again and I'm mostly agnostic to how people do it because there are many ways to approach the problem. But again I think in summary you need materials as good vascular supplies to the brain so you obviously need to do all the things to keep your endothelium happy and keep your blood vessels functioning properly and then getting the right supply of nutrients and building blocks from the diet. Safety against things that can negatively affect brain health so sleep is incredibly important avoiding certain environments, toxins, water quality may play a role, air pollution certainly seems to be associated with an increased risk of age-related cognitive decline. And then we're talking about stimulus and connection. A regular cognitive workload is important. I think we lose that particularly towards the end of our working lives and then into retirement and then social connection. Having strong social ties, having friendships, having those interactions with other humans are those are incredibly important. And if you maintain all those things and work hard to build them in then I think there's a huge amount of robustness in the system to maintain function and health of the brain. Hmm. Dave Ashbury will be sad to hear that you think he won't live to 160. I really don't think he'll live to be 160. He might make 90. Yeah. 90 would be just fine from us to. Exactly. Exactly. And he keeps functioning until 90. I think that's a real, you know, it's a good win you've got there. So the amyloid beta precursor protein is a large membrane protein that normally plays an essential role in neural growth and repair. And later in life however, amyloid beta can become corrupted and destroy nerve cells. And this is what leads to loss of thought and memory in people with Alzheimer's disease. Can you give us an overview of amyloid beta precursor protein and as many functions in the brain? Yeah, the amyloid precursor protein or APP is quite fascinating because we know that it's incredibly important, but people might also say we don't know exactly all the things that it does, but it's certainly involved in neuronal plasticity. So like the formation and connection of synapses between neurons, the transport of certain elements, particularly iron, also the response to neurotrophic hormones. And in dementia, even though we see aggregates of beta amyloid, which is a cleavage product of APP. Less of the precursor protein seems to be being produced. So that's part of the whole pathological process is that less of this is being produced, but more of it is being cleaved and then accumulating potentially. So having a normal system of production and clearance of APP is incredibly important as well as some of its downstream products, but this appears to get disrupted and cognitive decline, but also has for some reason become like the one thing that we focus on when I think there's a lot of other stuff that's also going to be important. Burke, Pfizer, Lillie and other pharmaceutical companies have spent billions, as Carl Sagan says, billions and billions of dollars on drug trials in their targeting beta amyloid. They have all failed essentially. Why do you think that is? I think that's because most simply beta amyloid isn't a significant cause or factor in Alzheimer's disease or what we should more accurately call age-related cognitive decline and age-related dementia because what Alzheimer originally described is probably a case of early onset familial dementia with a mutation of something like the presinillin gene and then beta amyloid is certainly associated in that process, but that's not the same as the late onset dementia that seem to be increasing disproportionately to our increase in lifespan and which some people have said will cost a trillion dollars by 2050 and bankrupt Medicare. I think we need to think about them separately. If you're thinking about late onset cognitive decline or age-related dementia, which is what most people are going to be concerned about, if you look at both rodent and human studies, the amount of beta amyloid accumulating in the brain is not associated with either the rate of progression or the amount of cognitive decline. Then if you target removal of beta amyloid to say you use a monoclonal antibody which many of these companies have tried, it doesn't improve outcome. If you see that there's less beta amyloid in the brain on a scan after you've given the drug, it hasn't improved cognitive function. So instead, age-related dementia has all the hallmarks in my mind of neuronal metabolic dysfunction. I know that you had Francisco Gonzlez Lima as a guest previously and he describes the vascular theory of Alzheimer's disease where a chronic under supply of blood flow results in down regulation of metabolic processes because of the lack of supply. And then you get reduced production of things like side-scrame-seogostides, complex for it in the electron transport chain. And ultimately this results in metabolic impairment and neuronal dysfunction and death. And personally, I think my view pretty much overlaps entirely with his, but if I use my three-legged stool, I think that any one of those directions can potentially result in this problem. And most of this is also supported by work that goes into Dr. Gonzlez Lima's model. So you can elicit cognitive decline in rodents by inducing chronic reductions in vascular supply. Or you can do it by poisoning the mitochondria, so say with low levels of cyanide, or you can do it by removing other rodents from the cage or removing what we call environmental enrichment. If you bring in toxins, if you remove necessary materials, or if you remove stimulation and connection, all of those can result in cognitive decline. So that's in my mind, essentially, any of the three legs of the stool that you can remove experimentally, and I'd argue that each of those also happens in humans, but other than some kind of side processes very little of it has to do with beta amyloid. And on that note, you and your wife Elizabeth wrote a recent paper where you argue that beta emloid isn't epiphenomenon of neuronal stress. Can you talk about that paper and how you write it? Yeah, this was a paper that Elizabeth was invited to review for the journal APL Bioengineering and eventually we collaborated together on it and it's called a disease-directed engineering for physiology-driven treatment interventions in neurological disorders. And if you thought the title was long, you should really take a look at the full manuscript because it's pretty epic. But we basically, through the paper, go over all the main pathological processes associated with both acute and chronic neurological diseases, and why we need a better understanding of the broader physiology and environment, both inside and outside the body to create better therapies. I think that's where we're missing some of the potential things that we can do. And we use beta amyloid in Alzheimer's disease as an example of mistaking correlation for causality, which actually happens quite frequently in neuroscience. And we basically just presented the evidence that I just talked about. And while we do know that beta amyloid itself can be damaging, so maybe early onset Alzheimer's or if you have very large quantities and you can construct that genetically in a mouse, then it does seem to cause a feed forward effect of neuronal damage. But in most people, we talk about it being an epiphenomenon because it's just happening during all these other neuronal stresses which are occurring, which then are probably what are actually leading to cognitive decline. Well, let's now talk about the most common neuronal stressors. You've mentioned a few of them, but this is a good point to review them. These can range from inflammation to sleep deprivation and others. Can you give us a rundown of the list of stressors that you think people should pay attention to? Yeah, that's a great question. And I think that the big ticket items are going to be related to metabolic or toxic stresses, injuries and infections. And with all of these, we see evidence of abnormal protein accumulation in different ratios and different amounts in different places. But that includes beta amyloid. So these kinds of stresses you might think of hyperglycemia and insulin resistance. Heavy metals are rather toxins like BMAA became this toxin which you can get from certain algae that people thought was going to be the root cause of Alzheimer's disease. And it just seems to be one process by which this can happen. And we might see something similar in traumatic brain injury or chronic traumatic encephalopathy, so repetitive concussions, particularly associated with sports or in the military. There have also been some studies suggesting that certain infections like herpes simplex viruses or pseudomonas gingivirus are associated with beta amyloid aggregates. Although I will say that that herpes simplex virus data has recently come under scrutiny, but it's sort of just like fits into the model. It doesn't have to explain all of the dementia that we're seeing if you kind of fit it all together. So associated with these things, there is sort of a parallel theory that suggests that beta amyloid is accumulated actively as a response to these insults because it has some antioxidant, metal collating or antimicrobial properties. We talked about that. It was very important for Ion. It might also be important because it can sort of try and target this insult that has come up which may be infectious or something else. So as such, I don't think there's huge amount of evidence to support this theory, but it would make sense that there's some kind of response to an onoxious stimulus. And all of these things seem to result in some accumulation of amyloid beta. So I certainly think it's a possibility. And as you try and build this big picture of causes of age-related dimensions, I think it seems very likely that this broad range of things can cause issues. And that amyloid beta is essentially just being produced as a side product. It may get to a point where you have so much that it becomes problematic on its own, but it certainly doesn't seem to be important if you're trying to intervene or prevent these things happening early on in the process. This is probably a good time to talk about the microagglia, which are known as the immune system of the brain. Can you give us a little rundown on their importance and explain exactly what they do in their general sense? I think it's worth me starting by saying that I'm far from an expert on microagglia, because they're essentially their own complete world of complexity and research that just gets deeper and more complex almost by the day. So as a neuroscientist, my training has led me to be a neuron centric, so I may need to rely on the microagglia for dummies definition. But they're essentially the resident immune cells of the brain, like you said. And they come from a similar lineage to macrophages elsewhere in the body that people may have heard of. They're very important in the response to infection or other injury, but they also have sort of normal homeostatic processes like they're involved in pruning synapses and strengthening and weakening neuronal connections as we learn new things or change other external factors. And microagglia are increasingly being targeted after neurological injury because they can have both pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory phenotypes, and there are several that fit into those categories. But there seems to be some evidence that pro-inflammatory microagglia, if they're not adequately switched off or switched phenotypes back to a more resting or anti-inflammatory phenotype, they can then contribute to ongoing injuries. So that's why microagglia are becoming sort of a big arena in the neuroprotection field as people try and figure out how they're involved and then maybe whether we can target them with therapy. So, Tommy, I'd like to back up a little bit and talk about how inflammation is associated with almost all neurological disorders. Can you talk about that and also the role of fatty acids and inflammatory signaling in the brain? So, pretty much every chronic disease, not just those in the brain, there seems to be this element of chronic inflammation. And when you're thinking about how these processes start and then how they're resolved, this is where fatty acids become very important. And a normal inflammatory process in response to something should absolutely happen. We often think about inflammation being a bad thing, but in reality, it's not. You just need to be able to switch it off when you've done the healing or switching it off as part of the healing process. And if you think about signals in the immune system as part of this sort of inflammatory signaling, you have two very broad groups. So, you have your cytokines, which are proteins, and then you have your lipid mediators, things like prostaglandins and leukotryines. And these, the latter, are produced from the omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids that we were talking about earlier. So, the initial immune response is largely coordinated by some prostaglandins and leukotryines created from a racodonic acid to the long chain omega-6. And that's part of coordinating the response. But eventually, you need to switch over. So, we want to class switch. We might call it for your microchlear, or somehow dampened down the inflammation as we resolve it. And this requires lipid mediators from the omega-3 fatty acids EPA and DHA. And a lot of this has gotten attention recently from the work of Charles Sirhan and the specialized pro-resolving mediators or SPMs, they call them. And I know you had David Lemay on the podcast previously talking about this. And when you're in the process of trying to resolve this inflammation, then again, EPA and DHA become important precursors for these resolvings or protectants, mericins, which are involved in the final resolution and healing process. Going back briefly to little air acid, what's interesting is that it competes with the same enzymes that are used to create these mediators. And instead, it creates something called oxidized little air acid metabolites or oxlamps. And these seem to be increased in certain disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease. And they, as well as competing for those same enzymes, they can stimulate this initiation of chronic inflammation rather than letting the body heal and resolve the inflammation by using some of those other mediators derived from omega-3s. So, Tommy, I suspect some listeners are wondering what's the difference between acute inflammation and chronic inflammation and chronic inflammation is a term that's thrown around a lot these days. So, can you explain the difference between the two? Yeah, absolutely. It can be difficult to kind of conceptualize chronic inflammation because it's not necessarily something that you can actively see. So, when people think about acute inflammation, you're thinking about the cardinal signs of inflammation, which we learned in medical school, which are Ru Bo Callor, Dolor and Tuma, which is Latin for redness, swelling, pain and heat. So those are the things you might see if you spray in your ankle or break an arm or something like that. That's the acute inflammatory process. Chronic inflammation, it's usually happening like deep in a tissue somewhere and can go on for months and years. And you might be able to measure something in the blood like, you know, maybe people will have heard of a CRP level or something like that. And that can sort of a low-ish level might indicate some kind of chronic ongoing inflammatory process. But in reality, it seems to be driven at the tissue level, sort of like the immune system in that tissue, not resolving and continuously sort of propagating, you know, whatever it is that's going on. But sometimes it's very hard to spot. And that's just because it's sort of this very low sort of indolent issue and in the brain it's almost impossible to easily measure. But then you'll see the same thing in the fat tissue if you're a bee or in other tissues in sort of heart disease and types of diabetes. So these things are very, very common, but it's not this very obvious thing compared to what you might see in acute inflammation. And one thing your lab has been looking into is how modulating microglia can reduce oxidative stress. Can you tell us about that research? And I just have to say microglia are probably my favorite cells. I'm looking forward to this answer. Oh, well, so again, I'll repeat that. I'm not an expert and probably leave that to people like you and Elizabeth. And I essentially kind of fell into this area and largely because of a collaboration with Elizabeth and some other colleagues, including one who has a significant amount of microglia expertise, Dr. Gwen Garden, who you know at UNC Chapel Hill Dawn. And in some of the work that we've been doing, we've been looking mainly at the drug as Dithromycin, the antibiotic people have heard of as Z-PAC. And it's very interesting because it causes a phenotypic switch in microglia. It seems to turn them from these pro-inflammatory microglia back to these more anti-inflammatory microglia. And in the lab, we have, again, in collaboration with Elizabeth, we have developed a slice culture model. So we take brain slices, again, from the ferret, and those include all the different structures of the brain. And we can then do a model of a stroke in cell culture, but it allows us to much more easily look at things like microglia. And so if you do this injury model called oxygen glucose deprivation, which is essentially removing the materials that you need for health, and this causes something similar to a stroke in this kind of cell culture medium, you see increased injury like you would if you had a stroke or something similar, like the neonatal brain injury to talk about. And the microglia, part of that is they become activated. And if you put a Z-PAC into the medium, you then see less microglia activation and reduced oxidative stress. And similarly, you can give a zythermysin to neonatal rats after, like a neonatal stroke type injury. And they seem to have a reduced amount of injury in both the brain, or they have less loss of brain tissue, and they have improved sort of neurobehavioral outcomes. They are functionally much more intact than they would be if they weren't treated with it. And so we're now trying to translate a zythermysin to larger animal models, particularly in the ferret. Both preterm brain injury and term brain injury were both of these things will be relevant. And the zythermysin is probably one of the more promising therapies that we might use in neonatal brain injury. We think a lot of it happens through its actions on microglia, but we also know that it's safe in pregnancy and in neonates and it's already FDA approved. So that kind of makes it closer to being translated to humans. The problem, however, is that microglia have long memories. So that raises the question of how do you reduce microglial activation? This is a fascinating area, and I think that some of it might underpin those things that we talked about earlier in terms of infants being born prematurely or exposed inflammation in the womb, and maybe some epigenetic effects that are happening. And in a lot of that might be creating memory and microglia that then results in them being either more susceptible or more pro-inflammatory throughout the rest of life. Something similar might be happening in macrophages elsewhere in the body. And for instance, if you look at our premature brain injury model in the ferret, and then take those brains several weeks later, so the equivalent of, say, a child of a few years old, then you take the microglia out of those brains and you look at what genes they're expressing. They look very different from control microglia. So they're expressing more genes associated with inflammation and fewer genes associated with more of like an anti-inflammatory phenotype. So there's a lot that we can dig into there, but those microglia definitely look different. And again, this is sort of several weeks and years developmentally further down the line. Similarly, there was a fascinating study looking at microglia activation in the brains of people months or years after a traumatic brain injury. They used a single photon emission computed tomography or a spectsat scan and a tracer called PK11195, which basically has a high affinity for activated or pro-inflammatory microglia. And in those patients, they saw increased microglia activation in the thalamus, which is basically the relay station for sensory and motor information to the cortex. And this activation persisted for up to 16 years after the injury and the degree of activation was associated with cognitive processing speed in those people. So this suggests that even several years after an injury, you still have this ongoing chronic inflammation in certain areas of the brain and that is actively affecting cognition. So this is again what partly makes microglia a very interesting potential target. As for what we can do about that, like I said, this is probably a question for Elizabeth and Dawn as we develop better techniques to deliver therapies to the injured brain. But I do think that reducing the number of other detrimental things we expose our brains to will be beneficial. So making sure we have the right materials to create a proper inflammatory response we talked about the fatty acids, maintaining instant sensitivity super important. And I think those things will help, but we certainly also have a lot more to learn. So Tommy, just switching the subject a little bit, but still thinking about oxidative stress and microglial activation, we recently interviewed Francisco Gonzalez Lima, as you mentioned earlier, about his research on methylene blue as a neuroprotectant. This is episode 107 on STEM talk. And since that interview, you and I have been discussing the possibility of looking at methylene blue to protect against hypoxia and do this cognitive decline in individuals working at altitude, which is a big area of research here at IGMC. And I know that we're both excited about this upcoming study. So what are your thoughts that we've been digging into this a little bit on the potential of methylene blue in the setting of acute brain stress or injury, not just hypoxia, but just in general? Yeah, I think that methylene blue is an incredibly interesting potential intervention. And both acutely and in people who want to try and maintain cognitive function in hypoxia, but also maybe after acute brain injuries as well. And there are certainly some people who are starting to look at that. So methylene blue is a synthetic dye, but at low doses, it's essentially an auto-oxidant so it can provide a free supply of electrons into the mitochondria. And it actively accumulates in areas of the brain that are metabolically active. So it's essentially going to go to where you want it to go. And it's going to continue to provide electrons even in the face of maybe some kind of decrease in materials. So if you're thinking about oxygen during hypoxia, blood flow to the brain tends to increase. But glucose uptake and the use of oxygen relatively can decrease. And this can be mitigated by giving small doses of methylene blue. And most of that's been done in rodent studies. But you can basically increase the efficiency of extraction of oxygen and you can increase glucose uptake and you can maintain metabolic rate under hypoxia if you have methylene blue on board. And then if you look at acute human studies, you give methylene blue and look at their functional MRIs an hour or so later. You see increased connectivity in the active areas of the brain and improved short-term memory performance. And the idea would then be that in those people who are going to be exposed to hypoxia, you can give methylene blue and that's going to help them maintain function activity in crucial areas of the brain that they need for decision making or whatever it is that they're going to do. And there's a lot of potential there and if you get the dose and timing right, I think it's an exciting way to potentially ensure people maintain cognitive function when they're under stressors like hypoxia. I agree. I have to say as you're talking Kensduck is tongue out which is coated in blue. He's actively testing as an N1 over here. So I'm often in N1. That is true. So many ways. So it's increasingly widely appreciated that maintaining insulin sensitivity is critically important as we go through life. But here in the United States and really it's not just the United States. I mean, if you want to see a good example of this visit the Middle East like the UAE for example in most of the world, really, we're not doing a good job of maintaining insulin sensitivity. I've seen it reported that about 80% of Americans have some kind of metabolic disease. Can you help our listeners understand why this is such a major health issue and why we should be concerned about it? It's a major health issue because those processes are associated with pretty much every chronic Western disease that the listeners might be trying to prevent or stave off for as long as possible, including cognitive decline. And the numbers that you quote come, I believe come from a fairly recent paper by Araljo et al called prevalence of off-spelled metabolic health in American adults. And they looked at seven years of N-Hens data about 9,000 people and using some of the parameters of metabolic syndrome, so waste of confidence, blood pressure, blood glucose, triglycerides, and HGL cholesterol, they sort of tried to see who had optimal levels of those things. And they estimated that 87.8% did not or had suboptimal metabolic health. And I would actually argue that it's going to be less than that or it's going to be more than that with suboptimal health because their cutoffs for blood glucose and triglycerides were 100 and 150 milligrams per deciliter, respectively, which if you're looking at sort of later health outcomes, you probably say optimal is closer to less than 90 for glucose and less than 100 for triglycerides. So what you're left with is that basically a very tiny proportion of American adults are in good metabolic health. And we know from elsewhere that more than 40% of US adults have at least one chronic health condition and more than 50% have some kind of long term prescription medication. So in reality, the average American, and again, don't want to just bag on America, it's definitely in seeing in multiple other countries who live these sort of westernized lifestyles. On average, we're sick and that includes some kind of metabolic disease or insulin resistance and what comes with that are all things like heart disease and dementia, which people are trying to avoid. Yeah, I always hate that term westernized. It's sort of like healthy whole grains. It's like built into the discussion, but it's vacuous. So if you go to India, for example, you're really not westernized, but they have these problems in spades or Italy, which is the cradle of western civilization. They're doing much better. I guess they're eating the Mediterranean diet. This is a whole other point. Vacuous term. That can spread up. Equally, you're also the reason why it's so easy to use is because as soon as I say westernized means, then you know what I mean, even if it's the western aspect. I know you mean that. Modern. Modern. Modern. Stimptop. Stimptop. Stimptop. Stimptop. Stimptop. Stimptop. Stimptop. Stimptop. So I have to say, I see what Tommy's wife Elizabeth means when she says that Tommy's always researching. The scope of his interest and expertise is just absolutely amazing. How many people do we know that work with newborns with neonatal brain injuries as well as formula one race car drivers? That's pretty widespread. I have to say Tommy is the only person that I know. Just one of those would be enough to be the only person you know probably. Yes. Yes. In any case, yes, I don't. The range of Tommy's research is indeed impressive. And I was particularly interested in what he had to say about the physiological and metabolic responses to brain injury. And their long-term effects on brain health. If you haven't listened to our two-part interview with Dr. Francisco Gonzales Lima, which also dealt with brain energy and brain health and particularly brain energy metabolism, I think you'd find it very interesting. I highly recommend looking up episodes 105 and 106. Listening to Francisco and Tommy back to back will give you a great perspective on three or four fascinating aspects of brain health. Definitely agree, Ken. And if you enjoy this interview as much as Ken and I did, we invite you to visit the STEM talk web page where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes at stemtalk.us. This is Don Carnegie signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on STEM talk. Thank you for listening to STEM talk. If you want this podcast to be discovered by others, so please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, stemtalk.us. There, you can also find more information about the guests we interview.
