Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host Don Conegas, and joining me to introduce today's podcast is Man Behind the Curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Slection Committee that selects all the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Hi Don, great to be here. Our guest today is Dr. Marcus Baman, an internationally recognized researcher known for his scientific contributions to the biology of human skeletal muscle and medical rehabilitation. So Marcus recently joined IHMC as a senior research scientist, and he is the founder and former director of the University of Alabama at Birmingham Center for Exercise Medicine. So Marcus and the UAB center, he led our international leaders in research that is actually aimed at understanding the biological mechanisms that underlie exercise and do adaptations and also their clinical utility and disease prevention and treatment and rehabilitation. So at IHMC, he will be leading various research projects, and that includes the Department of Defense related research that is aimed at maximizing the human performance and resilience of war fighters. One of Marcus's first projects at IHMC is working with the institute's chief science officer Tim Broderick on a DARPA sponsor program, and this research is aimed at developing a revolutionary platform to enhance training and also resilience of elite service members. So Tim Broderick talked about this program called the Peerless Operator Biologic Appity Project during his interview, which was episode 112 of Stem Talk. In today's interview, we will be talking to Marcus about the Peerless project as well as his earlier research into the many ways that exercise and in particular strength training can induce a multitude of health benefits. But before Ken and I get to our interview with Marcus, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk, and we're especially appreciative of all the wonderful five star reviews. As always, the double secret selection committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the widiest, and most lavishly praise-filled reviews to read on Stem Talk. If you hear your review read on Stem Talk, please contact us at StemTalk at ihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk t-shirt. Today, our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker Dr. John Deluca. The review is titled Best in Class. It reads, The Premier Science in Medicine Podcast. You always come out a little bit smarter after listening. Well, thank you, Dr. John Deluca, and also thank you to all of our other Stem Talk listeners who've helped Stem Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now onto our interview with Dr. Marcus Baman. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Hi, welcome to Stem Talk. I'm your host, Don Conegas, and joining us today is Marcus Baman. Marcus, welcome to the podcast. Thank you very much for having me. I'm looking forward to it. And also joining us is Ken Ford. Hello, Don, and hello, Marcus. Hello, Ken. So Marcus, let's get started at the very beginning. Where did you grow up? So I was born in Manhattan, Kansas, but at the age of two, family moved to St. Louis, Missouri. So St. Louis was my home. Okay, fantastic. And since you're an exercise scientist, I'm just going to guess that you probably played a lot of sports as a kid. Is that right? I did. I dabbled in just about everything you could imagine. The two sports that I gravitated toward the most in terms of team sports were basketball and soccer. And later on, as I got a little bit older in high school, I also played some club rugby, which was fun, but consistently basketball and soccer. So in addition to being pretty good at basketball and also soccer and high school, I understand that you're also pretty good in your chemistry and mathematics classes. Can you tell us a little bit about that experience? Sure. So mathematics came fairly easy to me throughout K-12 education. I would say the science aspect, I really sort of got turned on to science in seventh grade biology, I would say, and over the next several years, became more and more interested in the sciences. And so in high school, we had, you know, like a typical high school, there were some sort of college prep courses that you could take. I got sort of enamored with chemistry at that time. And in fact, my high school chemistry teacher, it was interesting. He was an engineer, a chemical engineer, who decided to make a career change. And we were the first group of kids that he had taught coming out of his engineering career. So it was a good experience for him, as well as us, learned a lot. And in fact, you know, I think helped me sort of streamline chemistry, you know, during the early years in college. Yes, fantastic. And I also understand that you were the sports editor for your high school newspaper. Is that right? Yeah, that was an interesting experience. It was on the high school paper for sophomore junior years, junior year sports editor, assistant, uh, overall editor to the paper. It was an interesting time. And we actually had at that time some really high profile athletes at our high school. One of them was sort of the parade all-American number one football player in the country, highly recruited. And another one, similarly, in soccer. And so it was fun to be able to cover those athletes and do that. I enjoyed that. And the sounds as if you had a pretty bright future as a sports writer, but at a certain point in high school, you became more interested in science. So what specifically sparked that interest? I would say, you know, through my own training as an athlete and trying to improve, I became very interested in sort of what drives improvement. And I think that was a, I had sort of a natural curiosity when it came to exercise training adaptations. And, you know, started reading and started trying to determine how best to train. And that sort of led me into the sciences with a focus on exercise related sciences. But I was very much interested in starting to understand more of the biochemistry and more of the molecular aspects. After you graduated, you decided to attend Kansas State. Were you motivated to go there because your father attended there or was there a wider set of motivations? It was actually just sort of an irony that both myself and my father attended there. That wasn't a driver for me. His training was an architecture in Kansas State. It's a very well-respected school of architecture. In my case, frankly, you know, the University of Missouri is sort of the primary state institution in the state. And it tends to be a high school reunion of sorts for those from St. Louis or Kansas City. And I wanted something different and got a partial academic scholarship to Kansas State. And they had a sort of an upstart program that was merging exercise sciences and nutrition sciences, which attracted me there. So I really enjoyed my time in Manhattan. After you received your degree in exercise science, you took off for the University of Alabama Birmingham. What led you there? Why UAB? As I decided to pursue graduate school, which was a decision I probably made around my sophomore year in undergrad, I was very much interested in how a muscle or how all of our skeletal muscles adapt to various modes of training. My primary interest was resistance training or strength training. And at that time, there were very few laboratories in the country focused on strength athletes and or strength training adaptations in other populations. UAB happened to have a professor there that I came to know by reading the literature, named Gary Hunter. And I was very interested in his work. So I reached out to him as well as a couple of other institutions where faculty were doing strength training research. But Gary and I really just sort of hit it off. I really liked the program that he was building. He was fairly new to UAB. He had come there in 1984. And this was now 1988 when I was sort of identifying where to go. So you know, he was upstarting something and I wanted to jump in on it. So Mark, is it I'm just going to say it seems pretty appropriate that someone working toward a degree in exercise science would meet his future wife at a fitness center. At least that's a story that we hear at Stem Talk. So is that really how you met your wife, Diana? Yeah, it actually is spot on. I was new to Birmingham preparing to start my master's program in the fall. Of course, I needed a gym. So I found a gym that I could train in, but also needed to make some extra money. So got a little part time job in a fitness center in Birmingham and happened to meet her there. She was both working there as a part time job as well, but also training there. And so one thing led to the other. So I guess, you know, in 1989, the fitness center was the singles bar for me. Has some advantages over conventional singles bars? Absolutely. After graduating from UAB, you headed to the University of Florida. And this was for your doctorate. I understand that you took a rather non-traditional route to earning a PhD. Those are often the most fun routes. Can you tell us about this non-traditional route? And also why the University of Florida? Like what was a driver for your decision to go there? Sure. University of Florida actually considered for my masters as well. It was one of the top choices for both masters and PhD. I'm really glad though I spent the time with Gary Hunter at UAB first. But Florida had a very strong center for exercise science. Scott Powers was there, new to the faculty. Mike Pollack was there running the program. They had a number of really prominent people there. So I was attracted to that. Also the in the Department of Physiology and the College of Medicine, which is actually where I did my training. There were a number of very talented faculty. Wendell Staines, B, one of the sort of world leaders in skeletal muscle fatigue was there. So a lot of those, for a lot of those reasons, I was attracted to the research profile at UF and just dove in. And the reason I pursued physiology as opposed to the exercise science program, I really wanted to establish a strong foundation in all aspects of molecular physiology at least at that time as much as I could dive in. And I felt like that program was a nice merger because I had on my supervisory committee and also had some laboratory experiences in the exercise science program as well as in the medical school. So it was for me a nice merger of the two just segue into the uniqueness of the way I was trained. About three years into the program, I actually got a call sort of a cold call from NASA Johnson Space Center in Houston. And they were interested in in starting a program looking at the impact of resistance training on skeletal muscle atrophy and spaceflight. And at that time, it was focused on space shuttle missions. I still to this day don't entirely know why I was contacted. I'd only published a couple of papers. I think most of it was just word of mouth and sort of people knowing names. I would owe some of that clearly to Gary Hunter at UAB because he was contacted and mentioned me. So they were interested in building a young research team. So how this sort of played out for me was I was working in skeletal muscle fatigue at Florida. Dr. Staines, because I mentioned was world renowned in the area. I thought this NASA opportunity was really interesting and I wanted to get into human research. I really wanted to get into resistance training research as well. And I just presented the idea to the department chair into my committee and said, look, I don't know if this can work, but this is an opportunity in front of me. If you don't think it can work, I certainly won't go. I want to finish. And to their credit, and I think, you know, still thank the University of Florida for this department of physiology, they embraced the idea of having me finish my doctorate at a distance. And so the way this worked out, I ended up moving to Houston, working at the space center, maintaining full graduate student status at UF, appointing a NASA scientist to my thesis committee so that I had oversight sort of, you know, face to face oversight at NASA. And frequent reporting obviously back to University of Florida. I went back multiple times to report on progress. For me, it was a great experience for a number of reasons. Number one, NASA gave me the freedom to design my own studies. So I actually designed the bedrest studies. It's sort of probably unheard of at this point in a current climate, but back then I was able to be principal investigator on the protocols at NASA and it was a pre-doc. And so I think I learned a lot from that. And going back to Florida to report was really important to me. I wanted to make sure that I stayed connected. You know, at that time, you know, email had just been introduced. So one of my ways of communicating was going to that little dust screen, sea prompt, connecting to the email and communicating with University of Florida. And I did that on a religious basis because I didn't want them to lose track of me. And it worked out well. Of course, I did go back and forth to update on data progress and things. But that was a very enriching nearly three years. We spent about, you know, two years and nine months at NASA. And I was able to do some interesting work and finish out. And I guess the last thing I'd say about that unique experience was because I was so focused on making sure University of Florida department of physiology sort of had me on their radar and was, you know, that I was moving toward graduation. I communicated a lot by email, a lot by phone, et cetera. And when I went back to actually finish off and defend the department chair, introduced me and said over the last, you know, nearly three years, I've communicated with Marcus more than any other graduate student. Well, that sounds like a really fascinating experience. And also just talk about thinking outside of the box for a grad student. That's, that's awesome. Marcus. And while you're at NASA, you work on a study that had people go through 14 days of bedrest in an effort to mimic spaceflight. We had IHMC had teen that was involved with a 60 day bed rest study. Just as an FYI as part of a larger initiative. But we did not actually run that bedrest study itself. So I'll let you talk about that in a second. But the paper from this study appeared in the journal of medicine and science and sports and exercise and was titled Resistance Exercise prevents planter flexor deconditioning during bedrest. I'm interested in the study, of course, but also we're even more interested in wondering how did you convince people to spend 14 days in bed? Yeah, it was actually a challenge. But NASA was very adept at this at that time. There were a number of bedrest studies of various durations. We chose 14 days because we were trying at that time to mimic the standard space shuttle mission. So shuttle was flying anywhere from 10 to 17 days on a fairly regular basis. So 14 days was sort of the sweet spot. Convincing people to do it, NASA had developed over time a fairly sizable database of local research participants. We tapped into that. We certainly did a lot of advertising to get new people who had not been previously in studies at NASA. We needed people who were not highly trained. That was one of our criteria. We were trying our best to at that time. It's interesting. But the astronaut core, there certainly had some fitness training. But a lot of it was endurance based. And so there wasn't a huge emphasis on resistance training. We did not want highly trained people coming into those studies from a resistance training standpoint. So it was a challenge, but we were able to convince people. And of course, they got paid fairly well. 14 days of six degree head down bedrest, I must add, to mimic the head word fluid shifts that you experience in microgravity. So it's not just 14 days laying flat. It's actually 14 days of some pressure toward the head. We did every other day resistance training in one group. We randomized the two groups. We were focused on the knee extensors as well as plant our flexors because we were really dialing into the sort of anti-gravity muscles that tend to atrophy the most. And that been well documented by MRI and other other techniques in the past. So this every other day program was pretty intense. We did it supine. So for the listeners, they never stood up for 14 days. We actually rolled them onto a gurney, rolled them down to hall to a horizontal leg press. They rolled them onto that, did the training, put them back in, you know, in so forth. So it was truly constant supine 14 days. But just with seven bouts of high intensity training, and it didn't take very long, we did five sets of leg press at a high intensity, five sets of plantar flexion at a high intensity. We prevented all the atrophy. And in the thigh, of course, we did this by muscle biopsy as well as other means of assessing how much muscle they had and whether or not they lost. And then in the calf, we did not biopsy the calf, but we had other means of measuring function and so forth. So we ended up publishing a number of papers. We looked at protein synthesis rates in the quadriceps. We looked at fiber size. We looked at strength and a number of other things and really found that these seven high intensity bouts of loading prevented the atrophy response to bed rest, which I thought was pretty exciting, particularly given the limited amount of time that each participant had to commit to that. So those were those were fun studies. We did those actually at the clinical research unit at UTMB Galveston. And that meant that, you know, I did a lot of traveling back and forth from the space center in Clear Lake in Houston down to Galveston. But they were very familiar with doing these types of studies with NASA in a collaborative effort. So we, you know, we essentially lived in Galveston for any time we had subjects enrolled. We tended to try to pair them up to so they were sort of duly housed in a room and had somebody interact with. Interesting. Bed rest studies, I just can't imagine how the subjects do that. No. I couldn't either, but be honest with you, we had some unique individuals without disclosing any individuals. I will tell you, we had a university faculty member who was young and actually came to the study saying, I need to write. I don't have time to write. He brought all of his materials in his laptop and spent two weeks writing and felt like he really made some ground. Had another participant who was a extremely proficient chess player. And we had some unique experiences. I remember one day when three of us as scientists decided to go three on one against this guy in a game of chess, he set up the board at the bedside and then he said, okay, we're going to begin and he promptly rolled away where he could not see the board. And we had to describe our moves and then he would describe his and he whipped us fairly easily. I'm sure in this as it's undesirable and unpleasant for the subject says a bed rest study may be perhaps the unprofessor was avoiding faculty meetings. Yeah, that may well be the case. I will say on the bed rest topic, my studies were 14 days because we cared about muscle as well as fluid shifts. We were involved in a 17 week bed rest study that had just gone underway to try to preserve bone mass and bone density with resistance training. We engineered the resistance train device for that study to be whole body again, supine. But during my time there, we had just completed participant number one. But that study also ended up being quite successful. 17 weeks is one third of a year, which I cannot imagine. No. No. After you wrapped up your dissertation at the University of Florida, how did you end up back at UAB? Again, UAB was a place that was I thought on the rise. It was already a very prominent medical school and biomedical research. It was very well known. But in terms of the exercise sciences and the muscle biology, I thought it was on the rise. So a faculty position opened up as I was winding down my dissertation work. There's a chance to pursue, I thought, a professional track at an institution that I felt like had a great reputation and great resources. Also an opportunity for my wife to move back home, I met her in Birmingham and so there were a lot of family there. It worked out really well for us. Yeah, I can see the attraction. It has been said that all good science begins with a question. As you began your career at UAB, was there an overarching question that was really driving your research? Absolutely. And it started, I think, during my days, as we talked about as an athlete and then going into the NASA work, I became very much interested in the influences that drive muscle mass regulation. And so my primary question has always been, what are the factors that lead to atrophy and what are the factors that lead to countering atrophy or inducing hypertrophy, which is applicable to a variety of chronic disease states, applicable to athletics, certainly applicable to the space program. So that was my burning question. I wanted to understand, you know, what are the influences of mechanical loading on both processes? What are the influences of the nervous system and neural input? And then also what are the influences of both systemic as well as local signaling molecules on the process of decide? For a muscle to decide, I need to be stronger, more powerful, larger or I don't. And I can therefore reduce my mass. So those are the things that have always interested me. The work at NASA, you know, one of the things I found very interesting is if you go to space flight for months and months on end, at your feet doesn't continue. You just reach a new equilibrium. So there's a very rapid loss for the first few weeks. And then your body says, okay, now I'm at the right place for my loading environment. So there's something interesting there. For me, you know, whether it's teleological, what have you, what drives the body to say, this is how much muscle I need for this given demand. So that I think that's my question. That's a good one. It's a really good one. And Marcus, you've played a major role nationally in the recognition and growth of exercise medicine. And in particular, you've really been leading the way in our understanding of biological mechanisms that underlie exercise induced adaptations. And also their clinical utility and disease prevention and treatment and also rehabilitation. So how did you first become interested in exercise as medicine? That's a great question. I would say the field as a whole starting in the mid 2000s, I think in some ways to gain ground from a public health standpoint. But also to gain ground in research adopted this terminology exercise is medicine. And that was driven by the American College of Sports Medicine as well as the American Medical Association. They came together on this officially, I guess, in 07. I thought it's a catchy term certainly. But I do take it to heart. And the reason I take it to heart is because like any other form of treatment, there is an optimal dose most likely. There are titration studies that are needed to determine what is safe, what is effective. And so the whole idea of exercise as a viable, and frankly, what I would call a multi potent form of medicine, meaning it affects every cell and every organ system in the body. Really, I think it attracted me as a term, but also scientifically, because when you put the word medicine on it, you do have to start thinking about dosing. And you do have to start thinking about what works best for this disease risk cluster versus this one. It takes it well beyond in my mind, hey, we should all do more exercise. So most of us know that exercise is good for us in terms of getting fit, but your research is shown that exercise can help prevent and also delay health problems. You've also shown that different types of exercise can bring about different benefits in people's health. And most people understand that aerobic activity improves heart health, but we're now seeing studies that show high intensity exercise can help reduce levels of bad cholesterol. So can you talk to us a little bit about this work that you're doing? And also how different exercises bring about different health benefits? Sure, I think there's a lot to unpack there, but I do think it's an exciting time for the field as a whole. I think we've clearly learned to appreciate over the last few years. Exercise goes well beyond weight management. In fact, it's probably not the ideal tool for weight management exclusively. It plays a role. And it also goes well beyond, you know, reducing the risks of cardiovascular diseases. So we now know that exercise of various forms, both moderate intensity aerobic as well as higher intensity, either interval or even resistance training, has real neurocognitive benefit benefit on executive function. And there are multiple research teams trying to unpack what those signals are. There's some really good evidence that exercise not only improves executive function, but is actually neurogenic improves and increases the production of neurons in certain parts of the brain. So that to me is very exciting. I think going sort of system by system, we're starting to understand that exercise is a very potent stimulus. It has influences on the kidneys. It has influences on the liver. It has influences on essentially every organ system that has been studied to this point. And I think we're going to see a continued growth in this in this pursuit of what are all those signals and cues that are driving exercise mediated adaptation. I would say a lot of this boils down to a concept I've had for a long time, which is that we are a demand based physiological organism. And we respond and adapt to demands that we place on the system. If we increase the demand for intermittent periods of time, such as during exercise, it forces the body to adapt. And it's not unique to the muscles that are working. It's not unique to the nervous system that's active or the heart, etc. It's essentially everything being impacted. On the opposite end of that, we adapt to a chronic low demand as well, which is not necessarily a good thing. We're talking a lot today about exercise as a form of medicine. And I'd like to take that a step further. We've actually focused in our research program the last several years on exercise as a form of true regenerative medicine. And I think that's an important distinction. When we talk about regenerative medicine in the general sense and how it is used across all aspects of application in medicine, just to give a brief definition of what this really is. This is a field of medicine that is really looking to determine how we can create tissues that provide repair, replace, or otherwise restore structures and functions in our bodies that are absent or lost or deficient due to a defect, due to disease, due to damage, perhaps due to just the aging process. And we've taken this into the exercise realm in a very important and meaningful way. When we talk about the health benefits of exercise training, as I said, they extend beyond some of the typical things that we think about. But if we can actually restore functions and restore cellular functions, for example, in the brain, when we promote neuroplasticity, improve cognitive function and learning and memory. We've got evidence in the field now of doing that both in animal models as well as in people. We can regenerate dysfunctional or otherwise compromised vascular systems. So blood vessels throughout the body. There are a number of things that we can just run down a list. Exercise can help regenerate bones that are deficient in mineral density. Can regenerate loss muscle, can regenerate or help us overcome inflammatory burden, can help actually in the cancer field. This is actually quite interesting. There's some really, really cool cutting edge animal science that shows exercise can improve the delivery of a chemotherapy agent to a tumor site by altering the vascular tour around that tumor site. So this just, this tells us a couple of things. Number one exercise has a broad impact and can truly serve as a form of regenerative medicine. But it also tells us that we have a lot yet to learn. And that sort of speaks to the multi potent stimulus that exercise is. It affects essentially all parts of the body from, you know, all cell types, all organs and so forth. And it's an exciting area to be in. But I do think the regenerative aspects of it are important to consider going forward and are, you know, sort of paints a very exciting future, I think, for the field. Yeah, I will hardly agree with you on that, Marcus. So in 2011, you established the University of Alabama Birmingham Center for Exercise Medicine, which has become well known nationally as a leader in exercise medicine. Can you give us a bit of an overview on how the center came about and then also the research that goes on there? Absolutely. Thank you. I've really enjoyed this, effort over the years. We started to recruit more faculty from outside the institution who were interested in exercise biology, exercise applications to clinical conditions and so forth. So we started to build this sort of cadre of scientists at UAB. And it seemed appropriate to me at the time that it was time to formalize this in some way in a center mechanism seemed ideal. At that time, we had a very engaged and supportive dean in the School of Medicine, who's now the president of the University of Dr. Ray Watts. I took the concept to Dr. Watts when he was dean. He immediately, you know, was enamored with the idea, loved the idea. We then pursued it with a formal application to the Board of Trustees. We're approved in 2011 to initiate this, this effort, what we called the center. It became one of the 24 University-wide research centers at that time. UAB is sort of well-known for having this center infrastructure where the center director's all meet on a regular basis, collaborate in a number of ways and drive a lot of research. And so our center over the years has grown to the point where it is currently collaborating with people across the campus, across the medical school. We have projects that are neuroscience-based projects, whether that be multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, and so forth. We have a number of projects that are aging-related projects in cardiovascular disease and disease risk states, a number of investigators in cardiometabolic diseases, diabetes type 2 diabetes, and obesity and so forth. Even in pulmonary disease now, we've got some more and more interest-growing and COPD-related exercise research. It's been a very, I think, rewarding process to grow the center over the years, to recruit trainees. One of the first things we did as a center was applied to the NIH to get a T-32 training program, which was funded and was enabled us to then recruit talent, burgeoning young investigators, both pre and postdocs, to come in and support the programs and help bring new ideas. Over the years, that program has done really well and we renewed it and have continued to bring in really talented people. So overall, I would say the center is in good shape. It certainly sounds like it, and it's a wonderful accomplishment to initiate it in grown that center. When we built this center at UAB, it was important to have focus areas or research pillars that in my view and in the view of the leadership of the center would enable us to really explore exercise across the spectrum of science. We identified five pillars that we thought were really important opportunities for ongoing research to really advance the field. The first was precision. A lot of times we hear the term personalized medicine or precision medicine. This basically means that based on our underlying genotype or our underlying phenotype, two individuals might not respond in the same way to a given treatment. Exercise is no different. So we have a precision pillar that explores why people respond differently and how we might modify a prescription to get the best response out of each individual. We have one called regeneration, which I've already sort of talked about with the regenerative medicine pillar, which is a really important one for the center. We have one that's focused on rehabilitation and this is across potentially all forms of disease, some of which are musculoskeletal. We've got some research in total hip and knee arthroplasty rehabilitation. We've done some work in liver transplant patients. So some of it is post-surgical, some of it is rehab of long term degenerative disease such as Parkinson's. That's an important one. We have a pillar called interaction and this is one that's also important because we just don't know enough about how exercise training interacts with other forms of treatment. So you can do imagine exercise drug interactions. Are they good? Are they bad? Those are studies that need to be accomplished. Exercise device interactions. So that's an opportunity to sort of merge engineering with the exercise sciences as we look at devices that may be used for people to promote their mobility or maybe promote their cognitive function and so forth. What is the impact of layering exercise into that treatment? So that's sort of number four and the number five is sustainability, which is really where behavioral medicine comes in. We want to figure out how to get people to adopt exercise training as a long term sort of life changing habit and that's tough to do. But we've got sort of behavioral cognitive scientists and behavioral scientists that are really focused on that area. So those are the five pillars. A clinical trial of yours in 2011 attracted considerable national attention for showing how many women in their 60s and 70s who underwent supervised weight training developed muscles that were as large and strong as those of the average 35 to 40 year old. This was a significant study because it demonstrated that the neuromuscular system of older adults was robustly responsive to resistance training and sometimes we hear the opposite. Can you give listeners an overview of this clinical trial and its importance, which seems evident, but I'd like to hear your take on it. Yes, thank you. That was an important effort. This was funded by the National Institute on Aging at the NIH and the question was exactly what you just mentioned, Ken, which was, is there a difference in the responsiveness of older versus younger individuals to resistance training? I think to this day, there's still this prevailing concept that the older muscle is less responsive and I think there's actually good evidence for that, but that doesn't mean it's unresponsive. We recruited folks who were quite young, 20 to 35, and did high intensity training and used the exact same prescription in folks that were 60 to 75, both men and women. Both groups improved quite a bit in muscle mass and strength in a variety of outcomes. We tested a number of mobility-related outcomes and other fitness outcomes. What was striking to me was not just that p-value that said x, y, or z variable increased. That's important. But more important to me was that the older individuals landed on the pre-training young values for a number of important outcomes, such as how large are your type 2 muscle fibers? How strong are you relative to how much muscle you have, those types of outcomes? Finding that 16 weeks of fairly high intensity training essentially erased 30 to 40 years of aging from a muscle standpoint. I thought was a very, very important finding. We also noted that it wasn't across the board. There are some of those individuals who were more resistant to the adaptations than others, but on average, we really found that this was a sort of from a muscle standpoint, a true fountain of youth. I'm sure that's, uh, that was very rewarding study. It absolutely was. And we also tracked these individuals. So after 16 weeks of high intensity training, this was pre-designed in the study. We wanted to not only know our old and young different in their responsiveness, but are they also different in what it would take to maintain gains? So we randomized them to one of three conditions for the next 32 weeks. One of those was true detraining. And the other two were various forms of what we were considering to be potentially maintenance training. And both groups did well. You know, it was remarkable to me that with not that I would recommend this lifelong, but for periods of time when normal training may not be quite feasible, just once a week dosing was sufficient to maintain gains in both young and old. So Marcus, in many exercise training designs that include both male and female older adults, both sexes undertake the same training. And the evidence seems to mix on whether men and women respond differently to the same training stimulus. But maybe thinking about this another way, is there any evidence that male and female older adults need different types of exercise training? That is, I guess, should we be looking at training older men and women in specific ways that are dependent on their sex? At this point, I don't think there are, there's enough evidence to support that in terms of a difference between how we would approach males versus females, particularly in the older older group. What we found in that study that we were just discussing is that women were actually more consistent in their beneficial adaptations than men. So if you look at the range of sort of the most extreme or favorable responder to the least responsive, that range was wider in men than it was in women. We found very few women who would sort of fall into this low responder group. So I think that from that standpoint was encouraging. I would say that there are, we did in another parallel effort really dive into physiological as well as cellular molecular sex differences across the age span. And there clearly are differences in the start point for a number of outcomes, particularly how the muscle looks from a histological standpoint. But their ability to train and adapt, we didn't find a real major sex difference. And I would say too, in the men, there's been a lot of discussion about testosterone. Well, we know testosterone is important and beneficial, but we had a range of testosterone levels in men, both total and free testosterone. It didn't seem to matter whether they were at the lower end or the higher end of physiological normal. And frankly, testosterone levels in females were extremely low as we as we all know and their adaptations were great. And so I think there certainly is something to chronic hypogonadism in men. However, in these men that were not hypogonadil, it didn't matter whether their total T was 350 or 800. Did you have men in the study that were much higher than that? We did not. Most of them fell right into that normal range. Some of them were sort of borderline low. And one of the restrictions in the study recruitment up front was you could not be on T replacement. And so by that, we sort of negated anybody who might be truly hypogonadil and being treated. Right, right. That makes sense. Some of the more interesting research that you and your colleagues at UAB were doing before you left as director of the center involved looking at how a person's genetic background determines their response to exercise. Can you talk about what you found in terms of the role that genes play in this matter? And maybe it could explain why some people seem naturally more suited to different types of exercise in a fact different sports. You can see it every day in sports. Absolutely. So what we've done to this point, because our studies on this, if you think about the sort of scale of clinical trials ranging from the early phase one to the large phase three with thousands, potentially thousands of participants, most of our work that has involved invasive procedures, tissue collections and things have been on the relatively small scale in the 70s to 100 individuals, those types of things. So we don't really have the scale to do true genetic variability and looking at polymorphic variants in the genome from person to person. But what we have done is look at how our genes are expressed. And when we look at the expression profile, we do find some very, I think remarkable signatures that differ between those walking in the door for day one who down the road adapt extremely well, add a lot of muscle, get a lot stronger versus those who don't adapt nearly as well to the same program. We found that their baseline gene expression profile is remarkably predictive. Some of those differences are linked to sort of walking in the door with what I would call a higher level of muscle inflammation. So we've sort of coined this term muscle inflammation susceptibility where some people seem to have it and some don't. We think that's somewhat predictive. But also the more sort of pro growth or pro andabolic programs that we have, some people walk in the door and they're ready to go. We've found, for example, differences in how many muscle stem cells people have on day one, differences in their sort of protein synthesis machinery on day one. So I do think it has a lot to do with their state coming into a program. And perhaps that's more important than how their molecular profile changes over the course of the training. In fact, we have a study that we are moving toward publication now that will show exactly that, that the baseline expression profile explains most of the differences in responsiveness, not so much what happens from first week to last week. Does that account for the phenomena one often sees in say two people that look similar and they start training and one of them is a former strength athlete. And that person proceeds at a very different rate than the other fellow, even though they appeared quite similar when they had been both untrained for, you know, a decade or something like that or two decades. Is that a epigenetic phenomena or some kind of muscle memory? What's going on there? I do think both of those I think are relevant, both epigenetic and some memory. So when I say expression profile on sort of day one as being an important predictive profile, I'm encompassing everything that influences the expression. So some of that is epigenetic regulation certainly. And we do think that there are epigenetic mechanisms that sort of overlay and determine our expression profile in ways that will differentiate who responds well, who doesn't. We actually have another trial pursuing that exact thing. But to your point, there is evidence of muscle memory. You know, we've all sort of thought about it and talked about it. Probably a lot of former athletes have sort of learned to believe in this concept. But from a molecular standpoint, it's actually bearing some fruit. There's evidence now that if you do train up a muscle and then detrain it, there is a signature that's sort of restored in the nuclei. Of those muscle fibers that are priming those fibers to respond again when you retrain. And so this is some interesting work just in the last few years that I think has added a lot of sort of evidence base to a concept we've all sort of bought into. Yeah, it's sort of folklore, but I had known about the new research. Thank you. Yeah, so bottom line is that everyone responds to exercise in positive ways. So can you talk about how some people may not gain as much muscle as others, but how those people will still see the benefits? Sure. So when we study the sort of what I call response heterogeneity across people, you're exactly right, Don. We're interested mostly in one outcome, which is how much new muscle have you gained from the state of muscle atrophy? And when we use that as our primary outcome, then you find a range of responses for sure. But beyond that, if you look at things like strength or insulin sensitivity or changes in resting blood pressure or changes in other functional outcomes, we find that everybody has responses that are positive to training. It just depends on your outcome of interest where you know, then you can dive into what makes this person respond better than this one. I would say the main message to take home is that there's no such thing as a non-responsive person to exercise. Everybody gets benefit. It's just whether or not the magnitude of their benefits for specific outcomes, you know, measures up to other people. Yeah, that's a great way of summarizing that. So, you know, there have been so many attempts over the years by researchers to identify a molecular signal that they could target with a drug. So do you think we'll ever find a drug that will give us the same kind of benefits as exercise? Well, you're going to dig into my biases now. I would have to say no simply because I mentioned this earlier, but exercise is multi potent. We are continuing to add to the list of metabolic and molecular signaling pathways that are regulated by exercise and have consequences on citer function and organ function. I cannot imagine ever capturing all of those molecular cues both up and down regulated signaling pathways into a single drug. There are some attempts to target one or two of the exercise mediated pathways, for example, to improve something that may be related to receptor signaling that influences blood pressure or signaling that influences how many mitochondria, these sort of energy factories in cells, how many of those are being produced or how many blood vessels are being produced and so forth. But overall, I don't see it from a reality standpoint. It exercise in my mind is just too multi potent. That makes perfect sense. That said, you know, there have been some drugs that have had trials that at least had shown the ability to increase muscle size in older adults and others. Although, you know, in older adults, these didn't translate into impressive functional outcomes or specific patient benefits, but might there be a kind of a sweet spot for people who are not able to exercise efficiently. Maybe they can just only do a little exercise, because those people perhaps benefit from drugs intended to enhance the outcomes of the exercise that they are able to do. You know, you can think of a variety of populations that would fit that description medically. Oh, I think I would absolutely agree with that that I do think these sort of exercise drug interaction studies and trials are very important, both in lower animals as well as in humans. I think we need to understand synergism and antagonism. What mediates or moderates the effects of the other, I think we definitely need a lot more work in this area. I think for some populations, as you mentioned, there's probably a need of identifying medications that can serve as synergistic or agonistic and enhance the effects of exercise training. And some of that work is ongoing. I don't want to discount the importance of those studies. I think they're incredibly important. Yeah, that's that's how I see it too. In fact, there are folks here that are interested in the PPR Delta agonists and aimed at specific populations of users. I mean, one can imagine astronauts, for example, they have permanent bedrests of a sort, in a long mission like to Mars or something might benefit from the application of such a drug. I absolutely agree. I think finding those pathways that are upregulated by exercise for some physiologic benefit or health benefit and then finding ways pharmacologically to enhance that exercise mediated up regulation, I think that has great value, just not as a true substitute. Yeah, I hate the way it's typically not the scientist that describes it as a substitute. It's usually the media and they use terms like exercise in a bottle or magic beans or pills or something exercise without the sweat. Yeah, exactly. Sometimes it's the university press release office. Stem Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research lab pioneering groundbreaking technologies aimed at leveraging and extending human cognition, perception, locomotion, and resilience. So, following up on something you said earlier, earlier you were talking about the cognitive benefits of exercise, which often get sort of swept under the rug and they're really significant. There are also studies that suggest that exercise can help prevent or at worst, delay the onset of Alzheimer's and other neurological disorders. And Alzheimer's is everyone knows is, everyone's afraid of Alzheimer's. It's probably second only to cancer in terms of the space it takes up in apprehension in the mind of adults. With so many benefits, one wonders why more physicians aren't prescribing exercise as a treatment or preventative. You've made this point several times during the interview already, but it's really easy to go see the physician and the whip out their little pad or now they type on their iPad or whatever and presto. You have a prescription, but the prescription never says resistance training or hardly ever. Yeah, absolutely. I think to address that, I do think a tangible prescription of exercise training can go a long way. And I'm very hopeful. Certainly in some healthcare provider offices, this is starting to happen. Some organizations such as the American College of Sports Medicine have really been sort of pushing this. They've actually developed physicians exercise prescription pads, so to speak, where you could actually walk out with, here's my target heart rate. Here's the number of minutes, the number of sessions a week of aerobic training. Here's how many sets and reps of resistance training, that type of thing. I think we're getting there. I would love to see it move a lot faster, but I think for it to truly become a reality and be embedded in the mainstream of disease treatment and overall prevention care. We've got to provide the evidence to say, here are your risk cluster. Your risk cluster has, you know, you're overweight, you've got high cholesterol, you've got hypertension, you're 45 years old. This is the prescription research has demonstrated to work for you, most likely, versus your 74, your osteophenic. You've lost a lot of muscle mass as well. This is the prescription for you. I think we need that and make it tangible for then a patience to appreciate and actually adopt, as well as for providers to feel confident in doing it. I often use this analogy. I don't think it does a patient much good for a healthcare provider to say, you know, here's all your problems, do more exercise. They don't walk out with anything tangible. That's really no different than saying, here's all your problems. Here's about all the pills take a few, right? You're going to walk out with a prescription. This is how many milligrams with or without food this many times a day. That's where exercise needs to be. Yeah, and to get there might require some shifts in the way physicians are trained. Absolutely. There's a strong sort of analogy to the lack of physician training in nutrition. You know, you see you see the same thing at exercise. We need to look at the effects of nutrition and the effects of exercise. They're huge and widespread, but they get very little attention in school. I agree with you. I used to direct courses in the medical school at UAB and we actually started a lecture series on exercise biology and eventually ended it with prescription. Took the most current data at the time to say, for a type 2 diabetic, here's the prescription, for a psychopinic, osteopinic, here's the prescription. And so forth, to give them some tangible evidence, but that's, you know, we've got over 140 medical schools that at that time was probably happening in fewer than 5 percent. And it really needs to be in 100 percent. Absolutely. So Marcus, the American Heart Association recommends that people get at least 150 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity a week. And the research also suggests that people set aside two days a week for moderate to high intensity strength training. So does that phone line with what you would recommend based off of the research that you've been doing? I think it's fairly close. I think again, it somewhat depends upon what you're trying to treat. I think for general health, though, I think these recommendations are pretty solid. I would like to see a little bit more creativity with regard to higher intensity forms of training integrated into an overall program. You know, ACSM, for example, recommends that, you know, if you're not going to do the 150 minutes a week of moderate, you know, that could probably be paired down to 75 minutes of high intensity interval, for example. But I think combining some form of aerobic or endurance training with resistance training is a very important message for the entire adult population and frankly for the pediatric population as well. I think for too long we've sort of been focused on the endurance training benefits and the resistance training benefits have sort of been secondary. And so I am glad that it's part of the overall recommendation. I would say even among those who know the benefits of both the scientists, the providers, every individual tends to gravitate toward what they enjoy the most. And so you can talk to scientists who know the benefits of both, yet they choose to pursue one or the other. So I think it's a little bit of a tough cell, but combined training is absolutely the way to go. Yeah, and that's true. Everyone does what they enjoy and then they get better at it. Right. And they enjoy it more. Absolutely. Yeah, I hate treadmills. I need elliptical machines. I hate anything with the TV attached. I'm not a fan of stationary exercise either. Yeah, sunshine getting outside is critical too, right? Besides being in the gym and lifting heavy so. Absolutely. So in 2017 you published an interesting paper looking at the dose response effects of exercise and older adults. So could you explain why this question is of interest to the field first of all? And then also whether you think establishing a minimum effective dose of exercise might have both scientific and also practical merit. Sure. So that study actually grew out of some of the work we talked about earlier in this discussion on the young versus old comparison. As I mentioned, clearly the older adults responded well, but we still thought there was room for improvement. And so we thought given that the recommendations coming from various organizations for how much resistance training one should perform on a weekly basis, given that those were fairly consistent across the age span, they were sort of agnostic to age. We thought it was important based on some of the pro-inflammatory signatures we were starting to see in muscle and differences in recuperability and so forth. Let's test this out. Let's see what if can we identify an optimal sort of intensity and frequency for the older adults specifically? So that was a study and again in 60 to 75 year olds, we designed four different resistance training prescriptions, randomized, a fairly sizable group to those four. We sort of went into this with thinking one or two of these prescriptions would rise to the top and turns out that that was the case. The one that was sort of the highest intensity three days a week was too much and we kind of suspected it would be, given 40 hours of recovery between bouts we didn't think was enough. And on the lowest end, we did one almost as a control, which was only high intensity once a week and then one other day of fairly low intensity loading. And we thought, well, that's not going to be enough. But there's a couple of interesting options in the middle. And the one that really turned out to give us the greatest gains in overall muscle mass and some other functional outcomes was this concept we came up with of high low high for the older adult. If you think about Monday, Wednesday, Friday type training, it was high intensity Mondays and Fridays and then they came in for a low, it wasn't really low intensity, but the loads were low on the midday. So it was almost a break from the higher intensity loading, but we were focused more on explosive movements and power development and things and giving them sort of a break from the heavy stuff. And it worked out really well. So we carried that forward into a subsequent trial, which was actually one of those exercise drug interaction trials. We thought, well, we've kind of identified a dose that works well in this population. Now let's translate it into something where we want to see the influence of a drug. In this context, we need to talk about intensity. You're really referring to the mechanical load on the muscle. In other words, heavy weight is, you mean by intensity or, or you're thinking like Tabata or no, I'm actually thinking of heavy weight. That's what I thought. The way we've always trained the older adults is with what I call super setting. So taking two muscle group movements that are not agonistic sort of antagonistic or you know, we can pair them up. So we move them through pretty fast, but you know, for example, they may do overhead press leg press combo, right? So one's not really impacting the other. So our res periods tend to be fairly short, but the intensity is all about loading. We tend to be in the eight to 12 repetition range to volitional fatigue. So our goal has always been sort of nine to 10 reps to failure and it's work fairly well. In that particular study on the high low high, the low day was not that it was not pushed to failure. It was actually loading at about 40% lighter loads and just trying to move fast. Failure is such an interesting and prejardive term. I hate to fail. I agree with you and that's probably not the best term. We should use the term volitional fatigue. I agree. But what we have found is interesting. I've got some really talented people who you know, do the training and oversee it. And when we feel like we have somebody or more than one person who is sort of sandbagging us, right? We do different things. Number one, we never tell anybody what the target number of repetitions is because people will perform to the tests, so to speak. So even though we may want them in the eight to 12 repetition range, we don't tell them that we just basically say do as many as you can do. But when you find a sandbagger, you can sort of say, okay, today we're going to do something different. We're going to go into this bar doesn't move anymore just to see where you are. And if they produce 15, 16, we know they've been sort of sandbagging us, so to speak, and it's time to bump the loads. But what we've always done is progress people teach them how to do it in a way that truly we think elicits volitional fatigue in most everyone. And then once they are successful at achieving 12 reps, that's time to bump the weight. So it's a continuous progression. And I think they, I think the participants frankly, feed off of that reward. My loads went up this week. Yeah, that's everyone likes that. Yeah. So speaking of strength training, a lot of people are avoiding gyms right now or can't go to gyms right now because of COVID-19. So curious if you have any recommendations for people who are struggling to keep up their strength during this pandemic. And also if you have any strength training exercises that you think they could be doing at home or should be doing at home. That's a great topic. And it is a challenge for all of us, frankly. Some fitness centers have reopened and I think are doing it in a fairly safe manner. But for those who for whatever reason feel uncomfortable in doing that and want to have some home-based activities, there are a number of body weight resistance training programs that can work fairly well, particularly for maintenance. And you can put your body into some positions that actually do overload the system quite well. You know, for example, if you can do standard sort of bilateral two-legged squat movement and you're strong enough to do it 50 or 60 times, it's not going to increase your strength necessarily. But find a place where you can stabilize yourself, hold on to a bar or a pole and try doing one-legged squat. And then you'll find out that's pretty challenging. So there are ways of using our body weight, same with things like push-ups, just by changing how high your feet are off the ground, you can increase intensity. Handstand push-ups with the wall. No question. If you can get there, you're doing really well. But even if you can just get to a decline, you can add some loading. And then of course, kettlebells. Absolutely. kettlebells are fantastic. So having a limited amount of equipment at home is great. I have found for myself straps, trainers that you get handles on a strap that you can adjust the height of those straps. You can do a lot of body movements with those. Yeah. Well, thanks to Ken and his recommendations. My bonus room has shifted over from a guest room to a room filled with weights and kettlebells, so thank you Ken. That's awesome. And you know, kettlebells go a long way. There's so many body, so many movements and ways to stress almost every major muscle group. Amazing. Sedentary adults, as we all know, can lose just a huge amount of muscle. I mean, the data is something like 30 to 40% of the total number of fibers in their muscles are lost by the time they're 55. And there's individual variation of course, but this is really significant because many of the neuromuscular and chronic inflammatory diseases are closely associated with muscle weakness, muscle atrophy and muscle fatigue. This is a really serious issue. And it's one of the reasons that the NIH launched a six year, $200 million study, really more than $200 million study, called the NIH Molecular Transducer's of Physical Activity Consortium. And this consortium is targeting enrollment of about 2,000 sedentary people and 300 highly active trained people. Now, since you are part of this ambitious study, can you give us an overview of how the study is being conducted and what the researchers are hoping to learn? Absolutely. So the acronym for this is MotorPack. This is a very exciting, I think, game-changing initiative funded by the NIH. This is funded out of what's called the Common Fund. And so that's sort of director Collins MetLevel support. All institutes below the director's office apply to have these Common Fund programs as a sort of trans-NIH effort. So this, if you sort of think back to the Human Genome Project, which was one of the most, you know, high impact common fund level programs at NIH, this is sort of the exercise human genome project. And what it really intends to do is map all of the molecular signals up and down regulated by aerobic exercise versus resistance exercise. So in the sedentary cohort, people are randomized and this is the entire age spectrum. So in adults, it's 18 to well over 60. And there's also one site doing studies in children and that's UC Irvine. There are 10 sites doing the adult clinical trial. So randomized to either resistance training and endurance training or control, 12 weeks of training, acute response studies. And what it may mean by that is bio samples collected before and after a single exercise exposure along a time course that can then be mapped. We have multiple institutions around the country who will perform the mapping. And we're talking about everything from epigenomic circuits to gene expression circuits, proteomic or protein circuits, metabolomic circuits. So the list goes on to try to capture all of the signals that are modified by exercise. And from the humans, this involves sampling, blood muscle and fat or adipose tissue. So there will be sort of this integration of how these three tissues respond to the two types of exercise, very exciting. The athletes are with the highly active people are there as a very interesting comparator group. So for those who've been training for a long time in one of those two modes, you expose them to the same acute or single exercise about what are their molecular profiles look like? And how different or similar are their profiles to the sedentary folks? We all know that you take a sedentary individual and put them on a training program. Their improvements are fairly rapid. You take somebody who's been doing this for years and years, their improvements are extremely small and slow. So you would expect perhaps the molecular signaling responses to be quite different. And I think we'll learn a lot from this study. For sure. It's a huge, ambitious study. Yeah, absolutely. There's also, I should say, there's a component of this is also incredibly important in animal models. So there are three sites doing rat studies and the advantage there, of course, is more tissue access. So now you're talking about sequencing and doing all the molecular mapping on not just muscle blood and fat, but also brain and kidney and adrenal gland and the list goes on. So I think there's going to be some very important maps. And when motor pack reaches its fruition, the beauty of it is that the data will be publicly available for all scientists to probe and ask new questions. I'm sure there'll be a lot of that too. Absolutely. And Marcus, these days there seems to be a lot of resources dedicated to understanding exercise at a molecular level. And yet we still don't really know how to get people to exercise. You don't already have an exercise habit. So one could argue that a good coach could address what some people term the non or low responder phenomenon with better programming or that soft skills rather than basic science discovery is what's needed to address the physical and activity problem. So the tough question for you is, and I appreciate that it's not an either or phenomenon, what is your take on the balance between applied and basic science from a funding point of view, and then also how to best maximize solving the problems associated with the lack of exercise? Great question, Dawn. So as you can tell from our discussion, I'm a physiologist and very much interested in the sort of biological underpinnings, but all levels of science are really important here. And you hit on the one that's probably the most important from a public health standpoint, which is behavioral change. We can show all of the interesting physiology, but how do we get people to actually stick to these programs, first adopt them and then stick to them? So I think there is a huge opportunity, frankly, for behavioral change science, for those that are in psychology, in research fields where they actually are very much interested in how we get humans to change behavior, behavioral medicine. I think it's a huge and frankly important missing area in this particular focus area in terms of exercise prescription. One of the pillars in the center we founded at UAB is actually focused on that. We call that the sustainability pillar, and we do have some really talented scientists pursuing these questions, also pursuing alternative ways of improving adherence. So for example, home-based programs that are carefully monitored, does that help overall sustainability? Different ways of sort of getting people to feel a sense of self-satisfaction, self-reward, I think is important. There's some interesting work going on right now, both in humans as well as in lower animals, on the reward centers of the brain, and are there differences in how one individual perceives exercise versus another, which may play a role? But I do think no question about it, behavioral change, research, and then implementation is incredibly important. I definitely agree. So shifting just a little bit here, talk about Parkinson's disease, which is the most common motor neurodegenerative disease out there. And earlier this year, you had a paper in the journal Frontiers In Physiology, and it's summarizing a study that set out to identify a transcriptional networks that might contribute to resistance training induced neuromuscular remodeling in Parkinson's disease. So before we talk about this study, it would be great if you could back up and talk about the paper that you had back in 2014 that found high intensity exercise improved muscle mass, and also mitochondrial function and physical capacity and people with Parkinson's. Can you give us a little bit of summary about that paper first? Yeah, happy to do that. This has been some of the most rewarding work I think I've had an opportunity to be involved in. Individuals with Parkinson's disease are facing a very challenging and long time course of disease progression, and the opportunity to work with some of them and potentially identify a way that we could help treat or at least help offset some of the symptomology. It's just been really, really exciting for us. So again, going back to 2011, 2012, when we started really developing the center, Parkinson's was one of the disease cohorts or disease groups that we wanted to target with some dosing of exercise. And we decided to start with fairly high intensity because there had been a number of studies already done with walking and other lower intensity forms of exercise. So we said, well, let's ask a couple of questions. One, can people with moderate Parkinson's, so Parkinson's disease in terms of its progression tends to be rated clinically on a one through five scale, this honing yard staging. So one being initial onset five being advanced disease. We targeted people who were two's and three's. So moderate disease state. We said, well, can they do high intensity training? We check that box. Yes, they can. We combine resistance training with actually body weight interval training. We kept their heart rates high the whole time. We kept them moving and challenging their balance, challenging their power development, trying to combat some of their symptoms by forcing, you know, just demanding more of the neuromuscular system. And we did that for 16 weeks. And what we found is that number one, they respond really well, much like older adult without Parkinson's. So they gained a lot of muscle mass, a lot of strength, gained a lot of power, improved balance. And at the citer level and the tissue level, they improved a number of important things such as their mitochondrial function and muscle, which is suppressed in Parkinson's. mitochondrial functions actually suppressed in all cells in Parkinson's. So we saw improvements there. They got more capillaries feeding the muscle, things of that sort. So there were some adaptations that were really attractive. But one of the things that came out of that work was this unique sort of muscle signature that we say, wait a minute, this is far and away different than the non-parkinson's age matched older adult. And that was this idea that it looked like the muscle was remodeling itself through this process that we've sort of come to know as motor unit remodeling. And for the listener, you know, a motor unit is one nerve or neuron. And then all the muscle fibers that it branches to and interintervates or activates. And so when some of those nerves or neurons sort of start to die off or you lose connection with the muscle fiber, either those fibers die away or they get rescued by a branching neuron from, you know, an adjacent sort of motor unit. Anyway, we found that this remodeling is is really profound in the Parkinson's muscle. And nobody'd ever seen this before. The focus had mostly been on the central nervous system. So we got interested in that. And what we found is over the course of 16 weeks of training, the muscle started to remember how it was once organized. And it was an unexpected finding. But we sort of saw remodeling going back to normal, which led to the paper dawn that you mentioned because we thought, if this is actually happening, there must be some gene expression profile or program that's helping drive this change back to a sort of normal looking older muscle. And in fact, that's what we saw in Kaleen Lavon was the lead author on that really did some interesting modeling to determine what gene networks were changing over the course of 16 weeks of training. And some of those were very closely linked to processes such as how neurons connect with muscle fibers. And we think we sort of mapped out some of the logical pathways that were activated by this high-intensity training that sort of taught that muscle to revert back to a healthier state. It's really fascinating work. Absolutely. And of great importance. Some markets with your move to IHMC, you're transitioning from clinical populations that you primarily worked with at UAB to now working on Department of Defense Focus work, where you'll be taking some of the same scientific questions and principles that you've been exploring with clinical populations. And then trying to apply those in other areas, specifically within warfighter populations. So can you talk a little bit about that? Yeah, I'm very excited about this dawn. I do think we've learned a lot over the years in both aging and chronic disease populations that has a lot of that information has high relevance to these new pursuits. One of my colleagues uses the phrase deficit spending. And I really like that phrase when we think about the warfighter and what they're going through on a day-to-day basis in terms of their stressors. And I think we've seen in the veteran population, for example, the onset of chronic disease, almost every disease across the board, happens earlier and potentially more severe progression in veterans than in non-vetrons. So I think that sort of paints a picture for us that there's a lot of stressors experienced by warfighters that are unique. And I think we need to understand what those are, but also figure out how we can intervene, whether it be exercise or other forms of intervention, whether it's just changes in sleep patterns or nutrition. I think there's a lot of things from a human performance and resilience standpoint we can explore to not only understand these stressors and what they're doing, but also how to mitigate some of those. And so this work, I think, is very exciting. I'm looking forward to continuing to grow my own research in this area, but also across the entire IHMC team. I'm very excited to see the talent, the vision, and sort of the new directions that I think we can all take together. Yeah, and I know IHMC is super thrilled to have you there. So can you briefly share your reasons for coming to IHMC? You definitely had a well-established lab at UAB and had been very productive there as we've been talking about throughout the podcast. Yeah, I think it would start with vision. I think I was at a point in my career, and I am still obviously wrapping up some important clinical trials at UAB, but I think I reached a point in my career when an opportunity to focus in a new research area at an institute that I saw with a great vision for innovation and sort of novel research directions. Very attractive to me, no question about it. I think the model itself in terms of how the research is conducted at IHMC, the focus on not just the sort of breadth of research, but the depth, I think, is something that attracted me, and also a focus on recruitment of new talent and new opportunities. All those things are good reasons, I think, for me anyway, to make this decision. I'm very happy with it. I look forward to continuing to grow the program here. I think the future, and I mentioned this to Ken earlier, I think where at IHMC has already developed a strong human performance in resilience and health span program, no question about it, but I think we're at the tip of the iceberg. I think the opportunities for growth, not just in breadth, but in depth of science, bringing computational biology more to the forefront as part of this overall program, sort of marrying the most applied research with the most basic research is an area that I think we can embrace and really do something unique here. Yeah, I'll hardly agree. Agreed, and very good to have you on the team. One of the first projects you're working on at IHMC is a DARPA sponsored program aimed at developing a revolutionary platform to enhance training and resilience of service members. The name of this program is the peerless operator biologic aptitude project, and it's been developed to increase the biological aptitude of the warfighters in an effort to increase their adaptability and resiliency mentioned earlier, all the wide range of stresses that they deal with and resilience is a key goal there. Can you talk a little bit about this project overall, and then your specific part of the project? Yeah, this is a very exciting project. As you know, it's being led by Tim Broderick, who's the chief science officer here at IHMC. It's an, I think, an incredibly important project, so this is supported by DARPA, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency as part of the Department of Defense. The goal, as you laid out very nicely, Ken, is to understand what all these various stressors are that the warfighter, and particularly, sort of operator, elite operator, undergoes and has to deal with. And then how to, from a molecular level all the way out to sort of a whole body functional level, how to integrate as much information as possible to determine, you know, sort of who will be the most resilient, and who may benefit from certain approaches to improve resilience, and then maybe overall, how can we do a better job of improving overall team resilience, because we may find signatures that are across the board that, you know, going back to this idea of deficit spending. Maybe this is a sort of a pervasive problem that needs to be addressed. So I think we'll be able to uncover some of that by going molecular. I think the programs that we're engaging with, with some of the service members, have been collecting a lot of good data over the years on a very applied level, and I think bringing the molecular into it, sort of the biologic aptitude into it will take this many steps further, so I'm excited about it. It's a very exciting program with a tremendous team. Yeah, we do have a super team, sort of an interdisciplinary team, multi-talented, and it stretches from, you know, neuro-cognitive science to basic molecular science, and sort of everything in between with physical, physiological, metabolic profiling and outcome measures, high performance outcome measures, and, you know, we're doing some unique things on cohorts of individuals in order to put together a sort of battery of outcome measures that we can then sort of bracket with acute stress responses at the molecular level, and I think really get a handle on, on ultimately what defines stress and what defines resilience to that stress. My specific role, you know, this is a task-oriented program, and sort of a leading TA1 or task one, which is really sort of merging all of the performance measures with the molecular expression circuits. Super exciting project, and as part of the peerless project, you recently returned from San Antonio where you occupied a building on an Air Force Base and converted it into a real time human performance lab in a very short amount of time, so it sounds as if you guys were definitely working around the clock. Yeah, that was, it was a very interesting, you know, 18 days for us, so for those unfamiliar with the term, it's a clamshell building, which is sort of a half moon shape building you often see on military bases. This particular one for the human performance laboratory that we created, like any other clamshell, no windows, it almost feels like you're in a cave atmosphere. We took a building that was largely empty, brought in a lot of high fidelity testing equipment to test every aspect that we could think of of humans sort of physiological performance. And over about the next week, developed a very nice testing laboratory, including the ability to do high fidelity body composition with a Dexascanner. We did a maximum auction uptake testing or VO2 max testing. We did strength and power testing. We did digital movement analysis, lots of, lots of tests. So that was a lot of fun. It took a lot of work. We had a great team. You know, we had ultimately a group of about 23 people supporting the program. In a separate building, we had a crew setting up and running neurocognitive testing, sort of psychological stress testing, as well as some simulations of shooting tasks and teaming tasks. So overall, we sort of hit, I thought we hit it out of the park in terms of testing all of the components and sources of stress that we really wanted to target. And then of course, collecting biological samples as well. So that was also our, my first experience anyway, setting up a field-based laboratory with centrifuges and minus 80 freezers and all the things needed to collect and process samples. Marcus, looping back a minute to your 2011 paper where you reported that resistance trained men and women in their 60s and 70s would benefit so greatly that they looked in terms of muscle very much like 35 and 40-year-olds that were untrained. Did you also look at power? You know, it's something I've seen that declines seems much worse in power. I run into really strong older people, but they can no longer touch the rim, say, in a basketball. When they used to be able to easily do so and their leg press hasn't changed, something is different. Do you can you talk about that? Yeah, clearly, yeah, I agree with you. Can power declines more precipitously than strength as we get older? We've done some cross-sectional studies to show that power actually drops off sort of in the, you know, starts to drop off late in a third decade, frankly. And certainly in the fourth decade. So in your 30s, power is starting to go down. You don't really see measurable changes in maximal strength for, you know, significantly more time, maybe 10, 20 more years. So power is a big one. And it plays such an important functional role in accomplishing daily activities and using body weight and keeping balance and things. We think power is incredibly important. In that particular study, we did show that power, absolute power sort of approached the young level. Didn't quite get there, but when you look at power relative to how much muscle mass they had, it actually got there and in many of the individuals was higher than it was in the untrained young. So, and I think part of that stems from the type of training. So I mentioned earlier the sort of this 10 repetitions sets. Those are not necessarily high power output as much as just brute strength efforts, right? But moving people fast and doing some other things that kind of made them move fast, I think contributed to some of that power development. Yeah, that's, it seems to be the one of the most debilitating aspects of the decline in muscle with ages, the loss of power. And frankly, you know, when I mentioned this sort of early fourth decade, 34, 35 years old, look at professional athletes that lines up with retirement really well. Oh, it does. It does, particularly in explosive sports, not even happened earlier and very explosive power sports. And we also find that in the military, right? If you look at some of the elite units, that's the tail end of the career. For sure. So Marcus, this might be a good place to talk about another project that you're working on and that's being sponsored by the Office of Naval Research. And it's called Precision High Intensity Training Through Epigenetics or Otherwise Known as Fight. So this is a trial that is trying to determine the effect of exercise dose on performance optimization and the underlying molecular mechanisms with the big focus on epigenetics. So can you give us an overview of the trial and also what you hope to learn with this study? Yes, this is an exciting project. So the acronym is Fight, as you mentioned. So we like to in recruitment, and this, this, the clinical aspects of this trial are being conducted at UAB in the center that we talked about earlier. The analyses of the tissue samples and other data are across a consortium which includes UAB for some of that work, a couple of labs at the Salk Institute, a couple of labs at Wright State University College of Medicine. So it's a great group. Individuals in the age range of 18 to 27 to mimic sort of early recruits into the Marine Corps are randomized to either moderate or high intensity training. We train them for 12 weeks and much like the motor pack program, we actually started fight long before motor pack, but we are doing a cute response study. So exposure to either a single high intensity, bout of exercise with biosamples collected before and after versus moderate intensity with samples collected before and after. Then 12 weeks later, repeat that to see what the effects of training are on those responses. And then we actually do something unique in this, which is four weeks of then strict detraining and collect more samples to determine what has changed over the last four weeks of now taking away that three days per week exercise stimulus. It's turned out to be a very interesting project. Some of the interim data are telling us that I think there are some important messages. Number one, in terms of epigenetics, meaning these regulatory mechanisms outside of your true genetic profile, but influences on how you express your genes, that sort of encompasses everything epigenetic. What we found is that, you know, probably not unexpected, there are clear sex differences. We knew that, but we're demonstrating that. But more interesting to me is there are dose sensitive expression signatures. So this tells us that not all exercises the same. So moderate versus high intensity gives you a different molecular response, which I think is important. The other important thing is that that signature in the true leaves untrained state at week, sort of week one is much different than the signature at week 12. So our responsiveness changes as we become more trained. I think that's an important second message. And then the third one is as we would expect, not every individual responds the same, right? And so I think we'll learn a lot from this project in terms of how we modulate our expression profile, how it relates back to health related and physiological outcomes that we're testing. And then ultimately, you know, the Navy and more focused on the Marine Corps is interested in, you know, tell us what is the optimal approach to training? And how can we best prepare people? And how can we best sustain people? And so, like a good clinical trial, this is blinded. That's what I call a single blind trial, meaning that the investigators are blinded to treatment. They only know these individuals as they're either in group A or group B. But I can tell you over the last four years, a lot of the people on the investigator's side of the fence have been trying to guess which program is A versus B because of the outcomes that we're starting to see. It's been kind of fun. It'll be the big reveal will be interesting to see. I look forward to hearing about it. Yeah, very exciting. And one other topic with respect to your research is you know, IGMC has conducted research aimed at developing an exercise machine for NASA and new approaches will be needed to permit effective astronaut resistance training and zero gravity, especially during a long duration space flight to Mars. So I hear you once had an interesting experience and zero gravity back when you were working at NASA. Can you tell us a little bit about that experience? Oh my goodness. Yeah, so I have had some experiences with brief exposures to zero gravity or microgravity on the what used to be the KC 135 sort of parabolic flight at NASA. The vomit comet. Absolutely Ken, the vomit comet. And it lived up to its name I can tell you. So this is an interesting experience. This is a plane that is hauled out with no seats except for in the back few rows. The main cabin is set up for people to bolt experiments to the floor and to the walls. It's it's an endeavor that is truly multidisciplinary different scientific teams at NASA sort of gear up for their experiments in zero G. So when you do fly on the KC in my case, we would be testing exercise devices. I tested a strength training device. I also tested a treadmill system and doing that right next to someone who might be doing surgery on a pig or doing a cell culture experiment or any number of experiments was very interesting sort of an eclectic group of people. So the way the parabolic flight works is it's a sort of flying level at 24,000 feet then shoots a 45 degree ascent at almost 2G. It's 1.8G pull to 36,000. Then when the plane knows is over, you get 25 seconds of true zero G and then you go into a 2G dive and this just repeats itself. So the vomit comet, my first flight we shot 53 parabolas out over the Gulf of Mexico. I think I made it through the first 25. That's better than the most. So yeah, it's actually a lot of fun but great experiences for sure. So one other question for you Marcus, after all this talk about exercise, what does your exercise routine look like? So I actually do subscribe to what we talked about earlier which is combined training. I think it's really important. For me, it's somewhat of a passion and almost I'm not sure how I would survive without it but I do a lot of resistance training four days a week. I mix it up in my resistance training so it's not all heavy. It's not all light. It's a mixture. I do like to do some high intensity interval training at least once a week is part of that. And then the other thing for endurance training although I'm less inclined for endurance training, I certainly would never be a marathoner. It's obviously important from a variety of levels physiologically. So I do do it and when I do it, I enjoy trail running probably more than anything. In a light can, I'm not a huge fan of the stationary devices. If I have to glue myself to a stationary bike I will but I would much prefer getting out on a trail taking my dog. I agree. We had another guest on Stem Talk who is a passionate trail runner. It's Mark, Mattson. Do you know Mark? I do. I absolutely done some fabulous aging work. He's excellent in all regards. So on that note too, what kind of diet do you follow? I try to eat a fairly healthy diet dog. I'm not strict on any specific type of diet. I do monitor protein intake fairly regularly. I do think protein intake is a really important. When I say protein intake monitoring, my goal is sufficient protein intake, not an overabundance, but I do try to make sure it's sort of not protein malnourishment. And I do try to limit simple carbs. I don't limit all carbs, but I try to limit processed and simple. I will go through phases where I get very strict for periods of time. I've done some keto dieting. I've done some a little bit of intermittent fasting. I do enjoy dabbling in those things, but I think over the course of a year, my main goal is to provide myself with enough protein, limit my processed foods, not completely abstain from enjoying something once in a while, but just as we all age, I'm trying to not have that as a source of expedited aging. That would be good. You mentioned protein. One of the most frustrating aspects is watching people go through the aging process, particularly loved ones, parents and others. Typically, their protein consumption declines when it should be going up if anything. And so you'll see them with toast for breakfast with jam. It's like, no, mom, I have some eggs. Absolutely. I'm a huge fan of eggs. I agree with you, Ken. I think the jury is still out on protein intake. What is optimal? But I think we can all safely say that 0.8 grams per kilo is not optimal. I think for the older adults, 1.2 to 1.5 is reasonable. And even I would put myself in that category. At my age, I'm 53. I've done enough research to know what the slope looks like. And so I do try to stay well above one probably closer to 1.5. That's good. It makes sense. Right now, you and Deanna are on the process of looking for a new home, and then purchasing one, and moving to Pensacola. You have so many projects going on that you have very much spare time, and that's a good thing. But when you're able to get away from work and have work off your mind for a minute, what is it you like to do in your fleeting spare time? Well, I must say I've got three children, all adults now, but all extremely important to me and to Deanna. And as much time as we can spend together, that's probably at the top of my list, no question about it. The good news for us as parents is that all three of our children are local to us. One is earn a graduate degree. One just finished undergraduate school. One is in undergraduate school, but they're all fairly close to us. And so we definitely enjoy family time. I think those trail runs I mentioned are good escape for me. I do enjoy reading when I can. I tend to read at night, and oftentimes, you know, I don't have a lot of free time, and I tend to work pretty hard. And so sometimes when I hit the pillow, I don't get very deep into a book. Oftentimes my wife will pick it up off my face, but I do enjoy reading. Well, that's the original Facebook, right? That's exactly right. That's actually the best kind of Facebook I've ever seen. I'm actually reading a book right now that was authored by one of your former or previous STEM talk guests. So it's a good book. Which book is that? Sacred Cow. That is a good book. A lot of truth in that book. Yeah, I'm enjoying it. Well, Mark, is this been fantastic having you on STEM talk today? Thank you so much for joining us. I really appreciate the opportunity. I loved chatting with you all. Thank you, Marcus. It was great. STEM talk. STEM talk. STEM talk. STEM talk. STEM talk. So that was a lot of fun. As expected, we always love talking with Marcus. And I followed Marcus's research for a long time, and I'm so glad that he is a colleague and that he is here at IHMC. Indeed, Don. Marcus has become known worldwide for his work in understanding the molecular responses to exercise and how they relate to health and performance. His research is highly valued by such organizations as the National Institute of Health, the Department of Defense, NASA, and other agencies around the nation. He is going to do great things here at IHMC. And like you said, Don, we are very fortunate to have him as our colleague. Absolutely. So if you enjoyed this interview as much as Ken and I did, we invite you to visit the STEM talk web page where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes at STEMtalk.us. This is Don Konega signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we need again on STEM talk. Thank you for listening to STEM talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others. So please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, stemtalk.us. There, you can also find more information about the guests we interview.
