 Welcome to STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. Welcome to STEM Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host, Don Conegas, and joining me to introduce today's podcast is a man behind the curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, HMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Sexual Committee that selects all the guests who appear on STEM Talk. Hello, Don. Great to be here. So our guest today is Dr. Yuen Ashley, who is a leading pioneer in the use of genomic sequencing to solve some of the most puzzling medical mysteries that people face today. Yuen is the Scottish-born professor of medicine and genetics at Stanford University, and he's also the author of the Genome Odyssey, Medical Mysteries, and the incredible quest to solve them. Before we get to our interview with Yuen, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to STEM Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Sexual Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the widiest and most lavishly praised filled reviews to read on STEM Talk. If you hear your review read on STEM Talk, just contact us at STEM Talk at ihmc.us to claim your official STEM Talk feature. Today, our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker JCJ. The review reads, The other day, I read an article about a new study that showed how diet, in combination with exercise, has the ability to transform our bodies and health. We so often focus on diet in terms of losing weight, but this study emphasized the importance of building muscle to lose weight. But I already knew that. I knew that because I listened to the Donald Layman interview you guys had, and that's what I love about STEM Talk. I feel as if I'm ahead of the game and the latest research. Well, thank you so much JCJ, and thanks to all of our other STEM Talk listeners who helped STEM Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now onto today's interview with Dr. Euan Ashley. STEM Talk, STEM Talk, STEM Talk. STEM Talk, STEM Talk. STEM Talk. Hi, welcome to STEM Talk. I'm your host Don Crenegas, and joining us today is Euan Ashley. Euan, welcome to the podcast. Oh, thanks so much for having me. Yeah, and also with us is Dr. Ken Ford. Hello, Don, and hello, Euan. Hi. So you and let's just get started. I understand that you were a computer nerd growing up and that your fascination with science fiction played a role in that developing interest. Is that correct? Yeah, I was born and nerd, trained in a few different ways after that, but definitely a nerd growing up. I loved any and all gadgets. I loved computers as they were coming online. I grabbed the first, I guess, Game Boy, which came many years later, but the first handheld gaming device, I had it in my hands had we wrenched free. Anything computers is definitely ready to adjust and hold on to as a little kid. So on that question, how are you first exposed to computers and what was it about computers that hooked you? Well, we lived in the UK and some of the computers, I think, that were available there. We're also available in other parts of the world in the US in particular, but the computer that we had at home was called the ZX Spectrum. It was a small computer. I think it had maybe 48k of memory, had rubber keys and you could program in basic or you could play games. And I did both of those things as a little kid and just immediately found an affinity with this, whether it's the addictive nature of the games or just being able to make a machine do something that you wanted it to do. It just seemed magical to me and I just couldn't, couldn't stop. And when you were a teenager, I hear you that you worked on developing smart tax software for your father. So how did that turn out? Yeah. Yeah. I really wasn't there. It wasn't I. Yeah. So yeah, I like to program little things and most of them were relatively pointless just to demonstrate that something could be done. And I think my dad spotted that and maybe thought that this could be channeled into slightly more positive direction. And he would, he used to prepare the taxes for his medical practice. He was a GP and he had every year had to take out these, these books of tables and then look up for each employee, you know, page 14 and column Y and, you know, row X. And it's just I spotted that there was a pattern basically. It wasn't too difficult to see that could be expressed as a mathematical function and suggest that maybe I could build that in so we didn't have to look up these tables. And somehow I guess I just spent the summer doing that. And by the end of the summer, I actually had a working version of the tax program. So maybe I should have spent a little bit more time outside. But when you get into something, you just want to just want to get it done. So it was, yeah, that was probably the first complete end to end piece of software I ever wrote. That's pretty cool. I imagine you also tried your hand at developing computer games or at least playing around with the thought of developing them. Is that right? How did you guess? Yeah, yes indeed. Indeed. So I mean, I, my friends were very much into computer games. They did a bit of coding, but mostly they played games. And so I was trying to find something to use them with. There was a game that was very popular on the ZX spectrum based on the celebrity who was daily Thompson, who was one of the world's best decafetes. And basically you got to move your little daily Thompson through 10 different events. And most of the events basically you made your competitor go faster by alternatively pressing these rubber keys, like as fast as you possibly could. I mean, in a really interesting twist, I later learned that the, the rapidity with which you can alternate muscles back and forth across the same joint is actually related to sprint performance. So that's, that's like many years in the future, I was to learn that. But at the time was all these kids like bashing the keys of this, this rubber keyboard to make their little daily Thompson run faster or leap higher. And that became the inspiration for, for my game, I thought, well, there's a way we can have an input. What about, why don't we do horse racing? And at the time you basically to do graphics, you would have to basically build a grid to then make a little horse inside the grid. I think I have several grids for the horses in different positions of running. And then basically two people would compete against each other and the computer to make their horse run as fast as possible along the course. And we had some random speed elements for the other horses and the, in the course. So yeah, that was, that was another, yeah, did not make me a fortune that game. But, but I think my friends thought I was reasonably cool, maybe, but certainly was fun to try my hand to make a computer game. So, so you and let's back up for a minute. Where did you grow up? Yeah, you may be able to tell from my accent that it was not in California or at Stanford, where I now live, but rather in the, in Scotland. So in the west coast of Scotland and in Glasgow, actually. And so your father is a physician and your mother is a midwife. And I understand that early on, you would tell people that you wanted to be a physician even though your parents didn't necessarily push you in that direction. So what was behind the drive of yours to become a physician? Yeah, it's a great question. I, you know, it's just something that appeared to be deeply in my soul. I just, I can't think of any other answer. I mean, from the youngest age, I can remember, which is probably four to five years old when any adult would ask me what I want to be when I grew up. I would answer that I wanted to be a doctor. I just felt like I was put on this earth to try and help other people through medicine. And I never really never considered anything else just from an early age. I think many would assume that it was the influence of my, my mom and dad, both in the medical profession. And I think that has to be at some level of case. But interestingly, they both at one point or another, more of my dad's side, if anything, push me a little away from a career in medicine. But despite that, it just was, it was, it was never going to be any other way for me. And at some point, you became quite fascinated by data and statistics. How did this interest come about? What motivated or sparked this interest? I go numbers always seem to make sense to me and seem to be fascinating. And that the patterns that you could see within numbers, whether it was prime numbers or the way that numbers related to the real world just always seemed fascinating. I would memorize numbers much more easily than I would memorize words. And they seem to almost sing to me in a way that just made sense. And so I think that combined with my computer geekery, which was somewhat mathematical as well, to give me this sense of the world as a mathematical place. And at school, even though again, I was always telling everybody that I was interested in medicine and science. My teachers were saying, but the things you seem to be good at are maths and physics. And are you sure you want to do biological science? Because you're just moderately okay at that. And I would be like, un-pressuated. I like, no, no, you're right. But I definitely want to do medicine. And it was much later to be honest that I realized that these might be, it might be possible to combine the two. I really had all of these two parts of my brain. You know, one side, I was clear I wanted to be a doctor. I mean, the other I was in my spare time at computer geek, but I honestly would never have thought that it would be possible to combine those two interests. So you graduated with first class honors in physiology and medicine from the University of Glasgow. And then you headed off your medical residency and a PhD at the University of Oxford. And so somewhere along the way, you met a fellow student named Fiona. So how did you meet Fiona? First of all, who I understand helped you through medical school and has played a pretty major role in your life. Is that correct? That is correct. It is about my wife about who you speak. Yeah, I met Fiona in Glasgow. And she was also a scientist at the time. I remind her of this from time to time, or she reminds me occasionally that she was doing RTPCR long before I was ever doing that. She was actually a microbiologist for her undergrad. And so we met, but we actually met through kind of sport and exercise. And she later became the president of the University Athletic Union at Glasgow. So she stayed around a little longer after her undergrad while I was in the medical school and our relationship flourished. And yeah, we beat that was quite some time ago now, almost 30 years ago. But yeah, she's been in an incredible support. We ended up moving to Oxford at the same time. She for a job and me to go and do residency and then a PhD. And then we came up with a crazy plan to move to California. And that's where another story began. Well, as you just mentioned, the two of you took off for California. And that was for you to conduct your postdoc research at Stanford. You must have been a good fit. You must have liked there because you ended up joining the faculty in 2006. And we'll come back to that. But what brought you to Stanford in the first place? What motivated you said you had this crazy idea and you both moved to California? What was the driver there? Yeah, I was lucky enough actually as a medical student to get a connection to California. You know, medical students are often recommended to try to do an elective during the summer period. Go somewhere else in the world and just experience medicine in a little different environment. And I went to one of the cardiologists. I was already interested in the heart. So I went to one of the cardiologists in Glasgow and asked, who do you know in the world? You know, it's side of these walls. And he gave me two or three names and I wrote to each one of them. And the each wrote back actually, I basically said, sure, if you want to come, we'd be welcome to. But one note in particular really stood out and it was from a professor called Vic Frolicer here at Stanford. cardiologist world expert in exercise and the heart literally wrote the book on that. And he wrote just such a cool note back to me that had humor and encouragement and saying that, you know, he might be able to help out with somewhere to stay and maybe I could use his bike. Can it just seemed like a wondrous opportunity? And it actually became now a 30 year long friendship. So as a medical student, I reached out and came to California and I was just blown away by Stanford, just blown away. It was the summer that Netscape was faulty. So it was actually the beginning of the internet boom. The internet was still a new thing. Bill Gates hadn't added the addendum to his own book about how the internet's going to be important. So it was it was pretty far back. And you know, I here was also I came from the west of Scotland, which has many great things about it, but weather is not one of them. And so I came from a rather rainy place to just beautiful weather. I had this bike that I could cycle around and where was I cyclic to get to work in the morning? I would cycle to through Xerox Park with the event that mouse and invented the graphic user operating system. And it was in geek heaven. And as well as that, I got to study data and relating to exercise in the heart. So I was just absolutely in heaven. At that moment, really, I'd said it was any chance of coming back to this incredible environment. It's down for I would absolutely take it and not worry about the consequences. So that's where it took us there a little bit later where I came out for a post. So I'm curious, what was it about the heart that fascinated you? And what point in your studies did you decide to specialize in cardiology? Well, I think coming from the west of Scotland heart disease is something that is is very much around you. And it was in my family and it was in the many friends and relatives that one point during medical school, one of the lecturers basically put up a series of slides that identified the place in the world with the highest rate of heart disease. And they started with Europe and then Britain and then Scotland and then the west of Scotland and then literally it was outside our door where heart disease had at that moment in time at least the highest prevalence. So that was an important part of it. But actually, if I really think about what drew me into cardiology, it was it was a singular moment in the physiology lab as a second year student. And we basically had this opportunity to look after a lying in the heart. So a lying in the heart was a scientist who essentially developed a number of really important physiological experiments. But one of them was the isolated heart where you could take from an animal heart and hang it essentially through the earth of the big blood vessel comes at the top and then feed it basically feed it sugar, feed it energy, feed it oxygen and keep it alive. And the incredible thing was that this heart just kept beating and it would beat for hours. And so we came into our physiology lab. We sat on these wooden stools and sort of rickety old lab from, you know, for all I know hundreds of years ago at the University of Glasgow. And suddenly we had this just beating machine that this sort of symphony of biology in front of us for chambers beating kind of in in unison. And as long as we kept feeding it, it kept beating and I stared at that thing for hours and hours and I said to myself, I have to understand how that organ works. It just seemed like the most interesting organ in the body. It's the only one in continuous motion, three billion beats in your lifetime. It creates music with its sounds as the valves open and close. It has rhythm. It just seemed like how how could anyone not want to spend their lives devoted to understanding that organ. So I think that was the day that the seed was planted. Really interesting and well spoken young. In terms of your professional career, you start out with a clear focus on medicine as we've discussed. And also as we've discussed, you had this extensive interesting computing and data. At what point did you realize these two really would combine beautifully to forge you an especially interesting career opportunity? Yeah, I think that was really the first time I came as a post out to Stanford. So after we jumped ship and came across the Atlantic and landed in Stanford as a post out. I came to the lab of Tom Kutomus, who's the chief of cardiology here at Stanford. And it was the early days of the microarray. So microarray, of course, Pat Brown and others developed this technology in the early 2000s to go from taking molecular biology from thinking about one gene at a time. Essentially maybe one protein at a time to a higher throughput entity. And at first that was a higher throughput was maybe looking at 20 at a time or 50 and then 200. And over the course of the time after I joined the lab, we were moving from a time where you could suddenly measure 2000 gene expression of 2000 genes up to the full genomic complement of genes up to 20,000. And this seemed to me just kind of mind blowing that you could measure the gene expression of every gene in the genome. But it was just the beginning. But what it also was was an opportunity because suddenly there were molecular biologists who were kind of used to their experiments with an end of three or five or 10. And they were ready with their statistics to do that. But suddenly they had a data file with 20,000 data points times however many different settings that you're measuring them in. And you just need a whole different set of tools to do that. So I think I definitely have to credit Tom Quaternhorst. I was new in the lab and he needed somebody perhaps with some geekery to take on the concept of thinking about 20,000 measurements. And so I sought out some statistical mentors at Stanford and I think that that moment that the die was cast and it really became clear to me that these things could be combined and that it could be quite useful to be able to make computers do things in a world, in a molecular world where you were making many, many thousands of measurements. And of course we moved from there to millions and billions of measurements and so data science biomedical data science became became born. Just this is the side I did my PhD at Duke University and my thesis was actually focused on gene expression, microarray and translation of it. This is back in 2008 when I started and translation of it as a diagnostic tool. And so I joked around that my PhD became less about biomedical research and more about biostatistics and data science because of the reasons you're talking about. So it's totally understand really exciting time. Yeah, absolutely. So currently at Stanford your lab is focused on the science of precision medicine and your best known for helping establish a field of medical genomics. And so you and your colleagues at your lab develop some of the earliest tools for their interpretation of the human genome and the context of human health. So can you give our listeners just a short primer on the genome and then also how the first draft of the human genome sequence is completed. That was about 20 years ago. Yeah, of course, so that I mean the human genome project really, really was like landing a human on the moon. It was a it was a true moonshot and I'm happy to say we're still in a world where we make attempts of those. But this was a project that was funded for $3 billion. There were 10 countries involved. It took basically 10 years to get to the first draft of the human genome. And when we'd say human genome, really what we each have two copies, we get a chromosome each from mom and dad in reality for the human genome was really just one. And so we call it monoplyde. So it's just one long line of letters essentially for each chromosome. And initially the idea was that that would be a mixture of 10 people's DNA so that nobody would know whose DNA was in the human reference at any given point. But for a variety of technical reasons that only became clear later on, it actually turns out that it's mostly one person and who said who is anonymous and one person who was actually one of the scientists connected to making those libraries at the time. Either way, this human genome reference has become the single kind of most important contribution, I think, maybe to biology, but certainly obviously foundational to the field of human genomics because every genomic experiment that came afterwards, whether it was gene expression experiment or human genome sequencing or genome white association study in a population cohort has has relied to some extent on that human genome reference. But yeah, it was several individuals from Buffalo, New York who answered an ad and they came along to have their blood taken actually by a set of identical twins, which I thought was a really nice sort of genetic element to the beginning of the human genome project. Nice touch. Yeah, yeah, exactly. I like that. So that's where we are. And actually the sequence was arguably completed last year with a project called the telomere to telomere for you. It was a draft in 2002. It had been improved over the course of the last 20 years, but it took a huge leap forward last year with the work of the telomere to telomere consortium who actually added eight percent that had been missing and mostly around the telomeres, the caps of the cone zones. And so we really are very close, first of all, to one fully finished genome and much more important than that. And I think we're exciting even is another related program called the Pan genome project will start to look at the diversity across the globe, of course, and in looking at multiple genomes. And so that's that's really been the trajectory for genome references at some point with the current technology we made actually able to leave the reference aside and just think about every new person every new genome that comes along as its own set of data, but at the moment we compare every new genome to the reference genome. You often talked about genomic medicine and precision medicine for listeners could you briefly describe what the entail in this context. Yeah, of course. And I think what the human genome project really opened up everybody's eyes to the possibility of understanding the genome at deeper level, understanding our biology, understanding maybe at some level, what it means to be human. And of course, the first step in that process was to use that to fuel discovery, but very shortly, a few, a few short steps beyond that is the application of that genome to medicine. So we think about being able to diagnose rare disease or being able to give people better risk prediction for the future. Or helping them understand which medications would be more suited to them in relation to their particular genetic makeup, something called pharmacogenomics. So when we talk about genomic medicine, we really talk about something in that range. And the genomic medicine really seated precision medicine, the precision medicine, much broader term, you may have also heard of the term personalized medicine and personalized medicine really encompasses the ideas I mentioned just a moment ago for genomic medicine. But precision medicine was really a way of really thinking about disease at the deeper level and kind of redefining the map of diseases. And really, as we understood a disease at a molecular level, it might turn out to be five different diseases. And it might turn out that each one of those five groups should be treated differently. And if we do find medications that do that, we find much bigger effects. And that has really come to pass. But it was really president Obama that rocketed the term precision medicine to the top of of certain Google search terms. If you look on the Google Trends tool, you can see that just before the state of the union, when he announced the precision medicine project, there were very few searches for precision medicine. But shortly after he announced what was coming several billion dollars of funding, of course, everybody switched out the word personalized for precision in their slight decks. And we included, but there are of course some overlapping elements. But the idea of a futuristic medicine where you get the right medicine to the right patient at the right time. That's the essence of precision medicine. And so I understand that the aha moment came for you back in 2009 when you walked into the office of a friend who is just a fifth person in the world to have this genome sequence. So can you share with listeners the significance of this and also the impact that it had on your life and your work? Yeah, it was a really pivotal moment. And I think you walk into these moments, not having any idea what they are at the time, but it's only in retrospect. It's just how important they were. I was going for a meeting with someone I didn't know that well time actually became a friend later colleague and then friend, but Steve Quake was the chair of by engineering here at Stanford. And he made an info for himself already and started multiple companies and written a lot of really important papers around micro flutics. He was an inventor, really a genius character around campus. And I was going to his office for a very simple reason, which was that we had a new chair of genetics coming, Mike Snyder. And we needed to organize a seminar, kind of welcome him to Stanford. So Steve and I were going to organize some of the geneticists on campus for that purpose. So I came, you know, I've had to find his office as usual as impossible to find in this labyrinthine Clark building here at Stanford. And then I found it and here, here was him in this office and you can imagine piles and these days people don't have this, but piles of journals like printed journals, like to almost to the ceiling, at least in my head, it was to a ceiling. And so I had to sort of see find my way through that to find him in the corner where he was pecking away to keyboard. And so I said, oh, well, let's, can we chat about this seminar? He said, okay, but first here come and take a look at this and he starts pointing at the screen of, you know, what looked like one of his old tables, HTML tables that used to be on old website. And I said, trade thematic at the top and then there were lists of genes and lists of variance. And you know, I hadn't really seen anything like this before. And I was saying, well, what is that? And he said, well, that's my genome. And as you said, he was like the fifth person in the world to have secrets that you know, which he did in his own lab with two people for a tenth of the price of the one before that. And so this was just, I mean, this was just mind boggling. My jaw was on the floor. This is somebody's genome. I can browse on the screen right in front of me. And it is a put this in context. We were sending genetic testing from our clinic at the time, but we would send a test for three genes. So you'd get only the genes, nothing in between. And it would take three months and cost like five to 10,000 dollars. And he was literally showing me a browser for entire genome, 20,000 genes. Plus everything in between. Remember that genes are only 2% of the genome. And the whole thing was there. And that was such, it was mind boggling. But then another thing happened because he started pointing. He said, hey, look at this variant that I have. Well, look at this one. Have you ever seen that gene? First of all, like, did he think I had some photographic memory for every gene that you know? I did not. But he actually started pointing to get some genes that I did know that caused rare heart diseases. And in fact, rare heart diseases that can be associated with sudden cardiac death, very severe conditions. And he appeared to have genetic variance in them. And so suddenly I was asking a few more questions. And actually, the whole session changed from being a scientific discussion among colleagues to almost like a medical examination. And so I started asking about his family history of heart disease. And at first, of course, like most people, he said, no, I don't have too much of that. But then as I pushed him a little further, it became clear his dad had a cardiac arrhythmia. There were other grandparents in the family who had early heart disease, many individuals. And then finally, I asked him, you know, has anyone ever died suddenly or unexpectedly, which is really our single most important question to help discover these conditions? And he said, well, it's, yeah, it's funny. You should ask because my cousin's son, who was a 19-year-old, no previous history, just didn't wake up one morning, died suddenly cardiac death with no known cause. And so we moved all of a sudden from this incredible discussion about his genome to this really tragic discussion about his family, the family members, cousin's son who had died. But also in that moment, it became clear that we had this unbelievable opportunity, because he was for sure coming to my clinic with this family history. And he said, oh, yeah, you know, my family would be telling me, I need to go see a cardiologist. And I'm like, well, okay, well, there's one right here. And as I invited him to my clinic, it suddenly dawned on, I think both of us, that he was about to become the first patient really in the world to walk into a clinic with his entire genome available to the medical team. And after that sank in, it's like panic set in, because how were we going to, what were we going to do? How are we going to analyze an entire genome? This is six billion data points, as I mentioned. In cardiology, we're used to like a lipid panel, like a cholesterol panel with five numbers. And suddenly, we were going to have six billion. And so that was the beginning of an adventure that initially took us, you know, six to 12 months. And that in reality has been 15 years now. It became an amazing friendship with Steve, many scientific collaborations. But yeah, it's not often you know your friends as deeply as we know Steve, all the way down to the last base pair of his genome. So yeah, on that note, you actually wrote a paper about Steve in 2010, where you described how you put together a team to undertake an integrated analysis of a complete human genome in a clinical context. And this is a groundbreaking paper because you were asking the question of how you bring together the entirety of genetic literature and everything that is known about associations between genes and disease and the variants of diseases. And so you built all these questions into an algorithm that could be deployed in the context of a single patient in a primary care practice. And I'm guessing that was no small feat, wasn't it? It was kind of crazy undertaking. But some of the most fun things in life come from slightly crazy ideas. And I mean, I often think about that TV show, who wants to be a millionaire where you have this opportunity, when you get a hard question to call a friend. And that was kind of how I felt there. Clearly, Steve was going to be coming to our clinic. I felt very comfortable taking care of the cardiology elements. And certain elements of the analysis of his genome were already starting to form in our minds. But there's no way you could take on something this big without a lot of friends. So I started calling some individuals a tool, but who's now at University of California, San Francisco, was at Stanford at the time. And he had built some tools for thinking about common disease and common genetic variation. Russ Altman still here at Stanford, had been building for a decade or more the farm GKB, the pharmacogenomics knowledge base, which remains the kind of Bible to the state for pharmacogenomics. And so they were two of my first calls. It was very clear. We need to think carefully about the ethical implications of what we were doing. So I called Hank Greeley, who's a world renowned ethicist, particularly around medical issues, and especially technology and medical issues. And so we formed this team to really try and start to think about this. And then of course the people who had helped analyze, at least with that first table that I saw in Steve's office, were from Harvard. Actually, George Church's group and the Traitomatic software had come from there. And so the personal genome project folks joined the project too. And we basically ran everyone, put down all their other projects basically. We did this one thing together for I think nine months running 100 miles in our many, many late nights to try and see if we could interpret one person's genome in the context of the entire medical literature on genomics, which was ridiculously ambitious and retrospect. And we only made a small bite. But I think as I always say to my team, you can't do two until you've done one. And so you just have to focus on the first one, do the best job we can. And I think in the end we made a first step. And it was a pretty exciting thing. I think it was a really neat undertaking because it was sort of the convergence of preparation and opportunity and circumstance. And taking advantage of it, not letting it slip away was wise and I think valuable. In terms of medical genomics, we have a tremendous cost savings now because of technological advancements and you know, you can not only sequence individuals as you mentioned, but perhaps think about entire populations. I would imagine that someday this has the opportunity to radically change the future of healthcare. And we're starting to begin to see this. Can you give listeners a sense of the impact this could have? Yeah, I think it really will change healthcare for everyone. To date, it has had a revolutionary effect for people with rare disease. And for a certain, certainly for around half the families that manage to get to someone who can do genome sequencing for them. And that's really the first step, I think, on the way to the revolution that is genomic medicine. The impact of being able to sequence a genome cheaply and quickly and accurately for those who suffer from a diagnosed disease has been significant. I think because if you don't have a name, you don't have an understanding of what your diseases, of course, it's impossible to treat it. And although rare diseases is actually collectively quite common, I mean, one in 10 people has a rare disease. So that still covers a significant portion of the population. Of course, I think the revolution is realized when a large majority of people are affected by something. And so I think now we're looking towards prevention. And essentially, sometimes we would call that precision health, the idea of getting ahead of disease. And I think genomics has a large role to play there too. Because I think understanding each person's individual risk for disease will really have to be incorporated into our ability and our approach to screening disease. So at the moment, we do screening for let's say breast cancer or the forms of cancer based on age alone. That doesn't actually make a lot of sense because we know in the population, there are people at much higher risk and some people at lower risk. And the same is the case for Parkinson's disease or Alzheimer's disease or other diseases for which we might do screening. So I think moving towards a personalized approach to healthcare and individualized approach. I mean, I sometimes say that surely your doctor can individualize your care just as much as your hairdresser. I mean, surely that's not too much to ask. We really have the tools to do it. And I think that the major tool is the human genome. So you and we listened to an interview you did with the New England Journal of Medicine's podcast where you talked about how someday we will see a pathogenic label or be able to order pathogenic label on a genetic report. And a lot of people today are ordering genetic tests or working with genetic testing companies such as 23 and me where people can learn for example whether they have the APOE for gene, which is related to an increased risk of Alzheimer's or say a genetic variant associated with Parkinson's or a genetic predisposition toward heart disease as examples. And it's remarkable what these genetic tests can tell us today. But on the podcast, you talk about how new more advanced genetic reports are on the horizon and that they will provide even greater detail and will come with pathogenic labels. So can you talk about these future genetic reports and how they'll differ from what we're seeing today? Yeah, of course. I mean, I think it's a really interesting area and necessary for the future success of genomic events. And the fact is that we all have variants. I mean, that's part of life. It's part of the great diversity of the world and the fact that no two people, even identical twins do not actually have identical genomes. We all carry multiple variants. And so I mean, as an example, I mentioned earlier, we compare every new genome that we sequence to the human reference sequence. In general, we will find around four million variants. So four million ways in which the person front of us differs from that reference sequence. And so that means that whenever we sequence a genome, that the problem is not going to be sort of searching for a needle in a haystack, but rather searching for a particular needle among, you know, four million other needles. And that's a slightly different problem. And so when we think of a clinical genetic test report, what often comes back these days, either you may have a very clear variant that has been known or seen before or just by nature of the way it kind of breaks a gene, it could be concluded just even the first time it's it's seen that it is likely to be pathogenic that it's contributing significantly to a disease. But there are many, many variants which are of lesser known significance. And we used to say at least that the entire genetics community would call these variants of unknown significance. I actually don't like that term at all because these days we actually know something we could say something about any variant. And that's because really of in many ways technology pushing us through and you mentioned the population cohorts. So it used to be when we started doing genetic testing if we would find a new variant in a particular gene. And then to know if it was new or not, we'd compare it to 100. I feel a, you know, amazing even saying this out loud, but you know, it's 100 anonymized blood donors. That was that was our population comparison. Well, now without too much difficulty, you can put your hand on probably a million or more individuals of much more diverse ancestry of the back of the day. We don't know anything with the answer. In order to make a comment about whether that's a variant that is common in the population or a variant that has never been seen before. And that's that's critical information. So I would say that we can get these next generation reports. First of all, by moving on from saying that just any variant in which we can't make a strong conclusion is of unknown significance. It is of some known significance because we have these population cohorts. But there's also really exciting a new work. Our lab and others are involved in this where we create essentially in cell culture every known variant in a given gene. And then we read out some phenotype or some change in the cells that we hope maps towards the disease that we're interested in in all of those cells that we make the variants in. So we can basically make every single genetic variant and they're called variant effect maps. And I think they will increasingly be available to allow us when we see a variant for the first time to say something useful about it. And finally, we have AI. And so just in the last month, we've seen from the Google Genomics team something called alpha missense, which is really building on decades and more of work by by many groups in thinking about it's given a new variant and given all the knowledge we have of the world and how proteins work and even thinking about comparative biology, other other animals and their genomes. What is our best guess as to whether the variant in front of us would actually cause disease? And we've had those those sorts of approaches for some time, but they've just been given an enormous boost by the power of artificial intelligence and particularly our ability to model proteins through alpha-full and other approaches and these population cohorts. So I do think we're we're in a very different and very interesting world now when we come to interpret new genetic variants and patients for the first time. You often compare the work of physicians and geneticists to detectives because patients often present themselves as sort of a medical mystery. Can you elaborate on this and talk about how you teach young physicians to think of themselves as a kind of a detective? Yeah, of course, I mean, I think when when we start, certainly if we we talked about way back in my childhood, think about being a doctor, but if you think about how we think about doctors just in the world, we often think about not the everyday diseases where the answer is obvious. Someone comes to me and tells me they get chest pain after walking up a hill, they stop, it slowly goes away. It's a central crushing chest pain. You know, we can all make that diagnosis and if we the first year medical student can make that diagnosis then they should be studying a little harder. You know, that's a blockage in a coronary artery. But I think that's not really what we think of. I desperately when you start to think about how doctors are sometimes depicted on TV or in culture and media. That's not I think what drew many of us into medicine. What drew many of us into medicine was the idea of a medical mystery where the answer isn't clear. Someone presents with a syndrome or symptom or series of symptoms that are unexplained and they go to one doctor, maybe they go to another one, maybe there's some tests and there's a remarkable number of people who live under the shadow of these symptoms and a disease with no name. I think that we don't really understand until you were really there just how isolating that is. Many of our patients with undiagnosed disease talk about being on undiagnosed island, like literally on an island separate. They don't have a community because their disease doesn't have a name. They don't know who to reach out to. They have nothing to Google. They have their symptoms but they don't have the name of a disease and of course because they don't have a name of a disease, they don't have a therapy. It really becomes an area of medicine where we look to do both very traditional things which is to say really listen to the patient, think about their surroundings, think about their environment, think about their own biology, examine them very closely, bring experts in and also apply technology. So something clearly I was attracted to for that reason. But when you think about that process, survey the scene, take in observations, think about it carefully, do sort of thought tests to see what it might be and what it might not be, run cities of tests, come back and compare them to your hypotheses. That's exactly what detectives do. If we think back to some of the detectives in literature, like Sherlock Holmes, it's very similar. When we think about how we teach young medical students, there is actually a lot of parallels between how we teach medical students to make medical diagnoses and how Sherlock Holmes might solve a crime. So about 25 to 30 million Americans have a rare disease which are sometimes referred to as mystery conditions and you've been instrumental in establishing the undiagnosed disease network which was established in 2014 and it includes teams of physicians across the country who work with patients and their families to solve these medical mysteries. So I understand that the network has identified scores previously unknown syndromes and we're wondering if you'd be willing to talk about some of this work and also how the network first came about. Yeah, of course. And this is really one of one of my favorite programs and it really feels like a privilege to have been involved in it. The undiagnosed diseases program which began at the National Institutes of Health, it really was the origin of the network. And this came about because of several individuals but most notably a man called Bill Gahl who was a geneticist at the NIH Medical Center and he'd been getting these rare conditions and just realized that in order to try to solve them, he needed a team of people and initially he got those teams together by kind of begging and borrowing resources but eventually got a program at the NIH essentially devoted to undiagnosed diseases funded through persistence and tumor and charm and and much else. But the good news is it was so successful that the NIH decided to essentially spread it, spread the love and turn it into a network. And so we were fortunate enough at Stanford to be part of that network and I was really honored to be asked with Bill to co-chair the network as it came together. And the idea was simply to do what the undiagnosed diseases program as one center did but do more of it and bring regional centers to those in need because it was very clear that the need was much greater than the resources that Bill had in order to answer that need. As you mentioned there are tens of millions of Americans and one in one in 10 people essentially has a rare disease and that's a lot that makes rare disease collectively as common as diabetes. And so if you have a tool like the genome in particular that can be applied to most of those people then it is reasonable to think of the people with rare disease collectively. But of course they are very individual in a way that it is very unusual. But one of the ways of solving that in fact turns out our central tool and 80% of cases we are able to solve these mysteries by using the genome. So although we definitely take the Sherlock Holmes approach and we stroke our chins and think carefully and bring experts into the room and survey the scene that maybe solves one in 10 of these cases. But of half the cases and they end up and are solved rates about 50% and so which if you think about it for many of these individuals they've gone for years going to multiple doctors just accumulating masses of financial and emotional debt and that's the moment they walk through our door. So although 50% I say that sometimes when people look at this they say oh you must be disappointed in that. I mean we want it to be better but when you think about what these patients have gone through before they walk through our door to be able to solve 50% and most of those with one tool the genome I think that is rather remarkable. And so over the course of years now we've solved hundreds of cases with established dozens of new syndromes and really it's all because of organization and dedication and our ability to understand the human genome. Yeah I think 50% is a remarkable number if you consider that some of the elements may not be resolvable to the genome directly. In other words probably that 50% is a very good performance. That's very kind of we want to make it more. We want to do better but you're right we have to think beyond some will be environmental causes and may not be genetic at all. Right. Stem Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition a not-for-profit research organization investigating a broad range of topics aimed at understanding and extending human cognition, locomotion, health span, resilience and performance. So let's talk about some of your recent research. Last year you had a study that looked at the impact of genetic sequencing in critical care settings because a genetic diagnosis can improve the prognosis of critical ill patients and therefore guide the clinical management of the care. A lot of effort has gone into developing methods that result in rapid reliable results. In a critical care situation it seems obvious so the decisions needs to be made in hours and not days. However traditional testing often requires weeks and even rapid testing requires days. Your paper that was published in the Duimin Journal of Medicine reported how you and your colleagues developed a method for rapid sequencing of the whole human genome in patients in as little as five hours. This new ultra-rappied genome sequencing has the potential to lead to significantly faster diagnosis. For the study used a technique called nanopore sequencing. First can you explain for our listeners what nanopore sequencing is and a little bit about how it works and the advantageous associated with it? Yeah of course and I mean sequencing the human genome is basically about spelling out every letter which essentially means we have two copies of each gene and two chromosomes one from each parent. So we're looking to give us the most complete picture of that. And what we do currently so before nanopore sequencing and before long read approaches to sequencing the most of the genome sequence to date have come using a procedure called sequencing by synthesis which is a short read approach basically we blast the DNA that we did that we usually derive from your blood with some ultrasound to put it into small segments that are like something like 150 bases which are letters long and then we essentially grow on these little clusters the mirror image of each individual strand and so and then those clusters as each base is added are read off that's the traditional way we do it. Nanopore sequencing works a bit differently and a nanopore is a protein with a holonet basically not too much more complicated than that but that's a way to think about it. And so instead of building a DNA which is how much of many of the sequencing approaches to date have worked we sort of unzip the DNA so the single strand falls through that hole in fact it falls through really quickly and so actually you need a little motor protein to slow it down and so this has been developed a technology that was was invented in California and pushed forward there but it's really been developed by Oxford Nanopore a company in Oxford in the UK and essentially if you multiply x those pores so you put hundreds and thousands of them in a membrane and pass a current through the membrane then as a molecule falls through and at this point we're talking about DNA but it could be RNA and in fact people are now looking at sequencing proteins this way but as that molecule falls through then there's a change in that current and that current can be detected and then using essentially these days an artificial intelligence approach you can take the squiggle and it is literally called a squiggle gram so imagine a very badly written signature that's the output but you can then feed that into a neural network that will translate that into an ATG or C and in fact it looks at a several bases at once as as the strand of DNA falls through the pore and if you multiply x that enough if you have enough of that happen you can start to sequence really quite quickly. So can you tell us about the sequence of one of the studies participants that was completed in just five hours and two minutes and it set the Guinness World Record for the fastest DNA sequencing which by the way we didn't actually know there was such a category so there must be a good story behind this so please tell us how did you end up in the Guinness Record Book? Yeah that's not every day that that happens well first of all huge credit to those on whose shoulders we stand you know back in the day when we first started doing genome sequencing but came clear that there was a category of patients in whom it was important not only to have a genome that was cheap enough and accurate enough but also a genome that was fast you know so sometimes you need the data quickly and we were standing on the shoulders of others and in particular a colleague of my Stephen Kingsmore had been starting to think about how to deliver a genomic data quickly at the time he was in Kansas he's more recently at Raydy Children's in San Diego and he had essentially managed to sequence and interpret a genome in 56 hours and that was really impressive we thought that by tweaking the computational pipeline a little we might be able to go a little bit faster and for a couple of our cases we had we had managed that but then he jumped ahead and basically managed to sequence an interpret a genome of 26 hours and at that time he actually got a Guinness World Record for fastest genomic diagnosis which was fascinating and amazing and much more importantly he started to apply this technology broadly so that many little babies and little children were able to benefit from getting genomic information rapidly he also demonstrated this was highly cost effective but of course we were interested in whether it might be possible to go even faster again and of course we're not competitive are we but it was a really interesting question as to whether nanopore sequencing could actually allow us to go faster so there was this machine that Oxford nanopore produced called a Prometheon you know very well-named machine it's almost like an entire sequencing center that sits on your desktop and it has 48 flow cells and individually within each of those cells there are thousands of channels and and individually probably something like 500,000 nanopores and so if you think about 500,000 of those pores with DNA flowing through them and pushing data out then you could cover entire genome once in just one or two minutes I mean just mind blowingly fast now if we want to make a genetic diagnosis we're going to have to do it more than once or twice we'll have to cover the genome something like 50 or 60 times but suddenly we're talking about the possibility of sequencing a genome in maybe as little as an hour or an hour or an hour and a half and so we thought well what if we brought that technology to the table then what's what is what do we have to do next well we had to think through every single element of the genome sequencing including it or how fast could we get the sample from the patient to the lab and you know the the PhD student who was in charge of this program actually was an ultra-distance runner so we used to joke that he would literally run it from from the hospital to the lab which he actually did on occasion and then we thought about how did it derive the DNA quickly how to get the DNA ready to go in the sequencer quickly and then on the other end the biggest roadblock was well you know how are we going to analyze this data this fast and and so the machine the computer that came with the sequencing machine that was designed to do the analysis well well if we we put this much data we fired this much data into that computer it took 18 hours to analyze it so clearly if we were trying to beat a record that was at the time somewhere around 19 hours that wasn't going to work so we needed a new plan and basically another PhD student started working on a way of piping the data into the cloud rapidly and then running the analyses in real time and we worked with other collaborators at Bala College of Medicine at Google at Nvidia and then of course with with Oxford Nanopore it was really an incredible group of people coming together almost a bit like that first you know most really kind of exciting moment to see could we do this faster and could we get that data then back to the bedside team to make decisions that really matter for critical care patients and so yeah I mean just to give an example one of one of the patients Matthew who's been happy for us to share his story he was a first winter of COVID presented with a cough to his local hospital in Oregon it turned out didn't have COVID he had his severe heart failure was going into shock so he was airlifted to Stanford where it was very clear that his organs were beginning to fail and so we put him on a heart long machine just to keep him alive and then implanted an artificial heart device just to keep his organs functioning the question was how did his heart go from essentially being normal to to completely failing and there's at least a few different possibilities most of which have been ruled out but we were left with perhaps one of them being myocarditis so an infection of the heart muscle which would ultimately potentially be reversible or a genetic heart condition which almost by definition would not be reversible so the question was how would we differentiate the two and even a biopsy of his heart muscle where we go in and take a piece of the heart muscle and look at it on the microscope that didn't resolve the question so we enrolled him in our study and basically just eight hours later we were able to make a diagnosis of a genetic heart condition finding a variant in the triplonid T gene that explained his underlying deletic heart immobility because of that information the team was able to make the decision to to put him on the transplant list and he actually received a new heart two weeks later and among many amazing things in his story they sent a regular test at the time regular genetic test because this was a new thing of course we sent the regular test it didn't come back until three weeks after he received his heart transplant so I think that just being able to get this information fast kind of allow people in those critical conditions to get answers and make decisions quickly to help patients that's who it's for at the end of the day absolutely and I further understand that you and others at Stanford want to cut the current fastest sequencing time roughly and half if that's true that ambition is true how far off would you guesstimate that is yeah I have said that haven't I it's like setting unrealistic goals for my team um yeah I you know we're aiming in that direction we have actually already managed to beat the record we said that you that you mentioned earlier and so we have already being able to go faster and we are starting to look at every single place we can shave off another another few minutes I think be able to do it in half the time is going to be a big lift but I think that we can get there and of course it raises the question how how fast is fast enough but if you're talking about critical care illness and you're talking about sudden death and people literally whose you know patients whose hearts are soft then I don't think we can go fast enough and and that's a part of of what I tell the team you know I think we have to decide the other thing is that this this approach because it's long read and it's long read sequencing is we we're not going to sacrifice accuracy it's actually it is possible to go faster if you're willing to sacrifice accuracy but this is somebody's life we're dealing with this is clinical genetics and so there's there's a minimum bar for how much genetic information and or what type that we want but but that tension is always there if we slow down we can usually squeeze out more accuracy so that's that's kind of where the team is playing as I mentioned we've we've shaved off a bit and it may take us a year or two though to get to to have so you and you recently published a paper in nature that introduced cosmos which is a cloud-enabled platform that performs real-time cell imaging and analysis so cosmos is an acronym for computational sorting and mapping of single cells and in your paper you describe cosmos as a novel platform based on AI and microfluidics and it's capable of high-throughput imaging that can sort cells using deep morphological assessment so cell morphology has been used by pathologists and also clinicians for years as the gold standard for disease diagnosis and prognosis and although there have been technological advances in making single cell characterization at the genomic transcriptomic and also proteomic levels tools for assessing high-dimensional cell morphology have not kept pace with advance mesmolecular characterization so really exciting and can you talk about the challenges that you and others have faced in performing real-time deep learning assessment and sorting of cells and also how cosmos helps address these challenges yeah of course and you know it's it's an amazing thing with the world has moved towards single cell biology and that's really exciting we have these tools some of which we've talked about here genomics of course and transcriptomics looking at the RNA proteomics thinking about the protein complement metabolomics thinking about metabolism all of these have been downsized to the point that they can actually apply be applied at the single cell level but one of the amazing things to us and this is something that occurred to us a few years ago is that we make all these high-dimensional measurements of millions millions of measurements but imagine if we did this with humans we do it without really looking at the cells so imagine if we were looking at a population of humans and we sequenced their genome when we looked at the transcriptome of the right blood cells and we looked at all their proteins but no one stopped to see well how tall was that person or how much did they weigh or you know just tell me some basic things about them and it's just really an artifact of the moment that we are in time as you mentioned the history of morphology and thinking about cells and their shape and size and how that changes the function has traditionally been the realm of pathologists and pathologists by definition look at dead tissue you know it's embedded and it's dead and it's cross-linked and you're looking at under a microscope deep and dark in the middle of the night but new technology allows us to keep those cells alive and separate them into individual cells and then potentially flow them in small micro channels we can even rotate them a little in those channels and then take pictures of and we can do that at scale and we can do that at high resolution and if we think about then this massive leap forward in our ability of neural networks like people learning architecture just in the last 10 years to be able to recognize objects in the world could be your dog you know we can make it recognize a dog from its ear in the corner of a photograph or a frisbee on a beach I mean it's not that long ago when that seemed really miraculous that a computer program could do that now we are as of this year and in the next revolution from AI of large language models and so the deep learning mode of just a few years ago seems like all old now let's last year's revolution but the fact is it hadn't actually reached everywhere and one of the places that that AI revolution was taking its time to reach what was single cell biology and so we really were impressed with the combination of of the move forward in artificial intelligence approaches single cell micro flutics and then the ability to understand biology at deep level so with the cosmic system really is about bringing those things together in a very talented postdoc in my lab Madison and Sally worked on this and felt that there was really an opportunity to build a system but there were a large number of challenges to do that's not a trivial thing at all in particular being able to track a single cell at speed in a channel and then sort it push it in one direction on the basis of let's say deep learning algorithm is a very non-attributable task so we start to the company out of the lab called deep cell also with my orcelec three co-founders to really try to solve this problem and the team has been growing over the course of the last few years and has been putting this in people's hands most recently this new technology and we're really excited by what the community will be able to do with it in adding morphology to these very high-dimensional genomic measurements have you thought about where you'd like to go with future enhancements of cosmos we've talked about AI and how that might be used in more advanced ways with respect to cell biology could you talk about how this might lead to new insights that could have significant clinical and translational implications yeah of course i mean i think one of the the drivers for us in thinking about this at the beginning was not just to think about what the scientific community might do with the tool but rather thinking about the circulation the circulation is a remarkable thing it's basically a biopsy of every organ in your body i mean your your bloodstream goes a red thing of a red blood cell and it's average day you know it's circulating around the body it's reflecting the health and disease of every organ and other bloodstream is of every organ in the body and so taking a blood sample is a remarkable thing and i think we've only scratched the surface of what we could do with that blood sample and the recent times we have started to look for cell 3 DNA or RNA which is a new world and that has brought many revolutions in terms of thinking about the early detection of cancer or non-invasive fetal diagnosis but but what about i mean i think what about the rest of the the organs in the body we know for sure that many of them are leaking cells into the circulation also why do we wait till somebody is ill before we start to look for these things and so i do think that there's a new world where we start to look in people's circulation for rare cells and we can use this technology to do that and so that rather than taking a biopsy let's say if you're liver if you have liver fibrosis we could look in your circulation we can pull out those liver cells and we can do all of those omics technologies that we just talked about to those cells we get in there alive so we can culture them so i think there's a really interesting and important feature of health disease prevention by really exploiting the circulation at the cellular level much more than we have today it's all as an aside you and it's been fascinating watching the application of the evolving and not always improving them i view but the evolving AI technology as it's applied to medicine in the right hands it's been splendid and in the wrong hands you see people using AI without understand the limitation of the particular technique they're using that i think that's absolutely true it's very interesting indeed the paper that we just sent off i think last week was partly what you know i think you'd have enjoyed it because we realized that for the ECG understand the ECG some of these new AI models were just better like the with the the f1 statistic was you know maybe it was 92 or something but we can get to 89 with a five you know a linear regression with with five terms in it you know it's like okay so you get you know a tiny bit more but with this huge computational cost and this black box nature as opposed to five easily determined easily definable features that anyone in the world could read from the ECG and so i'd unless opaque right yeah that's exactly right yeah yeah yeah so you in returning to Steve and the work that you did after he showed you his sequence genome you mentioned earlier how Steve pointed out to you a variant in one of his genes associated with heart disease and it's a variant that very possibly could be life threatening and accurate assessment of cardiac function is crucial for diagnosed and cardiovascular disease in a recent paper of yours you address the limitations of human assessment of cardiac function to overcome the challenge you and your colleagues have developed a video based learning algorithm which is called eco net dynamic and this surpasses human observation and several critical tasks that are related to assessment of cardiac health you reported on this development in a paper that was titled video based AI for beat-to-beat assessment of cardiac function so what went into the development of eco net dynamic and also what makes it stand out as an assessment of cardiac function yeah well we've been spending a lot of time thinking recently about the ways that artificial intelligence and neural nets can really help us where we're focused on augmenting the physician and making the the sum of of both better than the individual parts but of course there are going to be places where the artificial intelligence can be much better than human and there's going to be places where that will not be the case and we going back to an earlier point of conversation the thing that first drew me into the heart was that it moved you know it's the only organ in constant motion and you know that was one of the challenges because when we first thought about applying those algorithms that we talked about earlier that can recognize your dog or a frisbee or whatever on the beach a mountain then the first thought of course in medicine was apply those to static images like chest X-rays and CT scans but of course it occurred to us that it's just another step towards video and of course as just as the tech world moved from static images to video and the application of neural networks then we knew that that leap was something we could also apply and and medicine and we're better than than the heart of course so if we think about how we look at a heart our standard tool is ultrasonic so we we shine the ultrasound at the heart and we see it moving depending on which view we take we can see three chambers or two chambers of four but one of the most important elements that we try to derive from an ultrasound of the heart is how well is the heart essentially squeezing how much blood does it squeeze out poopy and we express that in a fraction known as the ejection fraction so the fraction of blood pushed out every beat and we realized that that is currently being measured in thousands of places around the world by individuals literally taking one frame from one video and then tracing around the inside of the heart and then scrolling forward a few frames to the point where the hearts at maximum contraction and doing exactly the same thing again and then calculating those areas and taking them apart that that is not a great use of humans time and of course if you can only really do it once but a computer can be trained to do it not just once many many times and so this was the idea behind the Econet system is to be able to derive ejection fractions automatically from ultrasines so that they could then be reviewed by a cardiologist and approve but just to save humans time essentially and it does more than just save time because it allows you to do multiple measurements which makes your measurements more accurate and more precise and it means that especially in situations where you have for example rhythm like atrial fibrillation where your heart is beating very irregularly and each beat is a slightly different shape and size whereas before you would just pick an example one now with Econet dynamic you can actually look across tens or as you know really as many beats as you want and average them and give you a much better and more precise estimate of heart function so that was the original idea that another important part of it was that the world only gets better by sharing data and so we were able and a huge credit to David O'Young and the team David led this work it's bar lab and James so was my cool senior author on this that we really were able to get to the point where we could share 10,000 of these ultrasound videos with the world and now on any given week there are people around the world working on that data to do better and that's it I think a really interesting element of the the tech world that is now coming into the medical world where as long as we can appropriately anonymize and de-identify data we can share it broadly and let really anyone work on it to make it better here at iHMC we have three primary overlapping research thrusts the first in original area was AI and the second that joined up here was robotics in exoskeletons and the third more recent areas health span resilience and performance and in fact we're building a new research complex dedicated to health span resilience and performance research thus I was really interested in your paper published in nature last year the genetics of human performance as you pointed out in your article although we have substantial epidemiological evidence supporting the beneficial effects of exercise we really don't know much about the molecular mechanisms through which these effects operate we do know however that exercise seems to extend health span in this article you reviewed the current understanding of the genetics of human performance and it was an excellent article can you talk about this and why it matters in terms of modern humans who have become largely sedentary unfortunately yeah of course and and first of all I share to Dan Kim who was the cardiology fellow who led this work and led this paper we've had an interest in human performance for for many years I just think you know we spend so much of our time dealing with the the freilists in in our world and those with the weakest hearts so we're the heart transplant program here at Stanford but in terms of understanding the heart I think you can learn a lot of course from the weakest hearts but I think there's a lot you can learn also from the strongest hearts and we've had a real interest in elite human performance and what we can learn about the fittest in our society in order to help the the freilist in our society and and so that's that is led to a study that's we've gone on for many years called the elite where we're sequencing the genomes of the fittest people on the planet and but I think that there's this just as you say this is really interesting kind of evolutionary component to heart disease through most of our history of as humans we've been much more active than we have now and we've had a completely different diet a completely different approach to to eating food that has led us with a particular genetic complement that allowed our survival over many hundreds of thousands of years that is mismatched with a world where we currently live where there are elevators and escalators and McDonald's on on every corner and and I think that that's something that isn't often appreciated but but is something that is really critical to trying to reduce the prevalence of heart disease if you look at modern hunter gatherers as our sort of best window into the world of more ancient hunter-gallon populations then certainly they would be walking five or 10 miles a day there are many of us who you don't go anywhere near that in our eternal sedentary world and they would be eating a combination of foods that could be farage but also every now and again there would be this opportunity to do what I think most accept us as the strategy of earlier humans to hunt through persistence something it is one of the advantages we have that because we're upright in two legs and we have bodies that are not covered with here that we can thermoregulate much more effectively than most quadrupeds and so although we can't we're definitely not the fastest runners certainly not over a short distance if we're able to keep the prey in sight then ancient humans are able to continually follow that until it gets to the point of exhaustion because of our better thermal regulation ability and because of our aerobic potential and so I think that when we think about that and we think about the genetic complement the loudest survival under those kind of conditions it is not well suited to our current environment so we do I think have to understand if we're trying to have humans be more healthy in the modern world that we have this complement of our this kind of baggage of our evolutionary history if you like the leads us to want to eat high fat saturated fat and not highly dense caloric foods and of for all save energy because it would be important to save energy because you don't know when your next big meal is coming from we have those predispositions in a modern world and what we end up with is obesity and diabetes and the challenges that we see around us so you and your co-authors reviewed the large body of research that has shown that all forms of exercise and in particular endurance exercise confer benefits across just all different types of domains of health and function and you then went on to review recent research that identifies specific genetic pathways that may underline the beneficial effects of endurance exercise so you can you talk about these genetic pathways and also the key points of your review and as well as your primary conclusions? Yes of course I think there are many elements to fitness as we think about it and one of our interests and elite athletes is that really every element of physiology every if you think about the analogy of a car I mean every element has to be performing at its absolute highest potential for that car to go as fast as it as it possibly can and it's the same thing with with the human body and so when we think about the different specific genetic pathways account when we think about aerobic exercise and the O2 max in particular human performance is often quantified using the maximum out of oxygen that the body can consume at maximum exercise then we think about different systems you have to be able to pool in oxygen very efficiently you have to be able to make sure that oxygen gets in and stored in your blood very efficiently you have to be able to transport around your body efficiently and then you have to extract from the circulation and get it to the exercising tissues and so there have been leaps forward over the course of many years in each of those different aspects of the delivery system of course you have to also then take the metabolites from exercise away from the muscle and that's that's an extremely important element too so initially these studies were very underpowered and it was very hard to make too many conclusions but because of really a large community effort we've started to identify common pathways some of the tip-meth volat pathways my teconereal pathways thinking about the heart the pathways that are like the heart to operate at high efficiency pulmonary pathways and circulatory pathways as well so obviously we go into a lot more or detail in the paper but really just thinking in a systems way is what I think has led the community to move forward in our understanding of the genetics of human performance I'm always a little cautious when you know people use the word fitness we all kind of know what's meant but when you think about it fitness for what you know fitness to be an NFL lineman is not much like fitness to be an accountant it's not much like fitness to run a marathon right so it's one of those words we all use I use it but somehow it without the context it's less meaningful than one would like that was a by the way I really liked that paper and speaking of pathways in the paper here in one of the figures the little text by one of the figures the conversion of lactate into propionate in the gut which is if taken up by skeletal muscle cells may contribute to enhanced physical activity via ampic activation this is really an interesting point what are your thoughts on the significance of the role the microbiome may be playing enhanced endurance physical activity in general yeah I think this is what's just one of the most fascinating papers I maybe ever ever read because it was surprising and the case was made I think very clearly by by these authors I mean we we have really under recognized the role of the microbiome in I think life and most of the cells that we think of as not right are not actually human right there their bacterial and also when we think of diet anything that we ingest through our mouth is going to meet the microbiome first before it meets any human element of our body and I think that that when I finally realized that and it took me way too long you know it was just a moment of of revelation for me and papers like this were among the ones that that opened my eyes because who would have thought that the bacteria in your gut were going to be part of your exercise metabolism I just you think of rest and relaxation so the type you know you think of the systems shutting down when you're when you're eating and digesting and that being the opposite of high intensity endurance exercise so we really think of the gut to something that isn't really playing a role we think of fight or flight as what we're doing when we're exercising so this paper was really revelatory this fill an L.S. species that is capable of providing like it's probably on it's just you know a sort of insane thing I would never have believed it to someone I said but they showed very elegantly through a variety of experiments in this paper including a microbiome transplant at one point into other animals that this really was true and I think it's just one of many papers that have linked the microbiome to a number of different like even psychological changes in a mouse's ability to to fear heights they show that the microbiome transplant can change that so I think there's a whole new world for us to really begin to explore through genomics and metabolomics of what is really happening with our gut microbiome and how it affects our entire world agreed we've had several microbiome researchers on stem talk including Elysio Fassano and others and it's it's so complex and yeah and really fascinating I only found that paper because you referenced it in your paper in the in the little note you know next to the figure yeah I don't think we we didn't have room to really go into it in detail but it was to me it was such a fascinating finding that I wanted to make sure we included it somewhere so I think that eventually yeah he squeezed it and of course I think just in a figure religion so while some genetic variants identified to date account for small portions of the variants in exercise training adaptations or human performance more generally it seems the major determinants of inter individual differences may lie in dynamic expression responses which are largely influenced by dynamic epigeno what in your mind are the critical paths forward and exercise epigenomics well yeah of understanding of course the essentially the anatomy of the genome what what is different in the ASTs and Cs in many ways just the beginning because it's the expression of the genes and the parts there are a good of three elements in between those genes that really determine our biology and so a major part of that of course is epigenomics and it's certainly been known since the earliest days of our ability to quantify the epigenome that exercises a powerful modulator of that and our tools are only only getting better I mean up till recently we've had to do special techniques to be able to read the epigenome think about methylation of the genome for example but nanopore sequencing like we were talking about earlier or the sequencing for specific biosciences these long read approaches are actually able to interpret the epigenome and read out the epigenome using just the same raw signal but a just a different algorithm which is somewhat mind blowing so we're now reaching a point where we can sequence the if you like the anatomy of the genome but also read out as some genomic function at the same time and I think that's going to be you know incredibly important path forward as we sort of upgrade our approach to sequencing so that we just roll in this at least this particular element of epigenomics to our approach and we're part of a consortium called the molecular transducers of physical activity consortium where we really try to think about those molecular transducers of both strength training and aerobic training initially in an animal model and that data is actually already available with the paper coming out the next few months and the human study is ongoing which is one of the largest studies of its kind and I know one that that Marcus found who you've had on the podcast in recent times is a major part of and so I think we're looking forward to be able to answer questions like this about exercise epigenomics using that resource over the course of the next few months and years yes Marcus is leading a large part of our health span resilience and performance effort here and in fact Marcus volunteered this next question for you the previous question notwithstanding you are involved in projects via the Wu-Sai human performance alliance to identify new genic variants that have larger effect sizes on human performance than those previously identified can you talk about the importance of the elite project in this context yeah of course and I think it goes back to our fascination with this idea of an engine working at its full potential I think we can learn from those who are the weakest in our society and whose organs are failing but so much that we can learn from those who operate at the elite end and the people who have the highest let's say view of two max or the highest strength and the those who can who can lead the highest and run the fastest and so we we started a project many years ago it was inspired by the the story of Margarita the the famous cross-country skier who had lived under somewhat of a shadow of a blood duping because every time his hemoglobul was measured it was really high but eventually it was found out that actually he and his family members suffered from a genetic condition that basically left the accelerate of down on the bone marrow so he was making more red blood cells if this was essentially a genetic genetic duping it wasn't his fault he was actually was cleared in the end but that idea that we could identify ways and and you know that pathway of course is is now a drug target so we use a rether poitin to be able to boost the red blood cell production for individuals who have anemia from a variety of causes and so it's a great example we felt of the way that we could study elite athletes and yet learn something that really could help a much broader group including those with disease and that's the essence of the elite project so we're recruiting if you know anyone or any listener thinks they may be in that elite category and and it's it's not yes you don't need to have an Olympic gold medal in fact we have some Olympic gold medal winners who actually don't reach the criteria to join the study but we also have plenty of people who have never been particularly competitive but find out that they're extremely fit from a vo2max perspective and we're interested in their their biology and particularly we're starting with the genome and so you can actually where it's a global study we're recruiting from across the world and these days of course many people have watches digital devices that estimate their vo2max and although they're not perfect and those estimates are actually not too bad and so if anyone out there is finding their watches estimating their vo2max is about 55 for women or 65 for men then we'd love for them to get in touch and we will sequence their genome share the results and try to learn about the super humans in our society so you and you certainly have a full plate and somehow you manage to find the time to write the genome Odyssey which the Wall Street Journal describes as an impassioned first hand account of the effort to bring genomic data into clinical practice so in writing the book what were you hoping to accomplish? Well I hope you've had a chance just in the time we've had to chat today of just the privilege I feel being in the middle of this you know first of all amazing place at Stanford but also in the stories of these patients who are afflicted with these rare and undiagnosed diseases I see what they go through and I compare it to my very privileged life and I just feel like I wanted to try to tell some of those stories and so that's what happened I had no idea whether I was capable of writing a book I still at some level don't believe I really did but I at least started with the idea of trying to tell their stories in the best way I could and an agent to the publisher were happy enough to go come along for the ride and yeah I was I was really happy to see that come out and it's it's even it's even nicer to get stories from people who have read the book from around the world and have have shared that it resonated with them or you know one case someone wrote to me they go to a job because they read the book I don't believe that but you know at least it's it's helping people I think understand well I hope the wonder of the science that that we've talked about here over the last period but also really what these families go through and what the genome has been able to offer them in terms of answers to these really difficult questions. So in the Wall Street journal review that I just mentioned it highlights your account of the remarkable progress of genetic medicine over the past two decades and then also mentions how you believe more wondrous advances are on the way so could you talk a little bit about some of these advances. Yeah I think and we've touched on some of them a little in this conversation I mean I think the genome is coming cheaper and faster and better but I think that we're also going to start integrating the genomic data with with data that we can get from from other places like we just a moment ago mentioned digital and wearables I think that we're really looking to try to move from a reactive health care system to a to a proactive health care system where we get ahead of disease and we can implement prevention rather than treatment and when we think about the ways of doing that we talked about precision medicine I think it's not just measuring the genome I obviously believe the genome is a huge part of what we can do with precision medicine but think about what we can do if you understood that maybe you were particularly at risk from your genome of a particular heart rhythm and then maybe that that is known by your watch that sits on your wrist and actually monitors your heart rhythm and it alters the pre-probability of of making that diagnosis in you based on its known on your known predisposition and I think when we start to integrate those worlds we have a really interesting situation coming about or another example might be Parkinson's disease if you think about the particular shuffling gate that goes along with that or the pill rolling tremor that some patients have again we have digital devices that can pick these up early that that data should be talking to the data in your genome to understand how likely it is that that person who's on whose wrist the watch is likely to suffer from those conditions so I do think that we're moving forward into an interesting world where we really can achieve this and realize this the school of preventive care. So one last question for you and you're Stanford bio it mentions that you're a father three and that in your spare time and I laugh when we think about that you're very busy as mentioned that you play jazz saxophone you pilot small planes and you conduct research on the health benefits of single malt scotch whiskey and I will tell you that I'm dying to know what the health benefits of single malt scotch are. Well hopefully they're obvious you know it's it tastes really good yeah I obviously come from Scotland and so from from an early age with colds were treated in Scotland with a something called a hot taughty which involves a small amount of single malt maybe it wasn't single malt scotch so it's certainly something that we've had it just in for a while I've enjoyed many moments of both scientific discussion and medical discussion over a glass of single single malt scotch hopefully lower blood pressure more relaxed psyche and great realizing and hatching schemes of great ambition are probably among the health benefits of single malt scotch. you're bio also says you're on a quest to understand American football now how is that coming? yeah well that's a hard one I mean the human genome is pretty easy but understanding American football is a whole other challenge for the fans yes exactly I'm still on the quest I still hope to understand more I was brought up on obviously soccer the football with that you hit with where you play the ball with your foot and rugby we're on the rugby world cup is on so I take that bias into my understanding I've always wondered in American football why they just don't lateral the ball more because that's how rugby works that's maybe a discussion for another day. Different podcast well you and this has been great talking to you thank you so much again for joining us on STEM talk today oh thank you so much for having me it's been really fun it's been great thank you you so can we so often hear people talk about how they're conducting pioneering research and how they're on the cusp of a new frontier but definitely have to say you and certainly is a pioneer and his work really does promise radically transform health care and those just a really fascinating and fantastic interview yes done you're right you and is certainly at the forefront of the application of genomic data to clinical practice for listeners who are interested in learning more about you and and this important work be sure to check out his book the genome Odyssey if you enjoyed this interview as much as Ken and I did we invite you to visit the Stem Talk web page where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes as Stem Talk.us this is Donkonega signing off for now and this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stem Talk thank you for listening to Stem Talk we want this podcast to be discovered by others so please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review more information about this and other episodes can be found at our website stemtalk.us there you can also find more information about the guests we interview