Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host, Don Conegas, and joining me to introduce today's podcast is Man Behind the Curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that sucks all of guests who appear on Stem Talk. Hello, Don, great to be here. So our guest today is a good friend, Dr. Dwayne Mitchell. He is the Phyllis Kotler Friedman professor in the Department of Neurosurgery at the University of Florida College of Medicine. He's also the co-director of the University's Preston A. Wells, Jr. Center for Brain Tumor Therapy and Director of the Brain Tumor Immunotherapy Program. Dwayne and I actually met while we were both at Duke University, where we served on the Institutional Review Board together. Dwayne got his medical degree in doctorate at Duke and then joined the faculty where he spent the next decade before moving to the University of Florida in 2013. Dwayne and his team at Florida are among the world leaders in the uphill battle to find ways to treat glioblastoma and aggressive form of brain cancer that affects about 16,000 Americans annually. But before we get to today's interview with Dwayne, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Slex Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher and other podcast apps for the widest and most lavishly praised filled reviews to read on Stem Talk. As always, if you hear, you review Read on Stem Talk. Just contact us at stemtalkatihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk t-shirt. Today, our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker, Wyohyker. The review is titled, awaiting the next Stem Talk. The review reads, Stem Talk is the one podcast I listen to while on my bike trainer, sitting quietly at the end of the day or on road trips. I often replay many sections and scribble notes in my notebook. This gives me a clear picture of how all of the podcasts are interrelated and build upon one another, topics based on leading science by the scientists in their field. Most telling though is several times a week I am checking in for the latest Stem Talk program, posted by Don and Ken. Disappointed when a new episode is not there, I'm like a kid opening gift wrap present when a new podcast arrives. This is a five star podcast. Well, thank you, Wyohyker, and thank you to all of our other Stem Talk listeners of help Stem Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now onto our interview with Dr. Dwayne Mitchell. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Hi, welcome to Stem Talk. I'm your host, Don Crenegus. And joining us today is our guest, Dwayne Mitchell. Dwayne, welcome to the podcast. Hi, good morning. And also joining us as Ken Ford. Hello, Don, and hello Dwayne. Good morning. So Dwayne, I understand that you like to collect quotes and that every Monday morning in your research group, you share a quote of the week with your colleagues. So what's the story behind that? Well, when I decided to think about how we could start on the same page as a team, I like to review quotes that just remind me to somewhat simplify all the complexities of life, kind of have some themes that you can focus on. And so it's a voluntary email list. I don't believe in spam, but I've asked the my colleagues if they would enjoy also having a little bit of inspiration at the start of the week. And we started this as a tradition that's now gone on for the last five and a half years. That's a great idea. It is indeed a good idea. I hear that one of your favorite quotes comes from Mark Twain, who famously said, I have never let my schooling interfere with my education. Is that right? Well, I am very fond of that quote. And I think it's, to me, is just a reminder that your education really is ongoing. And in some ways, begins once you've completed formal education. And certainly some of the most valuable lessons of learning, either in life or in science, have come outside of, you know, deducted teaching in formal schooling. Couldn't agree more. And speaking of schooling, you grew up and went to school in New Jersey, where your father was a scientist. And I understand that early on, you became interested in science and that biology was one of your favorite subjects. Is it true that by sixth grade, you're going around telling people that you were going to become a doctor? That is true. I initially was very interested in being a physician, and particularly at that time, cardiology. And I had, I have an older sister who is a practicing physician today, but at the time she was in high school, and she bet me $100 I would change my mind about being a doctor by the time I finished college. So I had a little bit of extra motivation to stick with it. And I, she hasn't paid me, but I, but I've maintained that interest since the sixth grade. So Dwayne, what led you to attend Rutgers College? Well, I grew up in Somerset, New Jersey, which was very, about 20 minutes from the Rutgers College campus. And when I was applying to different schools, I had wanted to go to a large university, and I was interested in getting an expanded experience beyond high school. And actually, after looking at a number of different schools both in state and out of state, I was impressed with the opportunities at Rutgers and the idea that I could live off campus, but still be within 30 minutes of home for meals and other essentials was very attractive. And so that was part of the decision. I also got some merit scholarships that allowed me to have tuition covered for attending Rutgers College. And that was also an influence in the decision. Rutgers, you were interested in gene and self-therapy, but then your junior year, I understand that you read the transform to cell. It's a book by Stephen Rosenberg. Can you talk about the impact that book had on you? Yes. The, you know, my interest at that time, where, as you mentioned, we were in biology. I was interested in becoming a physician, but it started to learn about the notion of having a career in biomedical research where you could attempt to improve existing treatments for patients. And I read Stephen Rosenberg's book on, you know, his quest at that time in trying to engage the immune system in battling one of the most aggressive cancers metastatic melanoma. And the concept of being a physician scientist and spending time both with patients and in a laboratory trying to work on cures for their disease really captivated my interest. And in particular, the idea that you could potentially use the body's own defenses to fight malignant disease was was a new concept for me. And I really just was, was intellectually captivated by that concept and decided then that that was the area that I wanted to pursue after college in terms of my medical training and research training. So doing you and I met at Duke University, but I understand that almost didn't happen because you're head someplace else from med school and your doctorate. So I hear you have an interesting story about how you ended up at Duke. What is that? Well, when I was applying to, at that time, MDPHT programs, I decided I wanted to become a physician scientist and pursue both graduate research as well as medical training. I had a short list of investigators that I was very interested in potentially training with. And one of the top choices was a scientist by the name of Dr. Ellie Gaboa, who ended up being my PhD mentor. And he was at the time I was applying to school actually at Memorial Sloan Kettering. And so I had my list of places that I was hoping to gain entry to and the top of the list was the Cornell Rockefeller Memorial Sloan Kettering program. And when I gained acceptance there, I also had gotten accepted to Duke University's program and was very impressed by their curriculum, but was excited about joining Dr. Gaboa's lab. And so when I called Dr. Gaboa about finding out if he would take graduate students, I would be starting grad school in a couple of years. He informed me that he would definitely be training graduate students, but he was relocating his laboratory to Duke. And so that really solidified my decision. I chose to attend Duke University specifically so that I could train in Dr. Gaboa's lab. So after receiving your MD and PhD from Duke in 2001, you remained at the university for the next 12 years. And this includes your postgraduate training and pathology, which is actually my department at Duke. And the Neurooncology Research Fellowship prior to joining as faculty in the Neurocordry Department. And as Duke faculty, you held a number of positions which include Director of Preclinical Research at the Press and Robert Tisch Brain Tumor Center, Associate Director of the Duke Brain Tumor Immunotherapy Program, and Institutional Review Board Member. And I only put this in there because that's where you and I met. And during your time at Duke, you became known as a trailblazer in the application and research of immunotherapy for cancer and specifically brain tumors. So can you give our listeners an overview of the role that immunotherapy plays in training brain tumors? Sure. So I think many people are aware that immunotherapy has really over the last 10 years, and particularly in the last five years, really moved into the forefront of new methods of battling aggressive cancers and certainly has led to several new FDA-approved treatments for refractory tumors. In the treatment of brain tumors, the use of immunotherapy is still in its developmental and experimental stages. We don't have yet an FDA-approved immunotherapeutic treatment for malignant brain tumors, but there is a lot of research being done on how we can more effectively engage the immune system to recognize malignant brain tumor cells, lead to their rejection, and ideally spare damage to normal brain tissues. And so our group and many others around the country are very active in clinical trials, and we've certainly seen evidence of the immune system's capacity to recognize and reject malignant brain tumors. In 2013, you joined the faculty at the University of Florida, and you brought your entire team from Duke with you. How did that transition from Duke to UF come about? Well, I received a phone call from the chairman of the neurosurgery department at that time, Dr. William Friedman, about a research director for the brain tumor center at the University of Florida, and that I was under consideration if I was interested in that position. So I was, you know, both humbled and flattered to be considered and decided that a certainly an exploratory visit was worthwhile. When I came to the University of Florida, I was really impressed. I knew a lot about the clinical program and the neurosurgeon program, which is very, very strong. I was really impressed by their vision for research and a translational brain tumor program. And so after a series of interviews that resulted in the offer to join the brain tumor center at UF and with that, the ability to recruit to several faculty positions. And so I discussed with colleagues that I was working with at Duke that were part of a large immunotherapy program, whether they were interested in the opportunity, and they followed a similar journey of mine, came out an exploratory visit. They were very impressed by what they saw. And ultimately we had a number of colleagues that relocated with us to initiate the research program in UF. So you've gained considerable clinical and translational research experience as a PI on seven first and human protocols through FDA approved clinical trials. And at Florida, you offer unique clinical options for adult and pediatric patients who are diagnosed with malignant brain tumors. Can you give us an overview of the work that you're doing at Florida right now? Sure. We direct the UF brain tumor immunotherapy program, which is really a collaborative and comprehensive translational effort with myself and several other principal investigators. We actually have five primary faculty members who are part of the brain tumor program in addition to myself. And we have a number of approaches to trying to engage the immune system in combating refractory pediatric and adult brain tumors. Our most advanced programs at this time are focused around cellular therapy where we use patients own immune cells that are harvested from them, modified to either stimulate T cell responses against their own tumors. In the case of what we call dendritic cell vaccines, or we also have clinical trials that are pursuing something called adoptive cell therapy where we actually activate the patient's own T cells outside of their body, expand them to large numbers, and then re-infuse those tumor-specific and activated T cells back to those patients. So in the time that we've been here at UF, we've had four unique clinical trials employing either dendritic cell vaccines and or adoptive T cell therapies for both refractory pediatric and adult brain tumors. Very interesting research. I'm told that there are over 120 different types of primary brain tumors with some being quite common and others very rare. Can you give our listeners a brief overview of what defines a brain tumor type and what some of the more common tumor types actually are? Sure. So, within the central nervous system, we think about the brain. Of course, we often think of the neurons that are performing the primary functions of cognition and carrying electrical signals involved in neurologic control. But in terms of brain tumors, it turns out that these tumors typically arise from other cell types in the brain that are important for supportive and accessory functions that support the neurons. Most commonly, what we call glial cells, oftentimes are the cell type in which tumors arise. We classify brain tumors now by a combination of a cell of origin as well as a much more in depth understanding of the genetics of those tumors and the biology that's driving them. Still, the appearance of those tumors under the microscope histopathology is still a very important component of diagnosis and staging. But over the last several years, we've gained an increasing understanding that even tumors that look very similar have distinct genetic subtypes. And so oftentimes, if a patient is diagnosed with brain tumor today, we'll have a tissue type of origin, a cell type of origin diagnosis along with several molecular markers that further classify what type of tumor or how aggressive that tumor is in those patients. As I mentioned, glial cells are one of the more common cell types for the origin of malignant brain tumors. But we have a diversity of tumor types, pendible cells, essentially in any anatomical region where you have distinct cell types with specific functions, we can oftentimes find some incidents of either low grade or high grade tumors that can arise from those cell types. And in children, in addition to the different cell types, there's quite a spectrum of tumors across the different ages from birth to adolescents that we see arising in the pediatric patient population. Glialblastoma, which is often referred to as GBM, is an aggressive form of brain cancer that kills 15,000 Americans each year. And it's the type of tumor that took the life of Senator John McCain. Senator Edward Kennedy also died from the disease. Most people diagnosed with GBM live less than two years. And I'm curious, why did you decide to specialize in a disease that is so deadly? Well, as you described, this is a disease entity that if you really look over the last three to four decades, we've only made marginal improvements measured in weeks to months for the survival of patients with glialblastoma. It is also the most common malignant brain tumor that we see in adults. So unfortunately, the most common presentation is the most aggressive form of cancers that we see in these patients. And so there's a clear unmet need to try to improve outcomes for those patients. And I felt that if the immune system could make a difference for compounding malignant brain tumors, then we would certainly be able to realize that in glialblastoma with such the, you know, characteristically short survival times that we would have in some ways a more rapid understanding of whether we were really making a difference with the approaches we were taking. What are the typical characteristics of glialblastoma that make it so tough to treat? So there are a number of challenges in successfully treating glialblastoma. I think, you know, probably one of the most difficult approaches is the invasive nature of these tumors. And so what a patient presents with symptoms that ultimately leads to the diagnosis of a brain tumor such as glialblastoma. We know that although we can see the tumor mass on an MRI and the surgeons, depending on anatomical location, can do a very good job of removing all visible tumor that there are islands of tumor cells that have migrated away from that central tumor mass and are embedded deep within normal brain tissues. Even on the other side of the brain, we know that these tumor cells exist. And so following up with treatments that can reach these invasive islands of tumor cells at effective enough doses to kill them or hope their growth and yet not harm normal tissues is a real challenge in one of the major challenges. Yeah, that can imagine it's got to be tough. What does the current standard of care look like for these malignant brain tumors and comparatively speaking, how effective are these approaches? I mean, you've said that we've only had marginal improvements over the last decades, but what is the standard of care these days? So if we were to look at glialblastoma in adults, the standard of care for most malignant brain tumors is to do initially maximal surgical resection. We do know that the larger amount of tumor, particularly if we can get greater than 95% of the visible tumor mass out of patients with surgery safely, that this does significantly add extensivival. But that as I mentioned, that is not going to reach those invasive tumor cells. So the standard treatments afterwards typically consist of radiation, conformal radiation, where a radiation oncologist will carefully outline the areas of highest risk of tumor involvement or clear tumor involvement and design a plan that can deliver maximal radiation to those areas and try to spare critically important normal brain tissues. That can typically be six to seven weeks of radiation therapy. That is often delivered at the same time with a chemotherapy drug called Temazolamide. And then those patients are typically treated with additional six to 12 months of psych monthly cycles of Temazolamide as adjuvant chemotherapy. That had been the standard backbone treatment for glialblastoma for a number of years, really since 2005. Recently, over the last two years, we've seen a new modality called tumor treating fields, which actually uses alternating electrical fields to disrupt the cell division of glialblastoma tumor cells. And this was FDA approved and shown to extend survival by several months in patients with glialblastoma that are receiving that while getting standard chemotherapy treatment. So the backbone of surgery radiation chemotherapy with or without tumor treating fields is the current standard of care. That's very interesting. I've ran into several researchers supplementing the standard of care with ketone esters or the ketogenic diet as well. And we have quite a bit of, we actually have an investigator within our department who's focused on specifically exploring the role of the ketogenic diet and a modified ketogenic diet for halting glialblastoma. We hope to be starting a clinical trial evaluating that shortly. So when it comes to immunotherapy, is this a standalone approach for treating brain tumors or is it administered in conjunction with standard therapy? And the second question for you, if the latter can change us to the immune system that occur through radiation or chemotherapy, have a negative effect on immunotherapy? It's a very important and great question. And I would say that our efforts have really focused on the integration of immunotherapeutic approaches with standard treatment. And the rationale for us has been we think that perhaps the best window to try to tackle these tumors is early on in the diagnosis when we can get the patient to, you know, as minimal tumor burden as possible. We know we're having some effects with standard treatment. And if we were able to effectively engage the immune system during that window, we feel that that may be the best opportunity for control as opposed to waiting until that treatment has failed and tumors have come back. They're typically more aggressive at that stage and at least more resistant to standard treatments. And we have really explored the integration of immune therapies with chemotherapy, particularly the adjuvant chemotherapy that patients receive. Your question of, you know, well, does the radiation then in the chemotherapy have effects on the immune system? We absolutely know that they have profound effects on systemic immunity. But we don't really have a great understanding yet as the net effects negative are positive. So chemotherapy certainly depletes the or circulating white cells. We know that. And that can lead to immunosuppression. We have patients that are at increased risk for infections when they have chemotherapy. At the same time, we and others have shown that if you stimulate immune responses during the recovery from these episodes of what we'll call lymphophenium or suppressed white cells, because the body is focused on trying to replenish the immune system, there's actually a window of enhanced factors that lead to T cell expansion and growth. And so you may be able to leverage the recovery from chemotherapy to actually get stronger immune responses. And then radiation similarly can kill tumor cells and lead to antigen release, which may allow the immune system to be both alerted through the inflammation and be more effective at recognizing tumor antigens. But of course, high doses of radiation would be toxic to circulating immune cells as well. So we are actively and others trying to study and understand it's probably a matter of dose timing and the appropriate integration. But we think there is an opportunity where you can, these can work if not additively, potentially even synergistically. Yeah, it's really fascinating. So the next question, this is kind of personal to me, just because I'm really interested in the brain lymphatic system. So it was once thought that the central nervous system had its own isolated immune system. But recent studies have shown lymphatic networks from the central nervous system that are connected to deep cervical draining lymph nodes and by extension, the peripheral lymphatic system. So it may not be as isolated as we once thought it was. How do these new findings impact immunotherapy approaches for brain tumors? It's a really important point. The notion of the brain being immune privileged came from observations in experimental settings where foreign tissues, for instance, can survive in the brain and the central nervous system and not be rejected either at all or at a much slower rate than if those same foreign graphs were in the periphery. And this led to the notion that the immune system really did not survey the CNS or at least was very impaired in that surveillance. We really understand now that both from the anatomic connections that exist and that the activated immune cells circulate with different patterns than you're quiescent or naive immune system. So the brain is relatively devoid of what we would call naive circulating T cells. You really don't find them in the perankoma of the brain tissue. But if a T cell becomes activated against anagen, which typically happens in the peripheral lymph nodes, it is capable of circulating through all compartments of the body including the central nervous system. This is how we protect against viral infections in the brain if we couldn't get immune cells there. We would be at a significant risk. So our new understanding really is not that the immune system can't get access to brain tissue and therefore potentially reject brain tumors. It becomes a question of where is the most effective site for engaging those cells and is it more effective to activate those cells in the periphery and allow them to migrate into the brain or in the case of some adoptive cell therapies is delivering them locally into the either tumor itself or the ventricles of the central nervous system is a local regional delivery of these immune cells more effective. So this is something that's being actively explored, but we no longer believe that you're incapable of generating potent immune responses in the brain. Can you describe in rather general terms how our immune system naturally deals with cancer? So it has an effective or not effective response? Sure. So our understanding of how the immune system engages cancer is I would say incomplete, but obviously under very active studying. We know that the immune system is very effective at recognizing foreign pathogens like viruses and bacteria. And the process by which immune cells recognize an abnormality that should lead to reaction is a combination of there being an antigen, something foreign or something different that the immune system can pick up on as not being a normal protein or tissue. We know cancers have mutations and other alterations that can be recognized by the immune system. The other important factor though is an inflammatory stimulus that really triggers an immune response or lets the immune system know there's something abnormal occurring that this cascade of reactions of immune rejection should be triggered. What we believe what happens with cancer is is that we do have the potential for antigens to be recognized by the immune system. But since cancer cells come from normal cells, a simplistic interpretation is they're delivering sort of mixed signals. There are some inflammatory stimuli that there's a pathologic process that does attract immune cells, but there are also at the same time signals that this is a normal tissue that perhaps is in need of repair and needs more blood supply. And so you have competing, I would say repair and growth signals being signaled by these cancer cells as well as this rejection response. So when a patient presents with cancer, we oftentimes see evidence of both things occurring in the tumor tissue. Immune cells that appear to be recognizing and potentially rejecting the tumor, but usually a much greater number of immune cells that appear to have been recruited to assist in tumor growth or repair damaged tissues and are probably helping perpetuate the tumor. And so that's one problem that we know we confront. And then the other is cancer cells have evolved or express a number of immunosuppressive molecules and cytokines and ligands that actually down regulate these effector immune responses. So even if you generate a strong immune response against some of these cancer antigens, the tumor tissue often is expressing many signals that turn that response off. And so the challenge in immunotherapy is either to induce a strong enough response against existing antigens and usually also overcome these negative regulatory signals. Fascinating. And so speaking of which, the program cell death PD1, PDL1 pathways and adaptive immune resistance mechanism that's exerted by tumor cells in response to endogenous immune system anti-tumor activity. And PDL1 is commonly overexpressed on tumor cells or on non-transformed cells in the tumor microenvironment. And research has shown that this pathway, otherwise known as the PD1, PDL1 checkpoint pathway, sends molecular signals from the tumor to prevent immune cells from recognizing and attacking the tumor. There's a new immunotherapy drug class and these are called immune checkpoint inhibitors that block these signals and allow immune cells to be more effective in fighting the tumor. So where does the research stand with these drugs and their efficacy in brain cancer? Yeah, so this new class of treatment called immune checkpoint inhibitors, I would say, has really been the foundational revolution in cancer immunotherapy because we saw our first FDA approved use of these drugs in 2011. And over the last eight years, there are too many new FDA approvals for me to even enumerate, but it seems about every few months we are hearing about another FDA approved use of checkpoint inhibitors for the treatment of refractory solid cancers. So the PD1, PDL1 blocking drugs and other immune checkpoint inhibitors have really taught us that one of the big challenges was not just stimulating an immune response or stepping on the gas for trying to stimulate immunity. It was actually that they're the brakes were being fully engaged through these inhibitory ligands called checkpoint inhibitor pathways. And by blocking that or removing the brakes on the immune system, you can allow the endogenous response to really become very effective in a large number of cancers, but in a proportion of patients. We've not yet seen checkpoint inhibitors reach an FDA approval for brain cancers, but there is new evidence from some recent trials that these drugs do have activity in glioblastoma and it may be very important when you deliver these checkpoint inhibitors as to whether you see this activity. So there's a, I would say almost a renewed enthusiasm and excitement about the potential for checkpoint inhibitors to also improve survival for patients with brain cancer. It's exciting. STEM Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research lab pioneering groundbreaking technologies aimed at leveraging and extending human cognition, perception, locomotion, and resilience. Some of the step aside for just a second to ask you something a little different, you're helping lead a health organized coalition known as the remission alliance. It's the University of Florida initiative that brings together neuro-oncology experts from institutions across the US and Canada. So can you talk about that a little bit? Yes. The remission alliance is essentially a translational research collaborative with a number of institutions and really partners and investigators that have been engaged in the brain tumor space have a strong interest in brain tumor immunotherapy. And in many ways, we're partners that we have been engaged with collaborative research over the last several years, whether through clinical trials and or pre-clinical research efforts. What we recently have done is formed a more formalized network with some funding support to really elevate the sharing of data and the functional activity of these collaborations and to bring some of the best minds in the areas of imaging, bioinformatics, machine-based learning, and immunology as well as brain tumor biology together to provide lend their expertise to a number of ongoing projects within this coalition. And so we're hopeful that through or formalized research collaboration that spans pre-clinical research through clinical trials that will be able to accelerate the pace of discovery particularly for immunotherapy applications for brain cancer. One reads in the literature and also hears of antidotally stories and, as I said, published literature, one hears of ketogenic diets being beneficial in the context of cancer. And this is typically attributed to the Warburg effect. I'm wondering if you've given any thought to the role of H.Dak inhibitors. Beta hydroxybutyrate is an effective H.Dak inhibitor and perhaps some of the benefit that has been reported is not only from the energetic effect of ketone bodies but also from a signaling effect such as H.Dak inhibition. That's a really interesting question and something that we have given some thought to in terms of how epigenetic modification of cancer cells may actually funnel into immunotherapy or immune recognition as well. As you know, the changes in gene expression profile that occurs with H.Dak inhibition can obviously lead to reprogramming of tumor cell growth and differentiation that can have an anti-tumor effect. But we also know that it can potentially turn on the expression of genes that we would call tumor-associated antigens that were perhaps not expressed previously. And these could lead to new targets for the immune system to recognize. And so one of the exciting areas, I think, of exploration is to actually look at the combination of an H.Dak inhibitor along with an immunotherapeutic approach to really explore whether this treatment allows us to have new targets for the immune system to go after and perhaps targets that they haven't been tolerized against and could lead to much more effective immunotherapeutic approaches. So I think the opportunity for synergy and combinations is very attractive. A recent paper in the journal Nature Communications describes how you and your colleagues at Florida have discovered a new use of stem cells that could clear a revolutionary pathway to make immunotherapy drugs effective in treating brain cancer. Can you talk about why you think this is one of the more exciting development that you've seen in several years? Yes, the work you speak of comes from recent studies that are really were led by Dr. Catherine Flores at our university who is a stem cell biologist by training. And a number of years ago, Dr. Flores got interested in trying to understand what the role of stem cells, hematopoetic stem cells from the bone marrow may be in immune recognition and immune modulation against malignant brain tumors. In studies that we've done in collaboration, we've discovered a unique role for bone marrow derived stem cells and not only just replenishing the immune system after lymphod depleted chemotherapy or radiation, but actually these stem cells migrate to areas of invasive tumor growth and have a profound effect on the tumor micro environment itself. And these effects include being able to recruit immune cells into the tumor micro environment and also for these stem cells to play a role in presenting antigens as they differentiate into antigen presenting cells to the immune system. And so this is a unique opportunity to use hematopoetic bone marrow derived stem cells not just as a rescue therapy, but actually as a population of cells that can enhance the effects of immune therapies. And we in fact found that you could take tumors that were completely resistant to immune checkpoint treatment alone and when combined with a intravina stem cell delivery, these tumors were now sensitized to becoming responsive to PD1 blockade and other immune checkpoint inhibitors. And this was shown in multiple brain tumor models that were in distinct areas of the brain and distinct genetic subtypes. So we're really excited that this may have the potential to be a broadly applicable approach to treating malignant brain tumors and possibly other cancers as well. Wow, that would be incredible. We're very excited about that. Yeah, I can see why. Cancer vaccines have been in the news a lot lately. Can you tell us a bit about how cancer vaccines work? Yes, so the term cancer vaccines really just implies a stimulus that is given to a patient's own immune system that either initiates and or enhances a response against altered proteins in the tumor. This are typically what we call therapeutic vaccines, not preventative vaccines in the classical sense. So we are talking typically about a patient who already has cancer and we are trying to boost the immunity against their tumor cells by administering some type of vaccine formulation and there are a number of different types. So there can be peptides that encode for tumor antigens that are delivered in a vaccine formulation. There can be viruses that are used to express tumor antigens. We use the patient's own cells, dendritic cells, which are responsible for stimulating immune responses as a cell-based vaccine where they are loaded with tumor antigens. So there's a variety of different ways of trying to deliver these antigens, but they all work essentially by stimulating the patient's own T cell response typically and other effector immune cells to now recognize those antigens and seek out and kill the tumor cells. So you also have a study investigating personalized brain tumor targeting vaccines for treatment of pediatric medial blastoma. Can you tell us a little bit more about this study? Yes, so one of the challenges in developing vaccines against brain cancers and other cancers is that they're very heterogeneous and oftentimes even patients with the same diagnosis like medial blastoma have individual distinctions in terms of what proteins their tumors are expressing. And so we derived an approach where we take the genetic material from the patient's own tumor, attained during a biopsy or during surgery, and we extract that in the form of messenger RNA. So we take the whole mRNA profile of the tumor, which is really just the blueprint of what proteins are being expressed in that patient's tumor cells. And then we deliver that mRNA to the dendritic cells of the immune system, which are really responsible for processing presenting antigens and initiating a T cell response. And so these patients receive back their own dendritic cells that have been loaded with genetic material isolated from their cancers in a way that we believe is much more effective at stimulating an immunologic response against those tumor antigens. That's fascinating. And in the past, you received a lot of attention for the results of a clinical trial using an enhanced vaccine credited with significantly extending the lives of multiple GBM patients, including one woman who is in her 13th year being cancer-free. So can you give us an overview of this trial and what you've learned from it? Yes, so this was a trial that explored the use of, again, an autologous dendritic cell vaccine that was loaded with RNA, encoding for an antigen expressed within glioblastoma tumor cells. And then these cells were delivered back to the patients where we inject the dendritic cells under the skin as an intradermal vaccine. And their job is to migrate to the lymph nodes and stimulate an immune response. It turned out in our early trial, we knew that these dendritic cells, while they are effective at doing that, the efficiency of them migrating to lymph nodes is not extraordinarily high. And so we explored in a cohort of patients, could we enhance that process by also delivering a very strong vaccine, in this case the tetanus diphtheria booster vaccine, at the same time we were delivering the dendritic cells. And we monitored whether this did enhance the migration and the activity of the dendritic cells, and it turned out the combination was very effective at doing that. What was somewhat surprising was that not only did this enhance the migration of these cells to the lymph nodes, but the patients who received that combination had twice the survival of patients who had received the vaccine without the tetanus diphtheria combination. And so those were pretty compelling results. It was a small phase one study at the time, but that allowed us to get a National Cancer Institute funding to repeat a very large phase two clinical trial, which is ongoing now at the University of Florida and in collaboration with my colleagues at Duke, where we will look to treat 120 patients with glioblastoma and see if we can replicate the pretty impressive clinical effects that we saw in the early phase trial. Don just mentioned a woman that's in her 13th year cancer-free, and she had glioblastoma. How frequently do we see long-term survival of this disease? So glioblastoma, the prospects for long-term survival, and we typically define that as greater than let's say five-year survival. There's in less than 10% of patients with glioblastoma. We do know that with standard treatment though, there is a subset of patients who do have prolonged survival through extensive genetic characterization as well as examining clinical factors. These are typically younger patients, and they have that have a particular type of glioblastoma that is more responsive to chemotherapy and has some characteristic mutations that also determines they have a differential growth pattern of those tumors. We look at older patients and the more characteristic profile glioblastoma, the number of long-term survivors goes down dramatically. In the early phase trials, we have seen this patient, the example you cite is our longest term survival of our earliest treated patients. We've seen several patients that would not have a predicted profile that was favorable for long-term survival, have survived those past five years. We always have to be cautiously optimistic when we're conducting early phase studies because they don't have the numbers to really determine what the true impact of the treatment is going to be in a large population. That's what we're excited about exploring currently, but are very encouraged by the early signals that we've seen. There are these outliers that we call exceptional responders. I tend to think that they may perhaps have an immune response that we really should be trying to study and see if there are any common characteristics beyond tumor biology. They might have the secret. So, Dwayne, a fair bit of research is focused on the fact that tumors can be rather heterogeneous, so that is there's a variety of distinct microenvironments with varying populations of neoplasmic cells and other types of cells. And this heterogeneity can have a significant impact on response to therapy. So, is there an effect of tumor microenvironment on response to immunotherapy? That's a fantastic question. And the early studies in examining this notion have certainly concluded that, yes, the immune microenvironment of tumors is also heterogeneous, but when we look across distinct what we would call molecular subtypes of say, either glioblastoma or metoblastoma, where we know different genetic mutations define the subset of tumors. We have actually found and published as well as others that the immune microenvironments of these distinct genetic subtypes of tumors can differ quite significantly. At least in preclinical studies, we have shown that the molecular subtype of, for instance, heterogeneous subtypes that define biological drastically in our terrestrial Α02 the response to immune therapy in patients is dictated by the heterogeneity of the tumor microenvironment. But all indications demonstrate that there's going to be as much complexity in heterogeneity within the immune microenvironment as we're seeing within the tumor biology and tumor microenvironment itself. So I've read some articles that bio material-based nanoparticles could be a potential solution for delivery of cancer antigens to immune cells and to circumvent these tumor microenvironments that are immune-suppressive. So can you tell us more about how these nanoparticles would work and where this research stands? Yeah, so an area that we think is potentially very exciting is to use strategies that not only deliver tumor antigens to the immune system effectively, say in the form of a cancer vaccine, but also have the capacity to significantly modify the tumor microenvironment from a classically or more characteristically immunosuppressive microenvironment to an immune-activating microenvironment. And studies that have been led by one of my colleagues at University of Florida, Dr. Eli Sayer recently published that RNA-based nanoparticles. So these are liposomes that have been loaded with mRNA that encode for tumor antigens. Can be very effective as a vaccine, but perhaps even more interestingly have a profound effect on activating the immune system systemically. And so we see within the tumor microenvironment a profound change of the expression profile on immune cells and the activation of immune cells in the tumor microenvironment from an immunosuppressive profile to a much more immune-potentiating and immune-activating profile. And so we think liposomes are nanoparticles of different formulation types, maybe a really important biologic response modifiers for the frame inotherapy. Indeed. So you touched on this earlier, but are there genetic or epigenetic factors that strongly influence the response that one sees from immunotherapy? Yes, so this is an area that's, we're gaining increasing understanding of, you know, you might call the immunogenetics. And so how does the genetic profile impact the potential to respond to immune therapy as well as the treatment course or response? And there's really, I think, two areas where we already know that there are important differences. One is the factors within the tumor microenvironment itself. So certain genetic subtypes, for instance, of glioblastoma, have a constitutive expression of PDL1, which we know is a very potent immune checkpoint ligand immunosuppressive ligand. And so although PDL1 can be upregulated in the context of an inflammatory response, there are some tumor subtypes that seem to express this molecule more constitutively due to genetic alterations. And so you might imagine that the propensity to be responsive then to checkpoint blockade can be very different if the mechanism by which the ligand is being expressed is driven as a secondary immunologic response or perhaps a constitutive upregulation from gene modifications. We're still gaining understanding of that, but there's clear evidence that the genetic backgrounds and this case we're talking about within the tumor can profoundly influence the expression of immune markers. The other area that hasn't been quite as well studied, but we're gaining better understanding on is the patient's own host immune response. As you can imagine, with HLA types across different backgrounds, we are already seeing your own HLA type may influence your propensity to respond to immune checkpoint inhibitors. And so certain that may be indicative of either how well you present certain antigens, we don't quite understand what the mechanistic link is, but there's clear evidence that a patient's own genetic background can influence their propensity to response. So this is an area that's being actively explored. I'd like to loosely call it perhaps the immunogenomics of trying to understand both the genetics of the tumor as well as the host and how that influence is response to me in therapy. It's an incomplete picture, but we know it's very, very important. Fascinating. We are learning more and more these days about the gut microbiome and it influences all kinds of things, including immune system regulation. It has an influence with respect to immunotherapy. Have you seen a connection in cancer of immunotherapy? Yes, I think one of the more, at least to me, fascinating, recent understanding and discoveries has been the profound role that the gut microbiota or the microbiome plays in immunologic systemic responses and response to me in therapy. So there's been direct evidence in the study of checkpoint inhibition that the gut microbiome can have a profound influence, certainly in experimental settings, in terms of making the difference between responding to checkpoint inhibition or being completely unresponsive to checkpoint inhibition. In the same tumor experimental models can be modulated just based on differences between the microbiome and intestinal and micro environments in treated hosts. There's also been very strong, cooperative linkage in patients who respond to checkpoint inhibitors versus do not respond. And differences between the gut microbiome, between responders and non-responders, which strongly suggests that this has a profound influence in humans as well. We have really interesting experiments where you can transfer the microbiome that's associated with response. Again, these are in experimental settings to hosts that would be resistant and now convey sensitivity. So we think that this is a whole new universe in terms of understanding the complexity of the genomes that are involved now in these species, but they clearly have a really profound response on our immune response and we're just beginning to really peel back our understanding of how to systematically characterize that and then importantly how to take advantage of this understanding to have better responses and patients. Phenomenal complex. It is. And I think fascinating phenomenally complex, but I also think is a really exciting new avenue to think about how we may be able to hopefully one day use that understanding to convert a greater number of patients to responders. One of our earlier guests on STEM talk, Alicia Fassano, is a thought leader in microbiome. And I suggest that folks interested in that might want to go back to that episode and listen to it. We have a within our Cancer Therapeutics program, Christian Jowman is also a leader in the microbiome arena who is part of our Cancer Therapeutics. He's co-leader of our Cancer Therapeutics program. So it's a major area of study and interest that we're trying to get a handle on. Yeah, I think it's an area that will require advanced methods and particularly some modern AI methods, machine learning and others. No, when you start thinking about the number of what we'll call omics platforms that you can characterize just on tumor, host, and now microbiome. The ability to integrate all of that data in a meaningful way and ideally elucidate informative patterns or prognostic or predictive information is going to take some type of sophisticated machine-based learning algorithms to take. Agreed. Another cool project. Yeah, another project. Where do you see the next exciting steps in research for brain tumor treatment coming from? What do you see around the corner that may really excite you? I think there are perhaps two major areas I'm really excited about in terms of the future directions for brain tumor therapy. One is I mentioned earlier, we have some new recent evidence that something called Neo-Agement therapy or just starting immune therapy before you take patients to the operating room. Has a profound effect on potentially a profound effect on their propensity to respond to immune therapies. Mechanistically, this is just beginning to be investigated, but the observation has been that patients who started an immune checkpoint inhibitor prior to surgical resection had much greater evidence of biologic immunologic activity to the treatment and greater survival compared to patients who started treatment postoperatively. This, what we call Neo-Agement Treatment Strategy, really is a new avenue for exploration. I think a potentially very exciting area now for combinations that may be very effective for patients with brain cancer. That's one area. The other is there's a lot of enthusiasm about immune therapy treatments, obviously in general, but when we really look and dig deep in the data, what we see is right now a subpopulation of patients seem to be having these remarkable responses. Converting a 20% or 30% response rate in a cancer that previously had no responses is very exciting, but obviously for that 70% to 80% of the patients who are not deriving benefit, we really haven't had a profound impact on their surile. We and others have been really been focusing on mechanisms of resistance. Why do some patients fail to respond? Some tumors, characteristics fail to respond. What can we do to overcome those mechanisms of resistance? We at least have some early findings that are giving us indications of where to focus. I think over the next five to 10 years, seeing increasing percentages and really meaningful, I don't know what I'm saying, meaning, the numbers that are responding are very meaningful now, but much higher impact in terms of the patient's who benefit. Then this new new approach in terms of thinking about how we treat brain tumors before we perhaps perform surgery in patients. Really interesting. Yeah, really exciting. Okay, so by 1970, cancer had become the second leading cause of death in the United States, and in 1971, President Nixon signed a Lamar piece of legislation called the National Cancer Act. Some curious, can you talk about the impact this legislation has had on research and our efforts to reduce cancer mortality in America? Yes, so the National Cancer Act really formalized our nation's commitment to funding cancer research, created the NCI, the National Cancer Institute's funding mandate that came from that, which allows the NCI director to be directly appointed and have a distinct and dedicated budget to fund extramural and intramural cancer research programs at the NIH in abroad. This has really been a huge engine for innovation, particularly in discovery research. That of course is then capitalized upon by pharmaceutical development and commercial development. So if we look, you know, over the last 30 years, there are cancers that in 1970, you know, perhaps childhood leukemias, maybe one of the greatest examples that had mortality rates of 95% if you were diagnosed with childhood leukemia, you had about a 95% chance of losing your child to this disease. Today, those same diagnoses have about a 95% cure rate. And so we have through the systematic organization of clinical research, preclinical research, basic science discoveries, and support, a major part of that support being from the NCI, but also the all the ancillary funding that has come from that. We can see diseases that have been transformed by those efforts. Where we are today, I think, is that we are really are able to hone in on the cancers that are perhaps rare in incidents and haven't received as much attention or have just been characterized to leave refractory and brain cancers, I think is one of those examples where we can't, you know, we don't have a narrative yet like we have in those leukemias. So I think that it's continued to have a tremendous impact in terms of overall cancer mortality, but we still have, you know, a long ways to go in some areas. Prevention has also been a huge part of that. We don't, you know, those of us who work in therapeutics oftentimes forget to mention certainly for cancers like lung cancer, perhaps, you know, the most profound impact has just been decreasing, you know, smoking rates has had the most profound impact on decreasing mortality from lung cancer, you know, HPV vaccination as a prevention for HPV associated cancers and vaccines against, you know, viral induced cancers, such as liver cancer, have had the profound effect on on incidences. So there are certainly great examples of dramatic successes, but that allows us, of course, to turn our focus to the areas where we haven't seen as much progress. So Dwayne, although you are still relatively young in your career, you've had an impressive track record of research success. So do you have any advice for aspiring researchers or physicians or even physician researchers? Yes, I think, well, two things. I do think a career in research, I believe, is one of the most rewarding careers you can have. You know, I get a chance to wake up every day and think about, you know, is there something we can do? I can do our team can do that potentially can have an impact, a favorable impact on patients lives in the future. And, you know, there are very few, I think, professional opportunities where we have the privilege of being able to potentially make significant contributions. So to not forget that, as we're all, you know, lost in our grant writing, a precious to publish and experiments that aren't going exactly the way we plan, that we still are privileged to be engaged in this field. And then the other is, you know, to follow your desires and your passions, you know, in your career choices, my fundamental philosophy has been as long as I'm enjoying what I'm doing. It's not really work. You have to work hard at it. But if you could find something that you would do, even if you weren't being compensated, then I think it can really contribute to a fantastic rewarding career. I think we definitely agree on that here. So, Dwayne, you talked about how much you love your career, but what else do you do outside of work? My passion outside of work right now is my family. I've been married to my wife for, we just celebrated our 20th anniversary a few months ago. We have three wonderful boys, 11, 9, and 5 years old. And so when I have some spare time, we really enjoy doing things with the children. Whether it's their sports activities, they really enjoy being outdoors and fishing. So I, right now, just enjoy having those moments with my three sons and my wife to just enjoy their presence and take a step away from work for a little bit and just watch the children who don't really seem to have a care in the world other than having fun and enjoying themselves. And that's really been a great pleasure for us. Yeah, it's wonderful. And kids always remember going fishing with their parents. They do. I do. I do. They remember their whole life. Yeah. Yeah. My boys love, we have a little fishing pond, closed our home. And professionally, when we first moved, I think that was my amount of what time I got home from work. If there was any light left before sundown, we had to run out there and throw a pole on the weather and it's been a great fun. That's a great way to end the day. So, Dwayne, thank you so much for joining us today on Stem Talk. That was my pleasure. Thank you for the invitation. Thank you. It was really good. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. So it was fantastic having Dwayne on the podcast. It was great to know while he's at Duke. He was absolutely respected by the faculty that I have a chance to work with and student population there as well. So, very excited to have him here on Stem Talk. Done. Thank you for suggesting Dwayne to the double secret selection committee where all votes are unanimous. And it was, of course, in this case as well. Our conversation with Dwayne was very enlightening and very enjoyable. Yeah, absolutely fascinating research that he's doing and very impactful. So if you enjoy this interview as much as Ken and I did, we invite you to visit the Stem Talk web page where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes. Stem Talk.us. This is Don Kanegas signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stem Talk. Thank you for listening to Stem Talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others. So, please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, StemTalk.us. There, you can also find more information about the guests we interview.
