Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host, Anagas, and joining me to introduce today's podcast is the man behind the curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Sleshing Committee that selects all the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Hi, Don, great to be here. Our guest today is Dr. James Kirkland, a geriatric specialist and researcher at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota. James is best known for his work on the impact that senescence has on age-related dysfunction and the associated chronic diseases. The senescent cells are sometimes referred to as zombie cells for their refusal to die, and as they build up in the body, they promote cellular aging and the host of other chronic conditions related to aging, such as dementia, cancer, aphorosclerosis, diabetes, and also arthritis. In today's interview, we particularly talked to Jim about a 2015 study where he and his colleagues at Mayo were the first report on the potential of senolytic drugs and their ability to selectively kill these senescent cells. His paper in aging cell was hailed as a major breakthrough in aging research. James is the director of the Robert and Arlene Cogood Center of Aging at Mayo. In the beginning, he is also the president of the American Federation for Aging Research. The goal of James Lab and the research conducted in the lab is to develop methods to remove senescent cells with the goal of delaying, preventing, alleviating, or even partially reversing age-related chronic disease and thereby extending human health spin. Before Ken and I get to our interview with Dr. Kirkland, we have some housekeeping to take care of. As always, if you hear, you review red on stem talk, just contact us at stemtalkathehmc.us to claim your official stem talk t-shirt. Today, our winning review by someone who goes by the moniker Kasey Gumbo is titled Nothing to Sell But Science. The review reads, unlike so many other podcasts, stemtalk doesn't try to sell you something. It just offers you straightforward interviews with scientists who are doing fascinating work in a range of topics, especially research into health span and lifespan. If you want to keep up with the latest in health science, this is the podcast to check out. Well, it's definitely a driver is not to sell you anything. Thank you Kasey Gumbo and thank you to all of our other stemtalk listeners who help stemtalk become such a great success. Okay, and now onto our interview with Dr. James Kirkland. Stemtalk. Stemtalk. Stemtalk. Stemtalk. Stemtalk. Hi, welcome to stemtalk. I'm your host, Don Crenegas, and joining us today is Jim Kirkland. And Jim, welcome to the podcast. Thanks. And also joining us is Ken Ford. Hello, Don, and hello, Jim. So Jim, let's get started. You grew up in Canada. What part of Canada? I was born in Montreal, but left there when I was around six years old and went to Toronto and Ontario. Okay. And when did you first become interested in science? I'm not sure. Probably somewhere between the ages of two and three. Wow. That's early. What was the manifestation of your interest? Was there something in particular? It's hard for me to put my finger on it. You know, I've always been interested in aging. And I think it was because I love my grandparents and notice them changing and they look different for my parents, et cetera. So it's just something that's always been in me. I don't know why. I understand that very early on, you decided that you did want to become a physician. And you've mentioned observing your grandparents and seeing how they were different and how they had changed in comparison to your parents. That was, I guess, part of what sparked your interest in geriatrics. Is that right? Yeah, I was interested in why aging occurs. Why, you know, our dog was getting older. Why my grandparents, as you were saying, were different from my parents. Why I changed every year. And so how did you end up at the University of Toronto? Well, I was living in Toronto. It was a natural place to go. And I knew people there. I liked the programs. And then you received your medical degree in 1977 and you graduated with first class honors. And afterward, you did your residency at Toronto General Hospital. So what led you to then travel overseas to study at the University of Manchester? Well, I think it's important. And I tell trainees this to travel and see different things learn in different places. And I went to Manchester because of the book written by John Brauchelhurst. He was the professor there. He was one of the first professors of geriatric medicine he trained with the first professor of geriatrics, Marjorie Warren. So I liked the book and I thought it would be an interesting place to go and learn from the sort of very first people who had worked in the area. It sounds like a great experience. And then you traveled back across the Atlantic to work at the National Institutes of Health. And during your time at NIH, we understand that you mainly did research on adipose tissue is that correct? Yes, I worked on adipose tissue and signaling in fat cells and so forth, but also became interested in senescence there. I'd read obviously about senescence before that, but there were people working in the area of cellar senescence and that directly affects the tissues that I was interested in at that point adipose tissue. And so I'm going to assume this is going to lead into this next question for you. What role your research at the NIH played in your PhD, which is something that you earned in 1990 from the University of Toronto? Well the NIH at that point didn't grant degrees, but universities could credit the research that you did at the NIH towards a degree. And I had that arrangement with the University of Toronto. So some of the work I did in the laboratory at the NIH counted towards what was in my PhD thesis and my mentor at the NIH was on my PhD thesis committee. After your time at the NIH, you held various positions at the University of Toronto. What led you in 1994 then to move to Boston? What precipitated that move? Again, there were opportunities. The funding in the US for doing research was better at that point than in Canada. I wanted to expand our laboratory. There were people who I knew in Boston that I wanted to work with. So it seemed like an opportunity at the right time. So in 2007, you became the director of the Cogod Center on aging at the Mayo Clinic. So how did that position come about? It was funded by Bob and Arlene Cogod who are benefactors of Mayo's who are very interested in the aging area. I had been speaking at meetings and a very senior person at Mayo, Nicol Russo knew me from those meetings and was working on creating the center with the Cogods. And he invited me out to take a look and I liked what I saw. That's very cool. And so just a little background here, a lot of the public perception of anti-aging research is that the aim is to extend lifespan. And the concept of extending health span is less well understood. So would you mind clarifying the difference for our listeners between lifespan and health span? Well, first of all, we prefer not to use the term anti-aging research. It doesn't exactly describe what we're doing. You start aging from the time of conception on. So you don't want to stop development from occurring. That's true. Yeah. And there's only one sure fire way to stop aging and you want to avoid that. Yes. And the other thing that we're interested in, as you mentioned, is trying to expand health span. That's the period during life when people are living independently free of pain and free of disability. The goal, I think, for most people in the field is not to try to extend lifespan at all costs. It would be much better to live to say you're 90 or 95 and feel like you're 50. Then I'd argue it would be to live to be 180 and feel like you're 180. So the goal is to add life to years, not years to life. Wonderful. I like that. I know a person that routinely asserts that he will live to be 180 and boy, it doesn't sound like a good time to me. Much of your research, throughout your career, has really focused on how cellular aging impacts a wide range of age-related and chronic diseases. And you're particularly well-known for your work on synescent cells and scintillated drugs. But trigger your interest in synescent cells in the first place. A game that occurred from an early point in my career when I first read about synescent cells before I got to medical school. So hayflick and moorhead published a landmark paper in 1961 describing cellar synescence. Before that, people thought that cells were immortal. And that was because people were growing cells using blood products made from animals in order to provide nutrition to the cells that they were growing. And they felt that cells could divide indefinitely, but they didn't realize that the blood products that they were using were unfiltered and those blood products contained cells. So whenever they were feeding the cultures they were looking at, they were adding fresh cells. So for many, many years, the dogma was that aging occurs at the level of the organism, not the level of the cell. And that's why if you read textbooks from the 1920s and 30s, people were interested in endocrine causes of aging or the thymus, the immune organ that atrophies when you're younger and whether that triggered aging. Hayflick and moorhead's discovery was that human cells, when you repeatedly passage them, that is when you allow them to divide and then split the cultures and let them grow to confluence and then split them again and keep doing this. They found there was a limited number of times cells could divide before they stopped dividing and they entered a state of replicative arrest where they didn't divide anymore, but they didn't die. And they termed that cell or senescence. So that really, in a lot of ways, revolutionized the field and are thinking about aging. People began to realize that aging processes occur not only at the level of the organism, but also at the level of the cell and possibly even subcellular levels. So it was very fascinating. So Jim, we particularly want to talk to you today about your 2015 paper in aging cell where you and your colleagues at the Mayo Clinic were the first to report on the potential of senolytic drugs, which selectively kills senescent cells. In our view, this paper represents a breakthrough in aging research, but first, before we discuss that 2015 paper, be great if you could talk about your research leading up to this paper. Well, I was very interested in cell or senescence as we were just saying. And a lot of my PhD work was in that area. There were people at the NIH at the time who were interested in cell or senescence who were in labs near the lab that I was working in. In the lab I was working in, we noted that fat cell progenitors, the cells that give rise to new fat cells, had a limited number of times that they could divide and then they stopped dividing and they didn't die as hayflick had predicted. So that led to a long interest in what cell or senescence is and how it might contribute to fundamental aging processes. What really hit home was a very important paper by Ned Sharpless, Norman Sharpless, who's now Director of the National Cancer Institute, that he published in 2004 in the Journal of Clinical Investigation and what he found was that the abundance of senescence cells in mice increases with age as was shown previously by others. But what he noted was that if you do something that extends health span, namely caloric restriction, that the rate of accumulation of senescence cells was delayed. And so that led me and my colleagues who worked with me in Boston at the time to ask, is there more than an association between senescence cell accumulation and aging? Might senescence cells be a fundamental cause of some aspects of aging processes and perhaps age-related diseases? So we wanted to look for causation and that led us to try beginning in 2004 to develop ways of targeting senescence cells to ask in cell culture systems or tissue culture systems or animals. Could we affect the rate at which age-related changes and disorders occur if we could eliminate senescence cells? So we started on a long quest to try to develop ways of killing senescence cells. The first approach was to use things called antibodies that would bind to a senescence cell and carry a toxic cargo with them. That didn't work. Then we tried setting up drug screens, comparing senescence to non-senescence cells to look for compounds that would kill the senescence cells but not the non-senescence cells in using random libraries of chemicals. And that didn't work because there were problems with the way that you have to set up those kinds of drug screens. And so finally that led us to a hypothesis-driven approach that we adopted in 2013 and May 2013. And that led us to the discovery of senelitic drugs. Before we loop back to your aforementioned 2015 paper, can you talk about the two senelitic compounds that you and your colleagues identified? And those are desatinib and charsatin and the significant of those. Well we discovered that those drugs were senelitic and they're the first senelitics that we found and we identified them using a hypothesis-driven approach after we'd been through efforts to try to find drugs that would selectively kill senescence but not senescence cells in other ways. And that approach that we took in May 2013 was to ask ourselves why despite the fact senescence cells kill the cells around them and damage the tissues around them, why did they survive? They're remarkably resistant to dying. They're only normally removed by the immune system. So we figured maybe they have pathways, survival pathways that allow them to survive despite the fact they're producing factors that kill the cells around them. And we used bioinformatics approaches, that is we used a computer assisted approaches looking at the range of proteins and other factors that are present in senescence cells to discern are there pathways, are there molecular mechanisms through which senescence cells can defend themselves against their own, what we call senescence associated secretary phenotype, these SASP factors that they produce that kill other cells. And indeed using bioinformatics approaches, using computer-driven approaches, we found there was a network of these pathways that defend senescence cells. So what we did next was to ask if we target particular components of those pathways, could we kill senescence cells? And we found that in various combinations and permutations that if we used genetic approaches called RNA interference in cultured cells, senescence cells to interfere with those pathways, senescence cells died, whereas normal cells didn't. The next step, all in May 2013, was to go back to the computer and use computer-assisted approaches to find drugs and natural products that would target those nodes that we identified in the pro-survival network. And that's how we identified the satin of Kersetten and over 20 other compounds that would allow senescence cells basically to commit suicide while leaving normal cells that aren't trying to kill cells around them alone. Fiseten is another senaledic agent that has shown benefit in rodent studies and is now being used in some human clinical trials. Some authors have described it as roughly twice the senaledic potency as Kersetten. How does Fiseten fit into the senaledic landscape? You said there are roughly 20 senaledics that have been discovered or a little more than 20. What's the landscape look like across this collection? Well, we originally found 20 compounds. We haven't yet published all of them. There are many more that have been discovered since. So they're probably close to 100 compounds now that have been identified using our original mechanism-based approach, but also others have developed high throughput screens and other ways of identifying senaledics since then. So there are a lot of compounds around. Now Fiseten is very closely related to Kersetten. Kersetten is what makes apple peels taste bitter. It's a naturally occurring flavonol compound. And Fiseten is just chemically very slightly different from Kersetten. Fiseten is also a natural product. It's present in strawberries and a range of other foods. There are something over 40 compounds that occur in foods that are related to Kersetten and Fiseten. Most of the others are not senaledic. Kersetten, Fiseten, and another compound called Ludiolan are. So one of the reasons for going after those compounds early on is that they have reasonable safety profiles. We eat them all the time. And there are also things that have short elimination half-lives where they're eliminated from the body fairly quickly. And that was important in our development of senaledics because as we might talk about later, we wanted to develop agents that could kill senescent cells and then disappear from the body quickly. So Jim, you began your 2015 paper writing about how research shows that the health span of mice is enhanced by killing senescent cells using a transgenic suicide gene. You then went on to describe how a series of experiments by you and your colleagues demonstrated the efficacy of senaledics, but to alleviate symptoms of frailty and also extend health span. So can you walk us through these experiments and also your results? Well, the experiments on the genetic model were separate from the work that we did on the discovery of senaledics. And actually, we began working on senaledics before we came up with the idea for developing mice from which we could use genetic tricks to clear certain kinds of senescent cells. But nevertheless, in many respects, the genetic clearance approaches and the senaledic drug approaches give results that are pretty close to each other. And senaledic drugs kill different kinds of senescent cells. So different kinds of senescent cells, depending on the cell type that became senescent and how it was made to become senescent, vary in their responsiveness to senaledic drugs. We didn't want to interfere with the ability to develop senescent cells because solar senescent is an important defense against cancers. Senescent cells develop in the placenta and are what produce factors that drive the baby through the birth canal. Senescent cells are important in wound healing and tissue repair and development. So we did not want to interfere with the body's ability to make senescent cells. But what we did want to do is to be able to get rid of those senescent cells, the 30 to 70% of them, that produce damaging factors if they persist around too long. And that's how senaledic drugs work. Basically they allow the senescent cells that are producing bad factors, the 30 to 70% of them to kill themselves instead of killing the cells around them by disabling their pro-survival pathways transiently. Now it takes anywhere from 10 days to 6 weeks for senescent cells to form. So what we can do is we can eliminate these cells in what we call a hit and run manner. We can give a dose of these drugs. The cells are killed. It takes 10 days to 6 weeks for new senescent cells to form. And that's why we like drugs that have what we call a short elimination half-life so we can use a hit and run approach. Also by using these agents we're not interfering with the body's ability to make senescent cells. So we treated animals with these agents, old animals or animals with chronic diseases where senescent cells form at the sites where chronic diseases begin to clear senescent cells. And we and now many others have found a large range of conditions that we can delay prevent or alleviate by clearing senescent cells. Really interesting. Yeah, it's really interesting. So not only did you find support the idea that senescent cells could one day be used for treating things like cardiovascular disease and frailty for example, but also raise the possibility that these agents have the potential to target a multitude of disorders as you just mentioned. Can you give us a sense of this potential and why you believe that the clinical application of these agents could be transformative? Well, I hope it might be transformative. We don't know that yet until we do the clinical trials. But basically what we're building on is something called the Geroscience Hyposis. That was formulated by Gordon Lithgow almost 20 years ago. And what that hypothesis holds is that fundamental aging processes may be root cause contributors not only to some of the changes that occur with aging, but also what we call the jiatric syndromes that seems like frailty or age-related muscle impairment called sarcopenia or mild cognitive impairment and other conditions might also be root cause contributors to the age-related decline in physical resilience at his ability to recover after surgery or after an infection or even to respond properly to a vaccination. And also that these fundamental aging processes could drive, help to drive many of the chronic diseases that account for the bulk of morbidity, mortality and health expenditures. So we know that most of the major chronic diseases, the biggest risk factor for them is aging. For example, 80% of the risk of Alzheimer's disease can be predicted from chronologic age alone. Your relative risk of having a heart attack or a stroke or other kinds of problems with blood vessels is increased to the forefold if you have a positive family history, a high blood sugar, a high cholesterol. But if your 85 is opposed to 30, your relative risk is increased 1000 fold. So for many cancers, for the dementia, for cardiovascular diseases, for arthritis, for osteoporosis, for long lists of other conditions. The major risk factor is chronologic aging alone and the thing that we were interested in testing is the stereoscience hypothesis and that said if you target a fundamental aging process like solar senescence, could you delay, prevent or alleviate whole groups of these conditions? So you followed up with your research with a clinical trial that involved a small group of diabetic kidney patients and this led to a paper that was published in the Lancet titled, Synolytic's Decrease senescent cells and Humans. And I understand that when you published this paper in 2019, there have been no peer-reviewed study that had previously demonstrated that synolytic's decrease in esens cells and humans. So first of all, is that right? And then second of all, how was the study designed? Well, that study was a very small study. It was a pilot study and it was designed to ask whether in people with obesity, diabetes and some degree of kidney impairment where we know that there are a lot of senescent cells in these people's adipose tissue. We wanted to find out if we could reduce senescent cell burden by a brief course of desatinib and carcinatinib first two senolytics that we discovered. Those two agents worked better in combination than alone and they were going to hit and run manner. So what we did was we did, took blood tests and did fat biopsies on these volunteers at day zero. They got these agents given orally on days one, two and three. Those drugs are completely cleared from the body by around day four because they've got short elimination half-lives. So we rebiopsy these people at day 14, 11 days after the last dose of the senolytics because we know it takes 10 days to six weeks for new senescent cells to form. And we compared the day 14 to the day zero biopsies and blood tests. And what we found was that abundance of senescent cells was decreased in adipose tissue in these subjects. There were decreases in some of the factors that senescent cells release in their blood. And there was also reduced inflammation in adipose tissue because fat tissue becomes inflamed, in obesity and diabetes. And this is what leads to some of the complications of those conditions. And we also, we found there was less scarring of their adipose tissue as well, less fibrosis, crown-like structures in their adipose tissue after this brief course of senolytics. So that is led to a larger trial which is currently underway to ask whether complications of obesity and diabetes can be reduced or forced all by senolytic drugs because we found that that is indeed the case in animal studies in obese mice, for example. So we're trying to find ways where we can reduce not only blood sugar and other issues that occur in diabetes, but also the long-term consequences of diabetes. Stem Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition. A not-for-profit research lab pioneering groundbreaking technologies aimed at leveraging and extending human cognition, perception, locomotion, and resilience. Your 2018 paper in Nature Medicine was titled Sinolytics Improve Physical Function and Increase Lifespan in Old Age. Can you share how you were able to demonstrate that with the senolytic drugs, you could delay the onset of basically, it sounds outrageous, but basically all the age-related diseases the mice typically die from. This seems like a strong example of Lithgaugh's notion that taking out a key factor of aging would then remove or delay or alleviate many of the chronic diseases associated with aging. Yes, so we were interested in, right from the beginning, in testing whether clearing senescent cells would delay age-related diseases. Conversely, we were also interested in testing cost-postilates, the postulates that were used to show that bacteria cause infections. So one of the things, in addition to removing senescent cells using senolytic drugs, in that particular paper, we also transplanted senescent cells into younger mice to ask if the problems could be caused. So we started by doing that. We injected a very small number of senescent cells into some mice and non-senescent cells into others, so that only one in 10,000 cells in the mice was a senescent cell or a non-senescent cell that had been transplanted. Those cells were labeled so we could identify them. And we found that if we transplanted a million senescent cells into the middle-aged animals, that mice would die earlier of all of the diseases that mice typically die of. So we worked with a very, very smart animal pathologist who specializes in aging animal pathology. And he found that essentially all diseases that mice die of, they died earlier of, if we transplanted senescent cells into middle-aged mice compared to non-senescent cells. Furthermore, we found that in that particular experiment that senescent spreads and it spreads in what we call an endocrine manner. So it can spread to different tissues. This transplanted cells had been labeled so we could identify the transplanted cells and distinguish them from the recipient's own cells. We found that the transplanted cells, which we injected into the abdomen, stayed in the abdomen, but we found the recipient's own cell started becoming senescent in their limbs. So this indicates that senescent can spread. Particularly above a threshold, senescent cells are normally cleared by the immune system. And our view is that once you achieve above a particular threshold burden of senescent cells, the rate of spread of senescent cells exceeds the ability of the immune system to clear them so they take off. Then we did the opposite experiment. We used the sonolitic drugs that we developed to ask if, in naturally aged mice, if we cleared senescent cells, or also in the animals in which the younger animals in which we transplanted senescent cells, if by clearing the senescent cells, we could prevent the transplanted senescent cells from causing frailty and early death on the one hand, or in naturally aged animals, we could reduce frailty and prevalence of age-related diseases on the other. And we found that both things were true. So we found a slight increase in lifespan in naturally aged animals because senescent cells only really begin to accumulate in late middle age and early old age, so that's where we started treatment. But we found that this delay was related to a delay in all age-related diseases that mice die from. And similarly in the transplanted animals that were dying early of all those diseases, when we treated with senelitic, we prevented them from dying early from all those diseases. So this corroborates the gyro-science hypothesis and would indicate that we're no longer dealing with the old-fashioned drug development paradigm of one drug, one target, one disease. Here what we're doing is we're using compounds that hit a range of targets in these survival pathways that allow senescent cells to survive. So we're using drugs that have more than one target, we're targeting a network of pathways and we're going after multiple age-related conditions, not just one disease. So incredible findings and despite the promising potential of senelitic drugs, you caution that there could be dangerous side effects and that people should absolutely not take these drugs just yet. So can you talk about any safety concerns as well as the length of time it will take to test some of these drugs? Well, there are a number well over a dozen now clinical trials underway with senelitics for a variety of diseases and disorders in humans. The main thing that we're looking for in these clinical trials is safety and tolerability. So we're constantly looking for especially severe or serious side effects. I lie awake at night every night worried about this because we're playing with a very, very fundamental process here of senescent. So it can occur at any point during life. Senescent cells can appear from conception on in various tissues. So that's a real worry because we're dealing with a fundamental process. So far, we haven't seen anything but it doesn't mean we won't with respect to side effects. And so I caution until we've got a number of clinical trials done by a number of groups in very carefully controlled settings that there shouldn't be a race to use these drugs. And furthermore, the clinical trials are being done for very serious potentially life-threatening conditions for which there are no good current treatments. We're worried about what we call risk-benefit ratios. So we're starting off in very serious disorders and asking if we can alleviate those disorders on the one hand and if these agents are safe on the other. That makes good sense to me and it's probable that there is some difference in optimal protocol and safety between the various senelitic agents. From correspondence with our listeners, we know that some of them are indeed experimenting with fissetten, for example. And I think what they're doing, they refer to it as the Mayo Protocol, but I think it's the protocol taken from the research paper, 20 milligrams per kilogram of body weight of oral fissiton on two consecutive days and then they repeat the same dose something like a month later. It does seem like early days to me and I'm hoping that everybody watches the literature and is thoughtful about this. Do you have any comment on that? I'd certainly caution against that at the moment. I think we need to know if these drugs are safe and effective in carefully controlled clinical trials where we're monitoring the volunteers who join those trials very, very closely where we're doing all kinds of things to look for side effects and I just think it's too early for the general public to be taking these agents or for physicians in routine clinical practice to be prescribing them. We just don't have enough data yet to feel that it's safe to move in that direction. You mentioned the risk reward ratio and in this case, one doesn't really know how to calculate that. There's not enough information to do that calculation, but as you said, this is such a fundamental process that I can see why you think about it frequently. Well, and we're using these agents in serious conditions. They're trials underway or beginning in things like Alzheimer's disease or severe coronavirus infections or frailty and elderly women where we know that the life expectancy is very short with that particular condition and for which there are no good treatments. Things like pulmonary fibrosis, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, progressive, ultimately fatal disease that we know is in essence driven, severe diabetes with obesity where we know that there are bad complications potentially. Those are the kinds of conditions that these trials are underway in at the moment. Makes sense and it's easier to come up with a positive risk reward ratio in those cases. With that information. Diabetes and obesity are also associated with accumulation of senescent cells and fat and other tissues. You had a paper in aging cell in 2019 that implicated cellular senescence as a causal factor in obesity-related inflammation and metabolic derangements. I was wondering if you could share how you were able to demonstrate that senolytic agents should promise in terms of treating obesity-related metabolic dysfunction and its complications. What we did was we gave mice a diet that's rich in fat and as much of it as they want and the mice become obese when you do that. They become insulin resistant. We also use genetically modified mice that are obese and have insulin resistance. These are commonly used models for obesity and diabetes. We treated those mice with senolytic agents to ask if we could improve response to insulin and also reduce in a series of papers side effects related to diabetes. Things like kidney dysfunction or development of fatty liver and ultimately cirrhosis based on that or changes in brain function that can occur in the context of obesity and diabetes. We've been finding that senolytics are, despite continued high fat feeding, alleviated the insulin resistance that occurs, reduced things like hemoglobin A1C, a measure of high persisting high sugars in the blood, restored to some extent kidney dysfunction that can occur with diabetes and prevented its progression. We found they cleared a senescent fat-like cells that can develop in parts of the brain and contribute to anxiety and depression in the context of diabetes and a range of other things. That's what's led to some of the clinical trials that are underway in these conditions. More recently, you had a really interesting paper in nature communications that explored the possibility of transplanting organs from older donors to young individuals. As you previously pointed out in other interviews, we throw away approximately 35,000 kidneys a year because they're from older donors. In this study, you did heart transplants from old mice to young mice as well as young mice to old mice. What did you find and what is the potential significance of this study? Well, we worked very closely with Stephan Tulius at Harvard on the Caesar transplant surgeon at the Brigham. What we did was, as you mentioned, we did heart transplants from old mice to young mice and young mice to young mice. I mentioned previously that we'd found that when we transplant small numbers of senescent cells into the abdomen of mice, we get spread of senescence. What we found with Dr. Tulius was that if we transplant hearts from old mice to young mice, we start seeing that the young recipients own cells in other organs at a distance start becoming senescent. And also that the senescent hearts produce factors that interfere with immune function and contribute to rejection of organs. Whereas transplanting hearts from young animals to young animals, we didn't see nearly as much rejection and we didn't get senescent cells forming in the young recipients own organs. So what we did was we did a series of experiments where we treated the donor animals that were donating the heart, the hearts themselves before they were as they were being transplanted or the recipients of the transplanted organs. And we found that in each of those scenarios, we could improve outcomes of transplantation. So it was particularly exciting to us that we found that if we treated the heart from old animals as it was being transplanted into young animals that we were able to reduce the spread of senescence that occurs on transplanting the old hearts and reduce rejection. So that's led now to studies where we're working with Dr. Tulius and others at looking at whether we can restore function of kidneys from old donors so that maybe one day they could be used in young recipients without causing some of the problems that they cause. And with another group, we're doing the same thing with liver transplants. Really impressive. Really impressive. Really interesting. Perhaps really help with the demand and supply problem there where there's a great demand for these organs and insufficient supply. And the other nice thing is that seniletics act very quickly as I mentioned before they act in a hidden run manner. It takes two maybe three hours of exposure of a senescent cell to a seniletic drug to initiate the process of killing that senescent cell, which takes about 18 hours. So when we have organs that were transplanting, they're commonly put on to what we call perfusion devices so that they can be transported to the recipient, say if a person's died in a car accident and they've been kind enough to sign a donor card, that organ is put on to a machine that perfuses the organ so that it can be kept functional while it's being rushed to the recipient. That's the time when we feel there might be an opportunity to treat those organs with seniletic drugs when it's put on to that perfusion machine and is being transported. So that's what we're testing at the moment. Really interesting. I'm just going to ask you when did you envision providing the treatment? So that answered my next question. Thanks. Earlier we discussed that your lab has a number of human clinical trials underway and you ran through a wide range of conditions all quite serious. Have any of the preliminary results looked promising or is it too early to draw any even preliminary conclusions? Well we had some promising results from an open label early phase clinical trial in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. That's a fatal lung disease that occurs in older individuals and we know is partly driven by accumulation of senescent cells in the lung. Now this was not a placebo controlled trial. It was open label. It was exploratory. It was to pave the way to a proper full what we call double blind placebo controlled trial. But in that initial trial which we published a couple of years ago, we did find improvement in function in those patients. So that's led to a larger series of trials, multi-center trial which we're just beginning to go through the processes of getting underway. We have other trials that are underway where we don't have the results yet because they're blinded. We are not allowed to see what the results are. We have something called data safety and monitoring boards, DSMB's that look at the data but they are not allowed to tell us what they're seeing unless they see that there's a major problem in which case they stop the trial. So myself and the people in my laboratory and my fellow clinicians are all blinded as to whether subjects are getting placebo or getting active compounds so that the results remain unbiased. And that's true across the trials that we're doing in conditions like Alzheimer's disease or osteoporosis and other conditions. These trials are all blinded so we don't know yet. Well, it's certainly something for everyone to keep an eye on. At IHMC we're very interested in skeletal muscle, both in the context of aging and sarcopenia you mentioned earlier as well as human spaceflight. The declines in physical function seen in your 2018 paper after transplantation of senescent cells into mice was really eye catching. Do you know if there is a direct or local role for senescence in skeletal muscle cells in terms of the mechanisms of frailty with aging and if so is there any evidence so far that specific tissues can be targeted with senolytics. For example, skeletal muscle. Is there... are you able to be that targeted? Well we've developed animal models where we can target specific tissues but in the case of the drugs very often we want to get rid of as many senescent cells throughout the body as we can because they have these what we call endocrine effects. They produce factors that get in the blood that cause dysfunction at a distance and they can also spread at a distance. So we find for example that one of the best predictors of age-related muscle dysfunction is the abundance of senescent cells in fact tissue and some of the factors that get produced by senescent cells are linked very closely to frailty and sarcopenia. So there are situations where local administration or topical administration would be make a lot of sense for example for skin diseases that are associated with cellar senescence but in the case of muscle while senescent cells do form and muscle the abundance of them is not all that high with increasing age whereas we find that in situations like frailty and sarcopenia there are a lot of senescent cells in other tissues that might be at a distance from the muscle or might be sort of mixed in with muscle like fat tissue for example. That's really interesting. Do... has anybody looked at where the number of senescent cells in fat tissue is increased after long duration space flight? You know you see rapid muscle wasting in space flight is... has anybody looked at senescence as a possible role there? We're very interested in space flight. In fact we're sending some of our cells up to the International Space Station on the Axiom 1 flight and we're getting blood from that flight and hopefully others from astronauts. Interest is determining how much senescence is caused by a variety of things. It can be caused by tissue damage by pathogens like coronavirus or other infections. It can be caused by metabolic insults. A whole range of things but one of the things that can cause senescence is radiation. So we're very concerned about the Mars flight where there's heavy ion radiation and we're also wondering whether high G forces like on takeoff and landing and also low gravity might contribute to senescence. So these are all things that we're testing and we've... we are our laboratories very enthusiastic about this. We're working with the Axiom people to design the right plastic wear and conditions to be able to send the cells up to the space station. Does a bedrest increase senescence cells? Hard to say whether bedrest per se does. It's hard to know what's caused an effect. Senescence cell accumulation leads and if we transplant senescence cells it leads to decreased activity and so it's... that's a very, very hard issue, very hard not to crack but it's certainly one that we're very interested in. Yeah because that would... if that were the case that would point toward loss of gravity or microgravity as a factor. But we're also wondering we know that mechanical and sheer stress can cause cells to become senescent. This is the basis for senescent cell formation for example in the knees and osteoarthritis or when what are called AV fistuli are made for people to go on dialysis where an artery is connected to a vein. We find senescent cells on the vein side. In fact that's one of the reasons why these fistuli appear to clot off. We find senescent cells downstream of divisions and blood vessels what we call bifurcations where there's turbulence and eddies. We feel that sheer stress and mechanical stress can induce senescence in cells and during space flight there's sheer stress occurring during takeoff and landing where there are very high G forces and also zero gravity might do this as well. That's really interesting. We know the impact at least in cell culture right of zero G or microgravity on cell cycle has a huge influence on cell cycle so it makes sense that there would be an influence there. Your 2017 paper and the Journal of American Geiatric Society titled the Clinical Potential of Syntholytic Drugs is a really good primer for our listeners who want to know more about these agents. There's a line in the paper that stood out to us and I'm going to quote this. With senolytics or other interventions that target fundamental aging processes proved to be effective and safe in clinical trials they could transform geriatric medicine by enabling prevention or treatment of multiple diseases and functional deficits and parallel instead of one at a time. So that paper is four years old now. Is there anything new that you would add to it? Well I think we're still very hopeful about that. I think that not only targeting senescent cells but targeting other fundamental aging processes all of which appear to be highly interlinked might be a way to address what we call multi morbidity in older people where people have three four five six conditions and also have these geriatric syndromes, things like frailty or incontinence or falling or a mild cognitive impairment that are frustrating for the patients, for their families and for the physicians and nurses looking after these people. The hope is there that this may come about and I think the other interesting approach that's beginning to be taken is this what we call unitary theory of fundamental aging processes that these processes are all interlinked so much that if you perturb one or target one you affect the rest. So I think another future where we're very interested in is combining interventions that target the different fundamental aging processes. Indeed it looks like for example metformin which may be of benefit in targeting certain chronic conditions. In fact inhibits senescent cells from producing some of the factors that they normally make. The same thing with rapamycin. We found recently with collaborators at Mayo that senescent cells produce factors that increase something called CD38 on blood cells that metabolize NAD and reduce NAD levels. So there are people looking at NAD and precursors of NAD to try to alleviate age-related conditions. So these all look linked to senescent cells as well and we're finding senolytics will result in improvements in NAD levels. So all of these fundamental aging processes may be much more linked together than we think. And therefore developing not only better senolytics and more trials and senolytics is important but to combine these agents with other agents and ask if they're are they less than additive? Are they additive or are they more than additive or what we call synergistic? And in early indications in Mouth Studies it's looking like they might be synergistic which would hold even more promise. That would be exciting. And for our listeners we've had several episodes of stem talk dealing with both metformin and NAD and its precursors. Jim you definitely have some very interesting and important work that you're leading. And you were talking earlier in the interview at the very beginning of the interview about the influence of seeing your loved ones aging and how they had an impact and led you to science and research and medicine. And I recently read that you said that one of the reasons you are so interested in this work is also because you are tired of prescribing walkers and incontinence devices for your patients and that you would want to do something that will slow down and even reverse some of these symptoms of aging. And it definitely seems like you're making progress. I'm going to guess you feel pretty good about the work that your lab is doing up to this point. I feel good about it but I'm cautious and what I'm really worried about is whether we can bring all of this through to the clinic in a safe way. So that's why we're working everybody in our group is working around the clock. And I'm a geriatrician as well as being a basic scientist and my geriatric colleagues share enthusiasm about this as well. They want to be able to do something more fundamental for their patients than is feasible at the moment. So the field of geriatrics is changing and younger people moving into the field are interested increasingly. And I think this is very important in developing a background in the basic biology of aging as well as clinical geriatrics. It used to be that clinical geriatrics was as far as you could get away from the laboratory. Totally unlike say cardiology where many cardiologists or endocrinologists even more so are very familiar with going from the laboratory to the clinic and back to the laboratory. Geriatrics that hasn't happened. So we need to create a whole new generation of geriatricians who have basic biology of aging training so that we can bridge what we call the translational gap, the valley of death between the laboratory and the clinic. And excitingly it's looking like there may be reason to do this now in geriatrics and aging research where there really wasn't any point doing it before because there was nothing to translate. Well, again, incredibly important work that you're all doing and we're excited to continue to follow it. We really appreciate you taking the time to speak with us today, Jim. Thank you. Absolutely, Jim. It was terrific. We appreciate it. Great interview. Thanks. Stimptime. Stimptime. Stimptime. Stimptime. Stimptime. Well, that was a fascinating interview and I really enjoyed talking to Dr. Kirkland. It's not every day that we get to talk about zombie cells on stem talk. And the work that he and his colleagues are doing on scintillitic drugs and their potential impact on age-related diseases is just super exciting. And after talking to him today is easy to understand why there's so much enthusiasm about the studies that are currently underway on these drugs. Absolutely, Jameson is lab are certainly at the forefront of geriatric research and in particular his research on the potential scintillitic drugs to prevent and even to reverse some aspects of aging definitely falling to the ground breaking category if they can transition from the laboratory to the clinic. In few years we hope to circle back with James and do another stem talk interview because as you pointed out Dawn, the clinical trials underway and those in the works offer so much promise in terms of extending human health span and perhaps lifespan as well. Absolutely, Ken. And if you enjoyed this interview as much as Ken and I did, we invite you to visit the Stimptok webpage where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes at stemtalk.us. This is Don Cornagia signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stimptok. Thank you for listening to Stimptok. We want this podcast to be discovered by others so please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website stemtalk.us. There you can also find more information about the guests we interview.
