Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host Don Conegas, and joining me to introduce today's podcast is the man behind the curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, Agencies Director, and Chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee. That selects all the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Hi Don, great to be here. So our guest today is Dr. Gordon Lithgo, a professor and vice president of Academic Affairs at the Buck Institute in Nevada, California, and Gordon's research focuses on uncovering genes and also small molecules that prolong lifespan and also health span through enhanced molecular stability. So because our conversation with Gordon was so fascinating and a little bit longer than we expected, we have split his interview into two parts. In today's part one of the interview, we talked to Gordon about his background and his early studies as well as his work with C.Elegans, which is a microscopic worm that Gordon and other geneticists study and often use for their research. We particularly talk in depth about two Gordon studies involving C.Elegans. One is one that looked at the role that protein-hemiestasis plays in aging, and another study which found that vitamin D3 improves protein-hemiestasis and also slows aging. A native of Scotland, Gordon studied the biology of aging at the University of Manchester in England before moving to the Buck Institute in 2000. Gordon is married to Dr. Julie Anderson, who was our guest on episodes 117 and 118, and is also a Buck Institute colleague of Gordon's. So, just a heads up, in part two of our interview with Gordon, we talked to him about a recent study of his, which found that the naturally occurring metabolite alfaketic gluturate reduces inflammatory signaling as well as chronic inflammation. And we've received several questions from listeners about alfaketic gluturate and Gordon's recent study that ran in cell metabolism, which Gordon discusses in depth in part two. But, before Ken and I get to part one of our interview with Gordon, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the widiest and most lavishly praised filled reviews to read on Stem Talk. If you hear you review Read on Stem Talk, please contact us at StemTalk at ihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk T-shirt. Today, we have a first. At least I think we do, Don, have we ever had a winning poem before? This is a review in the form of a poem. So, you mean a review that's written as a poem? I don't think we've had that Ken. Yeah, that's the first. I've never even seen a review as a poem. So... Pretty unique. So, this person got the attention of the Double Secret Selection Committee quite easily. Our winning poem today was posted by someone who goes by the moniker and you're gonna love this. DG12309748394, close parentheses 2926. The poem reads, learning all about the strain, about science, including the brain. For a podcast, this is my main, for learning that will not refrain. It was very creative. Also, thank you DG and I'm now going to start to try to repeat those multiple digits, etc. etc. And thank you to all of our other StemTalk listeners who've helped StemTalk become such a great success. Okay, and now on to today's interview with Dr. Gordon Lithgow. StemTalk. StemTalk. StemTalk. StemTalk. Hi, welcome to StemTalk. I'm your host, Don Crenegas. And joining us today is Gordon Lithgow. Gordon, welcome to the podcast. Thank you. I'm delighted to be here. And also joining us as Ken Ford. Hello, Non, and hello, Gordon. So, Gordon, let's start off with your background a little bit. I understand that you grew up in a steel works town. Outside of Glasgow, Scotland, is that correct? Yeah, that's right. Ravens Creek steel works as it was bigger than the size of Monaco. It was a massive steel works and almost everyone I knew either had worked at the steel works, or had connections with companies around the steel works. And so what were you like as a kid? Oh, not very bright. I was always a B student for sure. I have evidence of that from one of my school reports and assumed that I would follow in everyone else's footsteps and go to the steel works, but that didn't become an option because the steel works was closed down during the 70s and 80s. And so really, we were in a very difficult place with 30% unemployment in local community. And really, education was the only way out. Unfortunately, in Scotland at that time, education was completely free all the way through to graduate school. And I was very, very lucky to be able to follow that path. So, I understand that you're interested in sports. So, I'm wondering, how does a kid who is more interested in becoming a professional rugby or soccer player suddenly become interested in bird watching? And is it true that your interest in birds is what actually got you interested in biology? It really was. I wanted to be a fighter pilot or something and so it was interested in flight and I was never good enough for sports. I wasn't big enough to play rugby really at any level. But yeah, I kind of got interested in birds and bird watching in the back garden. That got me interested in biology and suddenly I found that I actually had a passion for biology. And that was the one thing at school that I could actually get beyond the B grade and attain an A grade. So yeah, that really was the path. Gordon just isn't a side. In the late 90s, my boss at NASA was a Scottish gentleman and Henry McDonald, Harry McDonald. Yeah, that's a question for sure. He was just like you imagined he was a fighter pilot and then went over to NASA. But he was great for understatement. One time I annoyed the administrator so much he pounded on the desk and cut his arm open on my cheap government desk. So the minister's spurting blood in my office. You've got to visualize this. There's a guy that reports to the president in the United States. He runs into the men's room, cussing me, runs into the men's room and Henry looks at me and Henry reported to him and I reported to Henry. Henry looks at me and he says, well Kenneth, you have something to manage to annoy the administrator. He looked at Sinkin for 30 seconds. Remember, this is my boss. And he says, well done. I didn't mean to digress. Excellent. No, good story. So Gordon, after high school, you headed off for the University of Strathclyde and I understand that you were the first in your family to attend college, is that right? Yeah, that's right. I mean, I think in Scotland education was always amongst the working class he's was seen as a major way out of, you know, of trouble really. And so my family were always very, very supportive of education all the way through grandparents parents. And yeah, it was a very proud moment when I got to go to university. It was really not something that I thought was possible. But as I say, with education being free in Scotland, that gave us the opportunity to do that. And so you studied microbiology, but I understand that at a certain point, you became interested in genetic engineering. So how did that come about? Oh, good question. I mean, I think that it was amazing, right? And it is hard to go back to those times and remember how incredible it was that we could change genes in bacteria and yeast and make them do things that in the entire 1.5 billion years of life on earth, we haven't been able to do, which is to, you know, make yeast produce human proteins for vaccines. And I was blown away by that. I just thought this is unbelievable that we can do this, that we can create organisms that are doing things that are really useful for people. So yeah, so my microbiology was obviously fantastic. And it was that the whole reason behind doing that was to try and get a job, you know, like you're working at hospital or you could work in a brewery or something like this. But then genetic engineering came along and just blew my mind away. And you know, I have to acknowledge like television's part of that and you know, outreach and STEM education because it was it was a television documentary that described genetic engineering for the first time to me when I was an early undergraduate and I thought, this is amazing. Once you had your degree in applied microbiology, you headed off to the University of Glasgow for your doctorate. What was the, you know, the primary factor that led you there? Well, first of all, it was very close. You know, a weird thing about Scotty students is they tend to stay close to home for their education. So I crossed the other side of the city and joined up biotechnology unit. And this was quite novel at the time. These were faculty who were devoted to the idea that we should be studying in manipulation of organisms, genetic engineering, you know, and creating a new industry, which was I think super exciting at the time. So Glasgow was a leader in that effort to create a new industry. And I mainly studied how genes were turned off and on because that was one of the key processes that we needed to understand to then, you know, at the time I thought I was going to make drugs and vaccines. That was really my goal. After you finished up in Glasgow and received your doctorate, you then moved to Switzerland. What drove that decision? Why Switzerland? Yeah, I mean, I, you know, most, at that time, most people graduating would come to the United States to do a postdoc and at the time that seemed very far away from home, to be honest. And there was a great group in Switzerland who were again thinking about how to make drugs through genetic engineering. And I joined C.B. Gaigey, a major pharmaceutical company that had postdoc to roll fellowships available. And it just seemed like the right fit for me. Like, this is what I wanted to do. I wanted to make vaccines and C.B. Gaigey were a major force in trying to make that happen at the time. And I moved to Basel, which is a beautiful turn. And I had a really great social experience there, but unfortunately, the science didn't work out for me. And so after Switzerland, you took the adventure of crossing the pond and you found yourself in Boulder, Colorado. Tell me about your time in Boulder. Oh, well, I mean, this was inspired by simply reading a scientific paper, sitting on the floor, 11 o'clock at night in Switzerland, and long winter's day, and seeing a paper from Tom Johnson in University of Colorado. I didn't even know where Colorado was. I had no idea. But this paper described the fact that Tom had discovered a mutation in a gene that extended the lifespan of a tiny animal, C.B. Gaigeyey is a tiny little worm. I mean, I, again, it was one of those moments where we're going, how's this possible that, you know, there's a gene that determines lifespan in an animal. And if it's true for C.L. against, is it possibly true for us? And so I basically called up Tom or sent him a fax, you know, there was barely email at that time, and said, you know, I'm really interested in working on this gene. Again, luck plays an amazing role in, you know, people's careers. And I was very, very lucky that Tom was able to take me on as a researcher in his lab. And, and Colorado was very mysterious and beautiful. And I spent glorious four years there, homesick for Europe, for sure. But during that time, the field of the biology of aging really exploded. And it went from, I think, many, many people not believing that Tom's discovery, to the time I ended up leaving Boulder, it was the desire of many young people to come into this field. I mean, it became accepted partly because other provenant scientists also found genes that were involved in lifespan. So really are remarkable four or five years where the, the field was really born. Absolutely. So Gordon, while working in Tom Johnson's lab during your postdoc, you made what Tom referred to as an amazing discovery. And you found that heat-shocking worms just one time increased their lifespan by 15%. So can you talk a little bit about this discovery as well as your paper that ran in PNAS? Sure. I mean, first of all, we were inspired by work by Pam Larsen and Jack van Flettern, who independently showed that the long-lived worms were resistant to oxidative stress. And that was amazing because we didn't know anything about these long-lived worms until that point. And I knew that oxidative stress was related to thermatolerance, or resistance to heat shock. And so we began these experiments to look at heat shock. And it turned out that that was a really nice way to find out what these worms were doing early in life. So on the very first day of adulthood, before they even went undergone the aging process, the worms were resistant to heat. And we also conducted these experiments for, as you say, we submitted the worms to a very limited mild heat shock and then looked at the lifespan of the worms after that. So you stressed them a little bit and then you go back a bit. And the bird long-lived. And I went to Tom with this result, very happy, saying, look at what I've discovered. And Tom went, yeah, and he literally opened his filing cabinet and pulled out about 20 papers, actual papers on paper. Of publications about hormesis, this idea that a small amount of stress can actually be beneficial. And this actually goes back to studies on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, where obviously there was a concentration of cancer events close to the impact of the explosions. But there was a ring around the impacts where it seemed like the cancer rates were lower. In other words, a mild exposure to the radiation of those events was actually protective. And also actually the famous evolutionary biologist, John Maynard Smith, kind of showed the same thing in flies in the 1950s, where he did a little bit of heat. He was trying to knock down the reproduction at the time and saw an increase in lifespan. So it was actually just a rediscovery of some of these classic descriptions of hormesis. So then the PNAS paper wrapped it all up and said, hey, look, you know, these long-lived worms are resistant to heat. Also, if you give a small stress, they become longer lived. And that opened up the idea that the biology around heat stress, which was very well actually developed around molecular chaperones and other responses to heat. That opened it up to aging research. And so that was very nice. There's a lot of perhaps related interest in sauna, you know, the heat shock proteins. Yeah, lots and lots of people are looking into that. That's right. And there are published studies that suggest that people who, particularly of sauna, have improved health relative to others. Obviously, studies in humans like that are very difficult to understand the causality. But you know, going back to things like the worms that we have worked on, we can engineer thermatolarins into those worms. So we can overexpress genes, including molecular chaperones, which are involved in protein folding and ensuring proteastasis. And when we do that, the worms are longer lived. So we can directly address causality in these models. But it's fun to think that some of this may translate into humans. And actually, there's a large literature on how mild stress can be protective, particularly ahead of surgeries, for example. And so this idea of hormisis is alive and well in humans. So Gordon, a number of years later, you followed up on the study and demonstrated that giving the worms repeated mild or medicaid treatments increased your lifespan even more. And since this follow-up study, do you have a better understanding of hormisis mechanisms at the cellular or even molecular level? And also maybe how that might relate to the prevention and treatment of different diseases? The administration of like a stress to then derive benefit, I think is quite difficult. There's quite difficult to study and it's quite difficult to think about how you would apply that. In some ways, we stepped away from simply stressing animals to look for benefits and try to look for chemical compounds or natural products that would mimic the effects of hormisis. I think that's much more powerful going going forward because I know we think about sonas and the potential benefits of sonas and so on. But all of that is very difficult to really study in a sort of causal way. I think in finding agents that act in a similar way to her mesis, I think that's the way forward. So Gordon, as you know, we recently interviewed your wife, Julie Anderson, for STEM talk. And when we asked her how you two met and ended up at the book institute, she said, and I'm just going to say that this is a quote, I was having a transatlantic relationship with Gordon and we met because we're nerds. Would you like to respond to that? Yeah, pretty much that's the case. We met a scientific conference and Julie's got a tremendous sense of humor. I remember being in the back of a taxi with her and she was characterizing a very famous Nobel Prize winning scientist and was able to very succinctly describe their science. And I'm not going to repeat it. But it was just so funny. And I just thought, wow, as far as not just a super scientist, but incredibly funny. And yeah, that's how we got together. And so the book was really important for us. We could have ended up anywhere in the world. But this institute opened, focused on aging. I mean, this was the only place in the world that was doing this. And Julie was approached to join the book and she basically said, well, I'm interested as long as you also take on this Scottish guy who works on worms. And so I joined the book on Julie's coattails. And this is a really incredible story because Julie worked on neurological disease and I worked on lifespan and worms. I had no interest at all in disease, in human disease. I had no interest whatsoever. Whereas Julie was laser focused on trying to find ways of preventing this particular neurological disease. And this is the story of the book. The story of the book is that people came together from different disciplines and found that essentially they were working on the same thing. And that is the aging is the cause of chronic disease. So our work really merged together. But also the work of other people around the institute merged together. People interested in lifespan and simple animals together with people interested in cancer, stroke, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's. And that eventually after about five or six years of the book being in existence, we started using this word, Geroscience. And Geroscience was the realization that the important stuff was actually in between these different disciplines. The biology of aging was speaking to the diseases of late life and the science in between those was the important stuff. Well, that's a fantastic story. I know we're all super appreciative of all the wonderful, the work that you all are doing at book. So there's a saying that all good science begins with the question. And in terms of your work, what are the questions that are driving your research? Well, I mean, I think even going back to, you know, when I got interested in this field to begin with, the questions are really, you know, yeah, falling curiosity because right now we have animals on this planet that live for days, worms, flies, yeast. And then we have animals that live for years, like, you know, some rodents, mice. And then we have animals that live for decades, like bats and naked mole rats, really weird creatures that are rodents as well, but they live decades ahead of mice. And then we have ourselves falling into the sort of decades of 80s and 90s life expectancy. But then we have super long lived animals. We have sharks that live for hundreds of years. We have Atlantic clams that live for over 500 years. You know, if you think about it, that's that's incredible. Like that clams are quite a complex animal. They have a circulatory system. They have a beating heart. And so there's animals right now that have hearts have been beating for over 500 years. And we have, I would say absolutely no understanding of why that is. But if you're interested in cardiovascular disease, you would want to be interested in why it is that our hearts give out whereas clams can go on for 500 years. That's incredible. So that's just curiosity. That's just really, really interesting biology. I guess that's the main driver, but secondary, and this is something I became much more aware of from working with Julie and other scientists at the Buck Institute, is this connection between normal aging and disease. And I think we're making progress, but I would suggest that we still really don't understand why aging causes disease. And I say cause very deliberately because I think this is not something that's generally realized in the biomedical community. But it's something I think we truly believe that aging processes, normal aging processes, cause Alzheimer's cancer, cardiovascular disease, syracopenia, osteoporosis, the whole vomit of things that face in life. So those two questions, that's what gets you up in the morning, right? I mean, just like wanting to understand some of that. Yeah, that's fantastic. And so in your work, you screen natural compounds like vitamins and minerals and other compounds to determine if they have the potential to affect lifespan. And you do this studying sea elegance, which is a tiny nematode worm. So for our listeners, can you please explain why you and also other geneticists are so particularly fond of sea elegance? Oh, sure. The sea elegance, it is amazing actually. If you think about that there are thousands of scientists all over the world get up every morning, go into lab, eight o'clock and pull out these agar plates where they have these tiny little one-millimeter worms growing, growing there and living there. And they're studying really basic biological processes, you know, neuronal development was one of the reasons that the worm became prominent in the first place, but all sorts of biology. And I guess it goes back to the principle that you want to find the simplest animal that displays the thing that you're interested in. So if you're interested in how neurons work and how the network together can't use bacteria, they don't have neurons, you can't use yeast, but you get to the worm, you go, okay, we have a really simple system here with 302 neurons that we can visualize and study. And it's the same with aging, like, you know, this is an animal that clearly ages, you know, anyone can look down a microscope and see tell the difference between a young worm and an old worm. It lives about 20 days. And that allows you to do many, many experiments over the course of months or years. So it became, you know, the darling of the aging world based on Tom Johnson's work when you discovered his first mutation that extended the lifespan by 70, 70%, which was incredibly dramatic. And I think it changed people's, really, their appreciation for what lifespan really means to look down a microscope and see an animal, you know, crawling around and then, you know, switch to another egg-ar play and then there's the control animals, the normal animals and they're all bad already. It's profound. I think every single scientist that has seen that either as a genetic mutation or as you say, compound, the natural product or whatever, when you see something living longer and healthier than expected, it has an effect on you. Stem Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research lab pioneering groundbreaking technologies aimed at leveraging and extending human cognition, perception, locomotion and resilience. Stem Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a lot of your recent research with sea elegans that we were just talking about, remarkable little critters have looked at the role that protein homeostasis plays in aging and one can imagine it's a major role. Can you give listeners an overview of the role that proteins play in determining life and health span? Yeah, I mean, as you know, you take protein in your diet, you break down those proteins into the essential amino acids and then you build your human proteins based on the instructions from your DNA and so you then have a string of amino acids which is great but what has to happen before this function is that that string has to fold up into a three-dimensional shape. And so the three-dimensional shape is the thing that gives either enzymes or catalytic abilities or structural proteins so that the shape of proteins is vitally important. And what we and others have seen is that during normal aging, this shape and function of proteins is degraded and so you see proteins becoming insoluble, dropping out of solution during normal aging. And there's something about that that connects to disease so we know, for example, with A beta and Alzheimer's disease or Huntington protein and Huntington's disease, Alpha Sunucleon Parkinson's. These are proteins that are behaving aberrantly. They are certainly falling out of solution. They're forming protein aggregates which is a non-soluble form. And it's not even that we understand whether the aggregates are bad or not but there's something about this process of proteins going down the pathway, the unfolded protein pathways to become aggregates that's toxic. So for example, in Alzheimer's disease, we understand that A beta soluble oligomers are perhaps some of the most toxic species. Okay, so that's neurological disease, but it seems like, as I said, during normal aging, many, many proteins are behaving like this as well, that hundreds of thousands of proteins. And what we believe is that that process of going from a normal three-dimensional shape to an insoluble protein aggregate is detrimental and we believe is driving normal aging. So proteins that behave like this that become insoluble during normal aging, many, many of them we know are involved in lifespan determination in simple animals. And now of course we're looking at this in mice and in humans and asking the question, do our observations of this failure in proteastasis in simple animals? Is it mirrored in humans? And is it partly one of the reasons that neurological disease starts to take hold in late life? I mean, there has to be a reason why kids don't get Alzheimer's. You know, late life adult get Alzheimer's. There has to be a reason for that. And it's probably many fold, it's probably inflammation, there's probably lots of reasons, but we believe that one of the major reasons is a failure in protein homeostasis in our cells ability to remove misfolded protein, to manage the way that proteins, you know, first of all, take up their three-dimensional shape and then remove damaged proteins if that happens. You had a paper in the journal aging cell on just this topic maybe about 10 years ago. Yeah, I mean, I think this has become a theme of the lab and many other fantastic labs out there are studying this process now. And it actually goes all the way back to the idea of the stress, the fact that the long lived worms are resistant to heat stress. Right, then we realized that probably molecular chaperones were involved because it was known that molecular chaperones were key in maintaining protein shape in the face of stress. Molecular chaperones also known as heat shot proteins, ceregros, you know, the upregulation of these proteins responds to heat. So it goes all the way back to the 90s when we were looking at the thermal stress and realizing that molecular chaperones and therefore protein homeostasis could be really important. So as you pointed out, we know that proteins sustain lots of damage in the normal course of metabolism. So could you talk a little bit about how you and other researchers are trying to better understand the mechanisms of normal aging that are likely to accelerate age-related pathologies and also disease? Yeah, I mean, I think it's well accepted that changes in individual proteins from normal function to abnormal function are a major driver in neurological disease, for example. And that's not to say we really understand this and there have been many, many failures to prevent Alzheimer's disease by targeting some of those proteins. But I think there's no question that there are individual proteins that cause, you know, terrible disease in some way contribute to that, like ABeta and Tau in Alzheimer's disease, for example. And I think what we're trying to understand is, well, what's the role of aging? Because these proteins are around in young people. There has to be an aging factor to this. And it's well documented that various processes involved in regulating protein shape and removing damaged proteins are altered with age. And, you know, the proteasome, autophagy, these are fairly well understood processes that in normal circumstances can deal with damaged protein. In fact, the essential for life, they're doing all the time. But with aging, there's a degradation in their ability to do that. I still think that's a bit of a mystery as to why that happens. And so, yeah, so we're looking for genes, mutations, or looking for chemical compounds that somehow augment the normal defense processes, maybe boosting autophagy, for example, maybe maybe a good thing under many circumstances. I think the general conclusion is that we find that things that can do that extend normal lifespan in the absence of disease. But also, if you're looking at a disease model, they suppress disease pathology. And this is really the sort of outcoming of the whole neuroscience concept that if you target aging processes, then you're going to see benefits in not just neurological disease, but multiple disease states. So, I'm going to change direction just a little bit here. A lot of your work has been digging into various compounds ranging from vitamin D to iron. And we'll talk about your research and to vitamin D a little bit later. But what led you to start looking at how excess dietary iron effects protein, hemostasis, and worms is kind of curious on that one? Yeah, I mean, I think this is this is one of the great joys of doing academic research that someone walks into your office one day and suggests something. And you think, okay, we'll give that shot. And this was a graduate student, Catherine Page, who came in and was very interested in metal toxicology. I wanted to come into the lab and do some things on that. And so really actually, Catherine worked on aluminum. But, you know, the next student coming into the lab was then interested in something else, which was iron. And this was partly inspired by Julie Anderson's work, also an investigator at the back. And Julie had done these seminal studies. She actually showing the role of iron and Parkinson's disease. And she was showing that even neonatal feeding of iron would result in the loss of the dopinergic neurons, which obviously is a major cause of Parkinson's. So, looking at those papers, we wondered again, thinking about the connections between disease and normal aging. We thought, well, if iron drives Parkinson's, is it also a driver of normal aging? And so, Eda Clang started these studies where she was feeding worms a diet of high iron. We had a fantastic collaborator, David Cavalier, who was able to measure the levels of iron in worms. And in terms of iron accumulates during normal aging, just like it does in humans. And so, when Eda fed the worms additional iron, she showed it its shortened lifespan. And then she looked to produce this. She looked at the accumulation of insoluble proteins. And it greatly accelerated that pathology of aging. So, you take a young worm, you feed it ironed for 24-40 hours. And it's molecular pathology for protein aggregation is accelerated way up to late life. So, you basically convert a young worm into an old worm over 48 hours by feeding iron. I was kind of scary. Having grown up in a turn that made steel, and I was exposed to probably high levels of iron, and every time I went outside and played sports, at the same time we were feeding our young child a formula that was high in iron. And so, it was like, wow, this is incredible how this accelerates aging. And so, then Eda will also was able to show that if you fed a calator that calates multiple metals, including iron, this was EDTA, that she could extend lifespan. So, you could actually slow normal aging by calating the iron and preventing the age-related build-up. So, do you think that iron that you're experimenting with in worms may have some physiological relevance for humans? I do, and that's partly due to Julie's work and others work showing that iron contributes to neurological disease, for sure. Also, generally metals are involved in the loss of protein-homingo steysis. They contribute to protein aggregation. You can do this in a test you're with it, you know, A beta, you add copper, and the A beta all falls out of solution, and that may make a process that's going on in Alzheimer's brain. So, Gordon, you've talked a bit about iron, and we know other metals are also an issue. Could you talk a little bit about other metals? Yeah, I mean, I think this is a really interesting area of biology that is maybe underappreciated, certainly within the sort of attempts to find interventions for disease. And it's completely understandable, because metals are essential for life, you know, I think in one third of all enzymes require metals for the function. And so, manipulating metal levels, I think, as a bad rap, if you like. But I think it's important, and I think that we should think about ways in which we could manipulate metal levels, especially the accumulation. This is going on in the human brain, it's going on in other tissues during normal aging, where there's an accumulation. And that's probably aberrant. It's probably not good. And there are many examples of biochemical reactions, including oxidative stress, where metals are involved, and are probably damaging macromolecules, including proteins. And so, it is an incredibly difficult area, but I think we should pay attention to it, because if we could control the accumulation of metals in our tissues with age, I think we might prevent some of the macromolecular damage and maybe even prevent some of the diseases of late life. Okay, so let's talk a little bit about your research into vitamin D now. In your interview with Rhonda Patrick, who is actually a guest of ours on episode number three of STEM talk, you told a story about how someone came to the office and suggested studying vitamin D, and you said, and this is a quote, no way there's nothing new to learn about vitamin D. So we're curious what happened. I, it's true. You know, and the person that came to my office was Karla Mark, an extremely talented postdoc, and who had done a screen looking at the effect of natural products on abeta toxicity. So this is the human abeta associated with Alzheimer's. She was looking at the toxicity of that protein in worms and c elegans based on seminal work from Chris Link and Colorado. And you know, she was going, wow, vitamin D, huh? You know, you can buy this stuff at the store. And I did think, no, we can't study vitamin D. I mean, vitamin D's been around for so long. There's been so many studies on it. But the one thing that that that Karla pointed out to me, maybe not that day, but over the course of days or weeks, was that deficiency in vitamin D in humans. So if you're a kid and you're deficient in vitamin D, the result can be rickets. And that's completely understood because vitamin D regulates calcium metabolism. But what was not understood was that if you're an adult and you're deficient in vitamin D, as many, many older people are, as many people in countries such as my own in Scotland are, then you're actually susceptible to multiple diseases. So there's an enhanced risk of things like diabetes, a range of different cancers, neurological disease, Alzheimer's, Parkinson's. And what basically Karla was saying is, isn't this connected to aging here? You know, and so we did this simple experiment of growing worms on vitamin D and measuring lifespan, and sure enough, normal worms showed an increased lifespan with vitamin D. And so now we have these results where it protected against Alzheimer's pathology and it extended normal lifespan. And we started to show these data to some clinicians, including Cliff Rosen, who's a member of the Institute of Medicine, and basically said, what do you think? Is there any relevance to humans here? And Cliff was very generous in kind and basically said, this is important because we don't understand what vitamin D deficiency is in humans, in adults. All we know is that there's this elevated risk for multiple disease states. So the logic followed that, well, maybe vitamin D deficiency is really like an accelerated aging phenotype. If you can extend lifespan in simple animals with vitamin D, that says that deficiency is accelerating aging. And then an accelerated aging phenotype fits in with the entire gyroscience concept that normal aging is connected to multiple diseases. And so it was great. And we used the power of the worm to then ask what pathways are important or what genes are important in vitamin D. And hopefully this inspires other people to maybe look at some of those pathways and some of those genes in relation to vitamin D and in relation to clinical outcomes is something that we're passionate about and we've moved some of these studies into mice. And actually I should say, as a cautionary note, that in no way do we suggest that people take large amounts of vitamin D is almost certainly harmful in large amounts. And even though this is something you can simply buy the local health food store, this is not something that I or I'm not a physician. So I don't really make recommendations, but I would say, be careful, talk to your doctor about this and maybe get your vitamin D measured. You probably can take 2000 units a day and it will be completely harmless and maybe beneficial, but this is not something that you know, you should be taking pills by the handful. So, Gordon, in your study which appeared in cell reports, you observe the vitamin D3 improves protein homeostasis and thereby slows aging. The obvious takeaway is that it would be important to maintain appropriate vitamin D serum levels and you just mentioned that listeners might want to get that tested. But the question is, the obvious question is whether you are able to determine what is in fact an appropriate level. You see physicians recommending a wide range of levels and I wondered if you had any thoughts on that or is that one you want to pass? Well, no, I'll certainly reflect the thoughts that I've heard from other people, you know, I'm a PhD and so I don't give advice on this directly, but this is a controversial area to be honest and you know, the recommendations for levels of vitamin D is set by a committee that is incredible scientists that actually have diverse opinions on this and that's partly because some scientists see incredible benefits either, you know, when you look at populations of people have appropriate vitamin D levels or in animal models, but also that we know that there are dangers in massive doses of vitamin D and mega doses. So one great piece of advice I got from a UCSF physician was that even if you're not tested taking a thousand units or two thousand units a day is almost certainly harmless. If you're deficient in vitamin D, it's almost certainly beneficial. And so, you know, just like almost everything I think when we think about interventions and aging, there's going to be a bell shaped curve and we want to find our way into the middle there. We absolutely know that deficiency is not good and deficiency can come from, you know, a lack of sun exposure, a lack of dietary vitamin D from mushrooms and salmon and other things and that many people who are economically deprived are in that basket. They don't have the opportunity for sun exposure or they don't have a diet that is sufficient in vitamin D. And so I think there's a very large sector of our society would probably benefit from a small intake of vitamin D through supplementation. It's often said that there's a big, very human variation in the response to vitamin D supplementation where some people you see it in the blood test immediately and for others it's less obvious and larger supplementation might be maybe necessary, but I like you and my PhD and not giving medical advice. It is interesting. It's really interesting. I mean, vitamin D itself is not the thing that we buy, the health food source, not active. It has to be converted into the active form in our tissues and our liver and kidney and obviously, you know, everyone has a different ability to transform the inactive form into the active form. And so it's not surprising that individuals have different responses to supplementation. And it's true that, you know, if there's a concern there, then talk to your physician, be tested for the active form or the precursor to the active form suggests that things are going well. I don't know. I just feel like it blows my mind away that we work on worms. We go to the lab every day and we're working these tiny worms. And here I am talking about human supplementation directly from experiments from these worms. It's bizarre, but I really believe that it's biology that's important and conserved. And so, yeah, so I'm delighted to do that. So Gordon, curious, have you or anybody else looked at whether vitamin D deficiency in older adults might explain why seniors and nursing home residents have an elevated risk when it comes to things like COVID-19? Yeah, and I haven't looked at this, but I've read some findings and, you know, with much of the literature on COVID-19, it's been released in a way that's not necessarily peer reviewed or repeated. So I think we should view these findings with caution, but some studies out of China have shown an elevated risk for the worst symptoms of COVID-19 in that sector of the population who are deficient in vitamin D. And at least one study describes something like an eightfold, eightfold elevation of risk of the worst symptoms. If that turns out to be true, that's massive. And whether this connects to the idea that deficiency in vitamin D is an accelerated aging, or there's something more specific about the action of vitamin D and all the genes and the proteins that they regulate and the virus, I don't know. What we do know is that many of the viral proteins interact with other proteins that we already know are involved in normal aging, you know, autophagy, torsignally. These are interactions that a large number of scientists including a major group at UCSF leading this study have shown that these proteins, the viral proteins are interacting with aging pathways. And I imagine that that's the connection, that that's why we're seeing this particular virus is devastating among the elderly population. This is almost certainly also to do with inflammation and the changes in the way that we respond to infection during age simply put our immune systems don't work as well in our older bodies, but also there's this inflammatory response that seems inappropriate in older bodies as well. We know that there's a background inflammation that rises during normal aging. Some people call this sterile inflammation, inflammation occurs without the challenge of a microbe, for example. So there's something there. There's something about what we're studying in the normal biology of aging is connecting to the prevalence of the worst symptoms of COVID-19 in the elderly. And be grateful to work it out. I mean, I'm also concerned of course as everyone is about how well vaccines are going to work in the elderly. And we know that the response to many flu vaccines is diminished in older people. And we have strategies to try and deal with that. And we need to be very careful that we think through the strategies for COVID-19 as well. This is where the vaccine is going. And we need to ensure that we have the appropriate data that older people are responding to the vaccine in the way that we hope. So I'd like to move on now to some work you did a few years ago with two other labs where you dug into the issue of experimental reproducibility. This has come up a few times on stem talk. And I wonder if you could give us some background on this issue and your research with respect to it. Sure. I mean, back in 2000 myself in Simon Mello of also a researcher at the Buck Institute published a paper in science which showed that a drug like molecule could extend lifespan in C. elegance. And this was widely reported around the world. I have boxes of newspaper. I think it's about this paper. And I think Simon and I thought, well, this is great. This is their career set. And we're going to have grants on this. And we're going to have papers on this. But within a few months, I got a phone call from a good friend, David James also a researcher in a agency in C. elegance. And David said, I think I don't understand what's going on. Your your compounds are not working in our hands. We cannot extend lifespan. And we went back and forward over the course of probably about a half a year or so. And we could never explain to David how we got the results we got. And we could never sort of make suggestions that worked in David's hands. And David published a paper saying that the compounds didn't work. And I was kind of shocking because we thought that this was an important discovery, extending lifespan of an animal with a drug and all that. But it was shocking. And David is a phenomenal scientist. And we deeply respected his his work. And so we were left throwing our hands up in the air wondering what was going on. So then fast forward, this occurred actually for a number of labs over the years where it seemed like important papers were not being not being reproduced in other labs. And I think this is not just an aging research issue. I think it's something that goes beyond that in biology. And so we were fortunate to be to be funded by the National Institute on Aging to really dig into this. And our efforts were combined with Patrick Phillips Lab in Oregon and Monica Driscoll's lab at Brookers. And the three labs sat down and said, right, how can we make sure that things are reproducible? And it first we thought, well, maybe we should standardize our protocols the way that we do things. So this is a simplest, simplest experiment in the world, right? You have tiny worms on a plate, you add a compound to the plate, and then you watch to see when they die. Couldn't be any simpler. High school students can do it, elementary school students can do it. But when we compared our protocols, we realized we were all doing it differently. And it actually took a year and a half for us to come up with a protocol that we all got the same results. We all got the same life spans for the same kind of worms. And I certainly don't want to bore your audience by going through all the the different things that we looked at. But we just had to we just had to pay attention to what we're doing a lot more than we ever had before. So following that, we were able to then find chemical compounds that did extend lifespan in all three labs. At the same time, we were also unable to reproduce some things that even came from our own labs. So it's been it's been fun in the sense that we we kind of feel that we understand why some experiments don't reproduce. And it's also been an eye-opener as to as to in this normal process of science, what you really have to document is way beyond what we normally do. Well, it's a critically important topic. You know, reproducibility is a cornerstone of experimental science. And in some fields, the default is that it's not reproducible, especially in parts of social science and some others. Yeah. You've touched down a little. But as a result of this project, you have some insights as to what are they say the three primary drivers of irreproducibility. And do you have some thoughts about how things could be done better? Well, I do, although I don't actually have data to back up my opinions very much. But I mean, I think first of all, understanding the natural variability between experiments is underestimated. We've definitely seen this with lifespan. Lifespan is highly variable between experiments. That's not because people are making mistakes. It's not because labs don't understand what they're doing. It's because it's variable. And at some point, we might understand some of the factors that are coming into play to cause that variability. And that's what we're striving for. We're constantly striving to find bits of the experiment that we're not controlling for. But meanwhile, we have to understand that it's variable. I don't think that data fabrication plays any major role whatsoever. I know it's out there. I know it's an important issue. But I think it's a very small issue. And that's not what's going on. The vast majority of studies that don't reproduce are not because people are making up data. It's because of variability. I do think that the one thing that we can do right now, I guess I've said this already, is just to simply document in much greater detail what we're doing. And I think that the scientific journals have made great efforts to do this. I mean, we've seen things like method sections, not having a limitation on page number. That's great. We've seen protocols put in place to ensure that reagents are reported in much, much greater detail than they ever were before. That's great. So I think we're on the right path to making sure this is not an issue. The one thing I would say is though that I don't think that scientists should look at each other and say, you don't know what you're doing. And I think we need to be much more open to the possibility that we all are doing the right thing. Whatever the result is, we're all doing the right thing. We're all attempting to do the experiment the best way we can. And there may be details that we're missing right now, but we should respect each other's results. And a negative result, so-called negative result, is just as important and just as right as a positive result in a flashy journal. Sure. And that's why it's spread problem in science. It's much easier to publish a positive result, even one that's less important than a strong negative result. Indeed. In fact, this week, with our labs, Julie and I have been debating publishing a paper that shows actually divergent results from two different groups of animals. We're just thinking, how is this going to be received? Basically, we want to say we've got this result that is possibly of great interest. And then we repeated it and we didn't get that result again. So how shouldn't that be published? We shouldn't be able to say that here's something that's possible, but the same investigators in the same laboratories, in the same institute, doing the same experiment, could get a somewhat different result and shouldn't we be thinking about what are the factors that play there? Stimptime. Stimptime. Stimptime. Stimptime. Stimptime. It's pretty cool that this tiny nematode worm is helping us unlock the secrets to the process of aging in lifespan extension. So I have to say talking to Julie and now Gordon has truly been fascinating. And the labs as well as the work of their colleagues at the Buck Institute is definitely advancing the frontiers of aging research. And I have to say, Ken, that the double secret selection committee made a very wise choice in lining up this couple for back-to-back interviews. I think we had a great time talking to both of them. Well, not surprisingly, I agree with you, Don. If you've not listened to our interview with Julie Anderson, that would be episodes 117 and 118. I strongly recommend it. I definitely do as well. And in terms of our conversation with Gordon today, it is always fascinating to reflect on how much we've been able to learn from studying the C elegans. After listening to part one of our conversation with Gordon, listeners will not want to miss part two of our interview with Gordon, where he talks in depth about his research that has demonstrated how calcium alpha-ketoglutarate has positive effects on both lifespan and health span in both C elegans and mice. If you enjoyed this interview as much as Ken and I did, we invite you to visit the Stimptuck webpage where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes at Stimptuck.us. This is Don Canegas signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stimptuck. Thank you for listening to Stimptuck. We want this podcast to be discovered by others, so please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, Stimptuck.us. There, you can also find more information about the guests we interview.
