Welcome to STEM Talk. STEM Talk. STEM Talk. Welcome to STEM Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host Don Conegas and joining me to introduce today's podcast as a man behind the curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Solution Committee that selects all the guests who appear on STEM Talk. Hi Don, great to be here today. So our guest today is Dr. Tim Broderick, who is a surgeon and biomedical research and development innovator who has been a pioneer in laparoscopic, robotic, and tele-robotic surgery. He's had an absolutely fascinating career as a surgeon, a DARPA program manager, and now as a chief science officer here at IHMC. And Tim has developed a large portfolio of cutting edge department of defense research projects throughout his career that we will talk about today. And we're especially looking forward to Tim's overview of the peerless operator, Biologic Optitude Project, which he and his colleagues here at IHMC are currently working on. So prior to joining IHMC, Tim was an academic surgeon and a DARPA program manager, as mentioned before. And during his four years as a DARPA program manager, he conceived and established five high-impact biotechnology projects that included revolutionary programs focused on precision diagnosis and treatment of military relevant diseases and injuries. And he's also led multiple ground flight and other sea-based biomedical research projects. As a result, he's an honorary NASA flight surgeon and a NOAA under sea saturation diver. Before Ken and I get to our interview with Tim today, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the widiest and most lavishly praised field reviews to read on Stem Talk. As always, if you hear you review Read on Stem Talk, just contact us at StemTalk at IHMC.us to claim your official Stem Talk t-shirt. Today, our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker KC.MON. The review is titled Stunning. The review reads, For the learner fascinated by so much in life and finds difficulty in the pursuit of one discipline, this podcast is a wonderful antidote. Global content and conversations, high quality production, and no hidden agenda, just science, and some humor, but mostly science, I love it. Well, you know what, Ken? We've been getting some great reviews lately, so thank you so much KC.MON for this review, and thank you to all of our other Stem Talk listeners who helped Stem Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now on to today's interview with Dr. Tim Baroterec. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Hi, welcome to Stem Talk. This is your host, Don Crenegas, and joining us today is Tim Baroterec. Tim, welcome to the podcast. Thank you, Don. And also joining us is Ken Ford. Hello, Don, and hello, Tim. Hello, Ken. So Tim, let's get started. You grew up in Cincinnati, and when you were a kid, it was the heyday of the big red machine. The Cincinnati Reds of the 1970s is considered one of the best baseball teams ever, and I understand that you often went to games with your family, is that right? I did very fond childhood memories. Big family outings. The Cincinnati Reds back in the day gave free tickets to straight A students in the Cincinnati area. We had a lot of kids in the family and a lot of smart kids, so we got a lot of straight A tickets and went to the big red machine, see the big red machine, although we were in what we're called the nosebleed seats where the players looked like little ants on the field. But it was just amazing time. Every Reds player seemed was on the National League All-Star team, and the thing that I really loved is you could go to a game and they could be losing two out bottom of the ninth, and you still expected them to win, and often they did. Yes, I recall the 1975 World Series between the Reds and the Red Sox. By all accounts, not just my memory, but baseball lore has it down as one of the greatest World Series ever. Sadly, my team at the time, the Red Sox lost. So can I have to say that something new I didn't know about you, are the Red Sox still your favorite team? These days I don't really have a favorite team. I have a hard time supporting any of the professional sports franchises. So I really don't have any interest in the teams anymore. There are lots of reasons for that, most of which I won't go into. But one of them is that in those days you could really get to know a team. They were your team. The players didn't change every year so much, and they were sort of part of the community. And of course that's long gone. So in addition to the big red machine, I suspect you also had really critical childhood memories of Apollo and the moon landings as certainly I did as well. Did that play a role in your interest in space and science more generally? Yes, it sure did. Like many of my generation Apollo was inspirational. It pushed me to explore, inspired me to explore about the world and science. Gosh, as a young child, I guess at the time I was about five. So vivid memories of laying on the floor in her house just transfixed as the black and white TV image chin in my hands as I watched Neil and Buzz land on the moon. It was just awe inspiring. And interestingly, later in my life, I actually have had the opportunity to engage with both Neil and Buzz, Neil lived in Cincinnati. And the latter part of his life, and he came down to our surgical innovation center and sat at the console of our surgical robot. Actually was simulating operating on a patient. I think he liked it. And I also am in a society with Buzz. It's focused on seeing space exploration. He is a pretty good diver. So Tim, I understand that watching your dad say someone's life in church had a very profound effect on you. Can you talk about that a little bit? Yeah, it was when I was about nine years old, we were coming out of church. Our family was almost to the car and a man suffered a heart attack and a parking lot and went into cardiac arrest. And my dad raced over and performed CPR on him until the paramedics arrived. And it was amazing to see that. There were some gross details. The man vomited and my dad continued to do CPR, but he overcame all the challenges and saved his life. His family was needed to say extremely appreciative and came over and thanked my father profusely. That sort of typified my dad. It was kindness and sacrifice to help others describe his life. And that event in my father's life inspired me to become a doctor. It sounds like those characteristics carried throughout your entire family. And we'll talk about that a little bit later in the podcast too. But I also understand that you had another experience that helped shape you that has to do with having someone having their arm nearly chopped off by a machete. Is that right? Yeah, unfortunately, I have far too many trauma stories. And as just as an aside, I'll say that real life is crazier and more compelling than anything that you would ever see on the screen, big or small. So yeah, I was trying to figure out my path in life. Specifically during college, I worked at night shifts as an orderly in a local ER. One night, a car sped into the parking lot, the doors and the back hatch flew open. And there was a young man in the back who was bleeding to dust. And his arm was nearly chopped off by what I later learned was a machete. It was a adrenaline-fueled, superhuman strength. I reached down with my right hand and grabbed his axilla and the major blood vessels there to stop the bleeding. And then I reached down with my other hand, grabbed his belt and then almost pressed him over my head. As I raised him into the trauma bay and the guys are a big guy too. In a one single motion, maybe Ken could do this. In my heyday, when I was in better shape, I was a little stronger, but I definitely shouldn't have been able to lift him up the way I did. But I helped save his life. It was also the first time I got to go to the OR. I guess serendipitous that my hand was stuck to his skin. The blood had dried my hand and skined to his skin. And I couldn't take my hand off before we were in the operating room. Otherwise, he would have blood to death. So it was definitely a time when I realized what you could do as a surgeon. And I learned that surgeons could help save lives. But I also learned some other life lessons with that experience that, you know, one, as I briefly alluded to, humans are indeed capable of superhuman acts, which has been hammered home throughout my career, trauma surgery. It takes a lifetime to create something, but it takes a second to destroy it. And I guess the final was talking to the doctors and the nurses and the surgeon around that time, learn what others can teach you, but sometimes you need to ignore their advice. It was funny. Going back through the, you know, trauma bay and then into the operating room, I finished that experience and a number of the doctors and nurses. And I must have thought that I did a pretty good job as an orderly. And they were like, oh, you ought to go into medicine, you ought to go into surgery. And then they said, oh, you really ought to drop out of computer science because computers are really never going to amount to anything. So, you know, sometimes you just need to do what you know is right. Yeah, it's a great story. Love it. Yeah, many lessons learned. I read in the newspaper of maybe 10 or 15 years back about a quarrel between two brothers over a rack of ribs. And one decided he didn't have enough ribs. And the other brother was holding out on him and eating all the ribs. So he whacked the brother in his arm with an axe. And the outcome was predictable. Yeah, there's amazing trauma stories I have that Darwinian is maybe a good way to phrase some of them, but yeah, from shooting and stabbing to, you know, throwing gasoline and lighting people on fire while they're driving in the same car, you know, it's just just some, you know, crazy stories. And this guy could have used the Tim Broderick to drag him into the into the surgical space. Yeah. So Tim, I've known you for a while now, and I have to be honest, I find it hard to believe as a teenager, you used to pretend to be Scooby-Doo. Is that true? And can you talk about that a little bit? Yeah, I pretend is maybe the wrong word. I was a performer. And that performer is maybe a better word. So in high school, I was a character. That's what they called us at well-known amusement park and national events such as MLB games, parades. It was an amazing job for many reasons. And in fact, my wife still teases me that I consider that the best job I've ever had. Scooby-Doo is not as popular now as he used to be, but goodness, he was a beloved cartoon character at the time. You know, we had 50,000 visitors a day in the park that I worked at. And the kids would race across this main mall to see Scooby-Doo run up and then drop their pants to show me their Scooby-Doo underroos. You're scaring me that for me to do. So yeah, their Scooby-Doo underroos are just, you know, big, huge smile, big, a big hug. But the things that they did and that job still brings a smile to my face. Did Scooby-Doo ever say anything? You're not supposed to. So yeah, it was all, it was very creative performing, but, you know, a better than one of those bad, you know, mimes that you see. No, it was a Scooby-Mime. With a giant hand. It was extraordinarily hot, I will have to say, you know, so similar to Florida, you know, Cincinnati and, you know, other surrounding area. It gets quite hot and humid in the summertime. Those were very expensive, professionally made costumes. And it was, you know, 100 plus degrees outside and you're wearing, you know, three or four, you know, essential fur coats. So it was, it actually took quite a bit of stamina to thrive in that job as well. That's really cool, Tim. I'd less than learned about you. That's awesome. So I will definitely look at you in a different light now. Just to read some Scooby-Doo literature. Yeah. Okay, so we've talked a little bit about this already and, you know, growing up the fact that you've had all these influences and wanting to become a doctor. So kind of for the first question is, how early on did you know that you wanted to become a doctor? You know, big picture, we know that you have this huge family that's filled with doctors. And the next question for you is, is it true that your family was sometimes referred to as the Kennedies of Medicine? Yeah. Yeah. I forget which reporter said that, you know, my parents, I already mentioned my dad, my mom was also was a fabulous role model. She was a nurse. We had a lot, a lot of family members who were doctors, six of seven kids went to medical school. I think we have 20 something physicians in the extended family, just a huge number. And that's a testament to my family in particular, my parents. Incidentally, if you get on the internet and search to check that fact out, you will see a lot of doctors and nurses in our extended family. But I will preemptively correct something. You may run across this fact. I am not related to Matthew Broderick. Or at least the Matthew Broderick that you're thinking of. Yeah. I think Tim, when you first came on board, everybody's like, you know that he's related to Matthew Broderick. Matthew Broderick is my godson. Actually, he is a doctor, a hospitalist, and unfortunately, you know, talk about sacrifice. You know, we talk about sacrifice, risk and sacrifice of serving in the military. He takes care of COVID patients. And he, you know, I will say that he got exposed. He's recovering from COVID right now. After graduating from high school, you decided to attend Xavier University. Xavier is in Cincinnati where you're at the time. That must have played a role in your decision to attend Xavier. What were the other factors in that decision? Yeah. So, you know, Xavier is an excellent school. And it helped educate a large number of my family members. All of my brothers and sisters went there. And then went on to, you know, as I mentioned, you see medical school, medical school at the same place, University of Cincinnati. In my case, you know, I have, I had a little bit of a wonder, the wanderlust when I was young. But it was primarily driven by cost. You know, my dad was a family practice doc. He did not make enough money to send seven kids to expensive universities right across the country. I had full ride, you know, merit scholarship offers, but it still was, you know, too expensive to go out of town. And so I went to Xavier. A double major is in a bunch of minors. Worked at an emergency room at night shift. It was overall, you know, a fabulous and formative experience. And the one other thing I will mention probably played a role. My mom was a, you know, devout Catholic and Xavier is a Jesuit university. So my mom was happy when her kids went to Xavier. So, Tim, I don't know many people who had off to college with the idea of doing a double major in chemistry and computer science. So how did that come about? Yeah. And so going back a little farther into my childhood, I liked doing things with regards to chemistry. I used to do experiments when I was in grade school and high school around the house, around the neighborhood. Yeah, maybe a positive example of that is a built a laser, chemical laser that helped me win a science fair, for example, in a latter parts of grade school. But, you know, I guess, harkening to my future time at DARPA where you're not, you're supposed to not be afraid to fail. Some of my other chemistry experiments catastrophically failed. And there are some really good stories I can tell, but those are probably better for a later time. But those, you know, experiments peaked my curiosity, especially some of the ones that failed. And, you know, I wanted to learn more. And from a computer science standpoint, I mean, that was, you know, exciting and new at the time. The first exposure I think I had to a computer, gosh, once again, grade school. There was someone who worked at a large, I think it was actually an aerospace company that was around in the, based in the Cincinnati area. And they had access to a mainframe, brought some very old desktop computer, did not have a screen. You know, but basically, they brought a bunch of the boys from the neighborhood over to take a look at the latest and greatest science, which was this computer. And I played some, you know, text-based computer game. And it was just, you know, awesome from my standpoint. So that sort of peaked my initial curiosity. And then as I moved through high school and college, I just fell in love with the creativity, the applied logic, and the problem solving that is programming. And college, the computer science classes were by far away, my favorite classes. Maybe once again, a sign of things to come. I, my senior project in college for computer science was an AI program that was focused on playing checkers and improving the competition that they provided. So that was a fun senior project. And we went all the way from, you know, designing and programming it down to building the compiler to assemble it. You know, it was, you know, nuts and bolts beginning to end just a fun project. And I'm going to say, Ken, don't ask me for the details because it's been way too long. Way too long. Well, you mentioned chemistry experiments. And those of a certain age will recall that most little kids or many, many little kids had chemistry sets, typically in their basement. It's kind of like kids having computers now or iPads or something. And there were many, oh, deferrous experiments. And do you recall that Tim? It wasn't unusual for kids to have these sort of pre-assembled chemistry sets that they could then expand in, you know, improve in various ways. Yeah, I remember some o-deferrous, some the foam, you know, the foam that is coming out. How do I phrase this? My catastrophic failures were a little more energetic. I can't imagine. I spared my parents any such energetic experiments. We had a, we had our high school chemistry teacher was had a reputation for wine to set things on, set anything on fire and things blowing up. So we had a couple of damaged backpacks in our class. So, but it definitely increased our interest in chemistry. That's for sure. So definitely appreciate that. Yeah, that's the way science should be. Yeah, it should be engaging and fun. Yeah, inspiring. That is, you know, one of the shortcomings I have seen, you know, raising three daughters, you know, we have fabulous schools they've been in, but science education is still tough. And anyway, I'll leave it at that. I will hardly agree with you on that on that front. I've had like been lucky to have teachers and professors who engaged. That's for sure. So Tim, you graduated from undergrad in four years and then 86 decided to stay in town from Ed School and you enrolled at the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine. So why Cincinnati? So yeah, you see it's an excellent school. And yeah, once again, I wanted to limit the debt that I incurred. It may not be apparent to many of the listeners, although it probably is, you know, undergraduate school is expensive, you know, it can be $100,000 a year now depending on where you go, which is just crazy. But you add to that graduate school debt and, you know, you can have hundreds of thousands of dollars of debt from medical school. So I wanted to keep my options open. I didn't know on the way what I wanted to do. Good example, you know, I started a surgical relief foundation and you know, took some people to Africa, the Caribbean and other places to teach people how to operate and to also care for patients. And you can't do things like that. If you have so much debt that you have to service that you are basically just locked into practice and just focused on practice. And the other thing about you see, it's a very good clinical reputation. So there is a difference in many of the medical schools, you know, some like some friends are went to Stanford 50% of their classmates from medical school to Stanford. Don't practice medicine, they're researchers. There is a percentage at UC that, you know, don't practice, but in general, there was a very strong clinical foundation in many of the physicians that were graduated from medical school there focused on clinical practice. And then I guess is the final reason why that was a good choice is I had a lot of family members that went there and I knew that was a good place. You mentioned that you weren't quite sure what you wanted to do, but throughout medical school, did you sort of have surgery in mind as the final goal or was that not unclear until toward the end? So I was working, you know, granted medical school is hard enough, but I, you know, I wasn't sure what I wanted to do. Ken is a, I guess, is the short answer. The longer answer is I was working in the emergency room like I mentioned still the first two years of medical school. That is in part because the first two years are more of like, you know, biochemistry or pathology or microbiology, things that are important, but honestly, I already did those in an undergrad. So I needed to figure out what kind of doctor I wanted to be and, you know, the machete experience that I talked about helped convince me that surgery was a strong option. I also started to realize more and more through so many experiments. Also, we were talking about I really like working with my hands. The other thing about surgery as opposed to internal medicine, an internal medicine you might prescribe a medicine that was developed 17 years ago, finally is adopted into practice and then you have to wait years and maybe you never hear how the patient you're treating responds to that medicine. The thing about surgery is you operate on somebody, you know how you did and you get feedback to continually improve your performance. That's the same and many of the other operational communities we deal with. It's like being a pilot for surgery. You open, you do what you need to do and you close and it's very similar to you take off, you do what you need to do in your land. Yeah, I have never come across a surgeon who told me later that, I don't think I did a very good job. Well, hopefully if you're not doing a very good job as a surgeon and granted there are some surgeons who are not great, I've run across them. I used to have a referral practice that took care of patients that had complications but hopefully you realize after a while, hey, maybe I'm not too good at this and I find something else to do. That's right. In fact, I know a person who did just that, he just repurposed what he would do in medicine. The reason I think I never had one say they did a poor job was because I picked so wisely. Yeah, that surgeons have very strong egos. See, I wasn't going to bring that up. As you would want, right? You want somebody who's pretty sure of themselves. Yeah, just like pilots. Yes, exactly. Actually, surgeons and cardiologists and incidentally preachers make the worst pilots. I also at one point was getting my pilots license and in flight instruction. They told me, listen, it's the worst combination of making enough money to buy a high performance aircraft and then not having enough time to remain proficient in it and then believing that you can do anything extremely well. They said that's why the bananzas were known as doctor killers. From the pre-stamp point, they said they were terrible because they just say, I'm going to put everything in God's hand. On the only other, the anecdotal say is that I also heard that having two flight instructors in the cockpit at the same time can be problematic because they're fighting over who has the controls sometimes. I can imagine. So Tim, for your residency, you landed in Richmond, Virginia as a surgical resident at the Medical College of Virginia, which is now known as the Virginia Commonwealth University Medical Center. So what led you there? So, initially I was interested in being a heart surgeon. I had a brother who's a cardiologist who warned me, hey, don't become a heart surgeon because we're going to do everything minimally and basively with stents and other technologies. But I was fairly sure I wanted to be a heart surgeon. So they had a good heart surgery program there. Once again, very strong clinical training. I did not want to be one of the surgeons referred to, for example, as ODAD as a nickname hands of death and destruction. The other criticism is that the surgeon cannot operate his way out of a wet paper bag. That is definitely, I did not want to be a bad surgeon from a clinical standpoint. So that was a strong reason why I picked MCB. They had a very busy clinically based practice from pediatrics all the way through trauma. That was the time was the second highest per capita murder rate in the United States, unfortunately. So we had a very busy trauma surgery experience there. It was long and hard back in those days, 120 plus hours a week. Finally, three months after I started, I had my first meal outside the hospital and within a short period of time there after I met my lovely wife, Cara, although we dated for a fairly long time during residency if you talk to her because I was working every other to every night. So it extended out the time we were able to spend with each other. During your residency became interested in minimally invasive surgery, can you talk about what led you to becoming the director of surgical research at VCU's minimally invasive surgery center? Yeah, so despite the fact that people were telling me that computers were never going to have an impact in medicine. My computer science education became increasingly important and relevant. The minimally invasive surgery for those that don't know is using video cameras and small diameter instruments that are sort of long instruments. You make very small incisions and you're able to operate on patients essentially using these long, you know, chopstick instruments to do things like take out the gallbladder. So that that revolution is powered by digital technologies. Video cameras, the surgical robots that I worked on and worked with allow the smaller incisions and translates into faster recovery and less pain for the patients. And it was a super exciting time sort of powered by the digital revolution. While still working at VCU, you became a consulting surgeon for telemedicine robotics with a NASA medical informatics technology applications consortium. I'm sure there's an acronym for that. What did this work in tail? What was your connection with that consortium? Yes. Yes, you are right. There is an acronym, MyTac, that I called it, at least some people called it. Based on my interest from the early childhood and space exploration, I wanted to help develop technologies that were exploration enabling. So specifically as a surgeon and computer scientist, I wanted to start by, you know, improving expeditionary medical care and focus on what are called, you know, surgery and space. At the time, you know, NASA was doing some work in telemedicine or providing medical care using telecommunications links. That was just still at its infancy. We pushed that field significantly forward. Now that's pretty routine, actually, because if you think many of the listeners may have had the experience with COVID of having to do a Zoom or some other VTC with their doctor. So it is now accepted. It was not accepted at the time, but we wanted to push it further than that, bang for the buck, the use of telecommunications and informatics to improve diagnosis. It's an easier thing to do, but we pushed towards the development of tele surgery systems. In that instance, what happens is you have a video image, but you have a robot, I'll use the, you know, air quotes for robot, where if you connect the control of the robot, the controller, the console to the end effectors on the other side with a telecommunication link, you can start operating over, you know, fairly profound distances, you know, maybe from the earth to the moon. It becomes a little bit more challenging as you go farther and farther away from the earth, but those computer-aided surgical systems, you know, surgical robots are now, part of the practice of surgery, you know, thousands of systems spread across the world. But at the time, they were not, and you know, I mentioned trauma surgery, that's a good example. It was originally developed, you know, for space fight and for trauma surgery, you know, caring for injured war fighters on the battlefield, but trauma surgeons in general hated the robot as it was first developed, because it's just wouldn't help them. But just to give you an example of what I'm talking about, that the intuitive surgical system, the DaVinci robot is, you know, one that is now widespread, and that gives us sort of an example of what I'm talking about to the listeners. And actually, many of the listeners probably have been operated on by surgeons that are using the DaVinci robot. Can you talk about some of the early work you did in laparoscopic, robotic, cantella robotic surgery? I know you've just touched on it, but I think there's more to say about this subject. Could you elaborate a little? Yes. So, my interest in surgical robotics started at NASA MyTac. Initially, there were two surgical robotics companies. One was called computer motion. Initially, the development of that system was funded by NASA for space exploration. As we started to develop that, there was a competing system that was funded by DARPA and the US Army. That's the intuitive surgical DaVinci robot, I mentioned. So, they had a legal battle. They ended up essentially almost suing each other out of existence, and then they merged and moved forward into the system that we know today. But the interesting part of that, you know, surgery is a stereoscopic bim annual procedure. You know, you're in apprentice, you watch somebody operate, you help them operate, and it's basically you see with your eyes, you stick your hands in somebody, and you operate on them. You make them better. The surgical robots originally were cable driven telemanipulators. So, it was still the same thing except you were just separated from the patient a little bit, and you could have some benefits. But they were cable driven analog, and what the real breakthrough was that we helped was the moving to a surgery by wire system, a digital system that allowed us to do some amazing things and leverage the digital technologies that we're all familiar with, you know, video being one of them. But the biggest impact is still yet to come, is that we can collect data when we're using that robot, as opposed to the manual procedures that we used to perform. We actually can collect a lot of data and improve the training, the outcomes, and the technologies that allow us to take care of patients better. So, we have developed and evaluate systems for use both inside and outside the operating room. There's some first from our team, surgical robotic first. We were the first to operate on a simulated patient in a desert by bouncing the communication signal off a UAV. Now that's commonly done now that they didn't even have digital communication links really at the time for small UAVs. So, that was an interesting first. In the NEMA missions, we were the first to operate on a simulated patient in an underwater laboratory off the coast of Florida, a surgeon in Canada controlled the robot that was down off the coast of Key Largo. That was an amazing experience, probably good to discuss a little further. And then we actually developed an acceleration compensating robotic system for use in space. We flew a robotic system, surgical robotic system, and overcame the challenges presented by zero G to operate on a simulated patient within the vomit comet. And then probably the most relevant to today's practice of surgery. We were the first to operate with the DaVinci system remotely. And once again, it's a simulated patient. And that was interesting because we moved finally into the commercial internet as our communication link as opposed to dedicated asynchronous transfer mode or ATM like banking networks. And then moving on to the division of GI and end of surgery. So, you know, division chief was a logical step in my academic career. At that point, I was still an academic surgeon and interested in moving up through the ranks to eventually become chairman at some place and a whole leadership positions in the national surgical societies. So, that's the primary reason why, you know, I was just moving up as a good sign that they asked me to run that division around the same time I also transitioned from a associate professor to full professor of surgery with tenure. And tenure, you know, it's important for researchers. Probably it's not as important for, you know, clinical, you know, surgeons or, you know, docs. But, you know, as I started to do more research with NASA, the Army, DARPA. It was a good idea for me to get tenure and that happened around that same time. I don't think tenures of much value. However, if you don't get it, in a place that offers it, you will be sorry. So, in other words, if it's available, you should get it because the consequences, um, termination, uh, is eventually. I think it's an outdated artifact, but saying that when it was time to get it, I wanted to have it. Yeah. It makes sense. Yep. You know. Stem Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research lab pioneering groundbreaking technologies aimed at leveraging and extending human cognition, perception, locomotion, and resilience. Stem Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, can you talk about how your interest and experiences thinking about medical support for astronauts and particularly remote surgery led you to becoming an aqua knot and a crew member for NASA's Nemo Mission 9. So, I was, you know, interested in surgery and space pushing that forward. And I found that we weren't making as much progress as I would like or hope wanted to have make progress, hopefully transition to flight, but for sure push the systems forward in a way that was helpful in space and on earth and was also hopefully inspiring for some people that were, you know, roboticists or surgeons so they could start working on the technology. And I heard about this Nemo program. NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations Program sounded ideal. It could spur or catalyze the development of the technology and also provide some potential inspiration, you know, briefing materials for those astronauts or program managers in the military that weren't that we're trying to push robotics technology forward. So, I talked to Bill Todd. Bill was a SIM trainer for astronauts. NASA actually second generation is dead. Did that as well? He started a Nemo program. Bill learned that I was a patty-dive master. So, we thought I'd be a good crew member. And that's important because it is underwater sat diving, technical diving, at least at the time. And it's challenging and unforgiving. Part of the reason the NASA uses that, you know, this, you know, challenging and unforgiving environment is it's a lot like flying in space. So, you do something wrong in space. It can be, you know, catastrophic. You can injure yourself, damage the station or die. And that's sort of the same basic concept for Nemo. So, I was backup crew member actually for Nemo 7 2004. I was fortunate then, I guess, to have done a good enough job to be offered to train in the astronaut office and serve as mission specialist 3 and chief science officer for Nemo 9 in 2006. And then also, and Nemo 12 in 2007. So, Tim, just as an aside, your support was one of the reasons that I had the chance to join Nemo as a crew member in 2016. And I'll forever be grateful for that opportunity. And as you mentioned, you were part of Nemo 12 as well. And I believe that you also have logged the most time underwater as a Nemo Aquinot. So, congrats on that accolade. So, what research did you focus on for the Nemo 12 mission and even for the Nemo 9 mission? Can you kind of give us a high level summary? Don, you did a fabulous job as a crew member, a Nemo crew member. I don't know if I still hold that record. I think I might for the most number of days in SAT from the office. So, yeah, what in 9 and then a little bit in 12, we explored more surgery in space. Nemo 9 had surgical robotics as a focus, but we also looked a lot at telemedicine and teleproctoring how to help an astronaut be able to perform a life-saving medical procedure if they're the crew medical officer and not a doctor. But we did some tele-operation. As I mentioned, the surgeon in Canada controlling the robot down in the habitat, the interesting thing that we started to explore was, so what happens when you start adding communication latency over a lag time, what we added was the lag time was minimal from 100 microseconds through a couple seconds that it would take for a signal to go to the moon, for example. And we found that if you get about 500 milliseconds, it becomes very, very hard to operate. As you might expect, it becomes even more challenging when you're operating in a real person because the tissues are moving and they're deformable. But, you know, at 500 milliseconds, if you, in a jitter or which is the stability of the lag, if you have a stable connection at over 500 milliseconds, basically what happens, it takes 10 minutes to put a needle through the tissues and then tie the suture, which is obviously just not feasible. It became apparent that those experiments that we needed to add some automation or some autonomy into the robotic system for it to be able to be useful as we moved farther away from the earth. So it might work on the space station, you might be able to do some suture elaceration, for example, of some cut themselves, might be able to do some dual use biomedical experiments from the ground to the station, but increasingly less likely to be a benefit as you move from the lower orthorbit to the moon to the Mars and beyond. And so that's what we then moved into NEMA 12 with starting to look at some technologies to mitigate the communication delay. And that includes some autonomy, you know, some machine vision and the robot actually starting to carry out some of the tasks like inserting a needle into a blood vessel in NEMA 12 and that work, you know, continues. That's awesome, Tim. And you and I have talked about the similarities between an operational environment like NEMA or Space Flight, or like we were talking about a little bit earlier in the podcast, high precision aviation, and the operating room. So were there lessons learned in the operating room as a surgeon that cross over into the NEMA mission? Yeah, probably the, you know, this is another, I guess, life lesson, I don't know how to put in quotes, but interdisciplinary teams are mandatory if you want to discover and then translate with impact in the operating room. If you don't have a functioning team, you will not be able to effectively operate on a patient. And that's the same in flight, you know, they cook crew resource management and flight. I won't go into some of the other negative stories I've seen about, you know, surgeons throwing instruments and sticking in into the wall or, you know, haranging the nursing staff, telling them they're going to kill the patient by doing something. The surgeons that are that self-unaware and being ineffective in the operating room and you can have catastrophic failures because people are afraid to tell them, hey, what you're doing is stupid. That's sort of the same lessons that we've learned repeatedly in flight. You have to have a good functional team. You have to be a team leader sometime. You have to be a team member at other times. And, you know, that message was hammered home in the NEMA missions. It's also been, you know, hammered home for me in the operating room as well. That's a good answer. It's a really good answer. So just to kind of continue on the NEMA bit, a mission like NEMA generates so many great memories and experiences. So this is an example. Our crew played Go Fish being cheeky one evening. Before we're getting ready to go to bed, we were all sitting together at the at the table inside the habitat and watching all the nighttime fauna, swimming outside the window. And that's definitely a memory that I will never forget. And obviously just super thankful for all the friendships that were also made during that mission. Can you share one or two of your favorite memories from your time underwater with NEMA? Okay, gosh. It's so hard to just pick one or two. Yeah. You know, we, you know, sitting around the table and talking with your crewmates, you know, we had a similar experience one night where we were there in the spring because our mission had a slip hurricane came through and we had a slip. So we were there when it was springtime in the water was colder, but the benefit of that was we saw these creatures spawning in which I had, you know, never thought I would see a mission and we'll, you know, never see again to see see that happening. But, you know, the transition was amazing. And I don't know if you had this sort of same experience. So you can tell me. So at the beginning, you get down there, you're super excited. You're a visitor, you know, in the undersea visitor. And you're sort of inside the aquarium. As opposed to, you know, normally we're like the person on the outside of the aquarium looking at the fish, you know, that are swimming around on the inside of the aquarium. All the reef inhabitants are looking through the windows at us, you know, with great curiosity, especially in the Nemo 9 mission. Eventually we were no longer visitors. We were living there among the inhabitants of the reef. They started to treat us like we were, you know, supposed to be there. And, you know, a good example of that. We had a couple very large collieth groupers and you may have had the same groupers down there. They greeted us every time we went outside. At night time they would peek their head in through the window as we were going to sleep and, you know, take a look at us, just checking on us. And they were like, actually so much like pets. And this is bad. I guess a little anthropomorphic or anthropocentric that we had names for them, renamed after one of the astronaut's dogs. And they were just like, you know, good dogs, you know, would come and join us as we were gearing up and then going out on their walks. Probably the greatest, you know, so two more experiences come to mind that I think the listeners would like. One was this night dive we went on. So, you know, it's a crazy busy schedule, as you know, Don. It's just like being on station. They have the timeline with this red line that's going through the day and you got to make sure you're staying on the timeline. But we had one night the opportunity to go on a night dive. So you gear up, you're swimming away from the habitat. And it's like going at gas because I haven't been in space, but it's like going into the blackness of space. If you're on a surface of another planet, you're swimming away, you see the habitat, your home and the light is fading into the distance. And then it's just the blackest space. So you can look up, you see the moon from the body of the ocean. And then we started to see these stars in the water. And you know, like, you know, what is this? So as the bioluminescent plankton that are on the sand that are on the coral, and it was like Harry Potter, ask you wave your hand and the sparks would fly from your fingertips. And it, you know, it was just awe inspiring the beauty of nature, the just the amount of things that we haven't discovered or experienced. That was a, you know, profound experience for all the crew members. And along the same lines, I'd say another very moving and touching experience for us is we were there on Easter Sunday. And we had a service that was for some family and some friends from around the world. But we, we held a memorial service for the STS-107 Columbia crew at the time. And that was needed to say very, very moving as well. Just incredible experiences and definitely shared some of those that you described him. But yeah, thank you for sharing this with us. So, 10 beginning in 2003, you spent seven years as senior scientist and trauma portfolio manager for, and let me see if I can get this right. The US Army Medical Research and Material Command, Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center. That is a mouthful. Can you talk about the work that you did during that period? Yeah, that is quite a mouthful. And NASA and the military both love acronyms. So we went by TATRIC. And I was there because I were combination of being a trauma surgeon, which is needed to say important in the military and a technologist. So I was focused on developing systems to better train medical providers and improve the care of war fighters that were injured on the battlefield. And some technologies we developed there, medical information systems, surgical simulators, those are fairly common now, but they weren't at the time. And surgical robots that we've already talked about a bit. So in 2010, you became a program manager for DARPA or the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency for listeners. And I realized that you're not a liberty to talk about some of the work that you did at DARPA. But one thing you did was to develop biocompatible nanoplatforms that enabled in vivo diagnostics, which is really interesting and rather revolutionary development. Can you talk about that work a little bit? Sure. So just a, I guess, a little background for the listeners who are not familiar with DARPA. DARPA, you probably know the technologies that have been created by DARPA, like the internet. In fact, was not Al Gore. It was do tell. So one tech that IGMC listeners might be familiar with, the DARPA project spawned Siri. And that was developed in part by IGMC and another group called SRI. That just gives you back on your plenty of technologies, the rockets on the Saturn 5, the rocket engines on the Saturn 5, for example, another, another example GPS. So plenty of examples. I went to DARPA and I started a whole bunch of programs. By the time I left, it was about $100 million a year as a research portfolio. But one of the things that was inspiring to me, and there was a famous physicist named Richard Feynman. The listeners might be familiar. He gave a lecture titled There's Plenty of Room at the bottom. And you know, nanotechnology, nano, it's a very familiar and busy word now. But there is like no biomedical applications. At least they were very limited at the time. And in fact, like the FDA at the time was pretty much just concerned about nanoparticles because they thought they were toxic. So I figured that there was an opportunity there. So we started a program called NVVO nanoplatforms or IVN. And this was focused on developing safe biocompatible nanoparticles that would revolutionize diagnosis and treatment of diseases and traumatic injuries that we really had like no good solutions for. One of the diagnostic applications was detection of infectious disease. Like you could use these technologies, for example, to detect early if someone has been exposed to COVID. A good example, you can look up on the internet. There is some performance from Duke. They developed this technology called inverse molecular sentinels. So it's a little nanoparticle that when it gets exposed to DNA or an RNA from the patient or from, for example, the virus, it goes from off to on. This RNA binds to another specific RNA and it causes a conformational change. It sort of swings this reporter molecule close to this nanoparticle. It's serving as a nano-ampifier. And with that, you can say, hey, by shining a laser on it, you can say, hey, this person has been exposed to this particular disease. It's a very interesting program. Of course, I'm biased. It's sort of like one of my children. You get very attached to your programs, but it was a very interesting program that has been spun off into other programs at companies and is still having impact. Very interesting. You mentioned the concern about safety associated with nanoparticles. I had a sport coat made for me once a long time ago, probably about the same era. I made from some phenomenally expensive fabric from Italy that had a nanoscale pattern of lotus leaf. You couldn't see it, of course, on it. And would render it remarkably waterproof. And you could go to restaurants and take the sauce and pour it on your arm, and it would just slide off. But I had a colleague who, upon learning this, was terrified to be near me wearing this coat. And she was also at DARPA, by the way. And I used to kind of try not to wear it when I knew she would be at the meeting, not to cause concern. But if people remember that era, anything nano was very much in scrutiny. Yeah, same as always. He always has a better story than I do. So yet another instance of that. There definitely if you formulate the nanoparticles in the wrong way, they're toxic. But on the flip side of that, for example, like silver particles for bacteria, cytl, or kill bacteria. So it's a dual-edged sword. They're small enough that they can go places and do things that are otherwise would not be able to do. But if you design in the wrong way or put them in the wrong place, they can be toxic. And that's true of many, many things. Yeah. Well, that was a great explanation, Tim, of some of the programs at DARPA. And while you were there, you developed some specific modular nanotechnologies that permitted really flexible targeting for improvement of diseases such as antibiotic-resistant bacterial infection. And this is one that lots of people have had unpleasant experiences with, as well as traumatic brain injury applications as well. Without going into detail, could you briefly give our listeners a little insight into how that might work? And what prompted me to go to DARPA was that I had seen too many people get sick and die. So infectious disease, I made another program that would help people suffering from sepsis. But back to our stories of trauma, whether or not it's a student athlete or a war fighter that hits their head when they're jumping out of an airplane or gets exposed to a blast when they're out on the battlefield. TBI, I saw just too many people who were injured in suffering from traumatic brain injury or TBI. And in fact, there's still no good treatment for TBI. We're still looking for treatments. But what we did in this particular application, they said there were some concerns about using this solid metal nanoparticles that we were talking about for the diagnostics. So we developed a nanoparticle that did not have those metal cores. And then we developed, and it's probably a little bit too much detail to go into, but developed some special targeting proteins. Proteins allowed the nanoparticles to go through or across the blood brain barrier, and then specifically target injured brain cells. And just putting these targeting proteins on, you'd give an IV dose of this medicine, and it would be 40 times higher concentration in the injured brain than it would if you didn't have them. So that was a big step forward, potentially, would improve the treatment and limit to side effects. The other interesting part of this was there's billions of dollars of research and industry that was going on to use anti-sense therapeutic technology to develop and use it. There's a company that we worked with that has developed some anti-sense agonucleotides that help with some pediatric neurologic disease that were, here to for untreatable. These anti-sense agonucleotides are sequenced specific for the DNA or RNA that's in it. And therefore you can use these nanoparticles to deliver these payloads in a manner that you can precisely target the problem you're talking about. And so this personalized molecular based treatment and the application that we're interested in as we're talking about is TBI. So one of these anti-sense oligonucleotides are ASOS and do some epigenetic changes that limited the neuro-inflammation and actually improved at least in an animal mile, improve the ability, recovered some of the ability of that animal to think and to have their cognitive performance after a TBI. So it's just a fascinating program. It was again unbiased, but also potential solution with just such profound impact. Absolutely. Totally agreed Tim. And after your work as program manager at DARPA, you became the Chief Science Officer at Wright State Research Institute. So how did that come about? Yeah, so DARPA program managers, you're there three or four years and that's part of the way DARPA is designed. You want new people to come in and develop new programs. So my time came, it was time for me to leave. I wanted to continue to do military related biomedical research and WSRI Wright State Research Institute is located across the street from the Air Force Research Laboratory's Human Performance Wing. So that's the reason why one of the reasons why I went there. At the same time, I still wanted to maintain my academic medical career and was also a associate dean for research at the Wright State University Boone Shuff School of Medicine. So one of the first projects that we teamed up on together Tim was to look at cold water mitigation strategies for divers and it's funded by Office of Naval Research. And one thing I like about the work that you have done is that it is focused on direct development of solutions for the end user, which is similar to the research that we do at IHMC. So how does this type of research differ from basic science in your mind and what drew you into this type of research? That's right. I think it's both both are important. Basic science is important and applied research and development. It's also important. Basic science is at the discovery, the intersection of disciplines. You need to have that discovery to power the translation transition with impact. And in order to do the basic science, you need interdisciplinary team with team members who have very deep expertise in their respective fields. And then you need so many who can translate service of facilitator. One of the most rewarding things you see is all these team members sitting around the room wondering why the hell they're there. And then also in boom, you see this light bulb go off and they say, ah, this is how we are trying to solve this problem. And that's where the magic happens. And then the applied research, you take that what has been developed that new discovery. And I hate innovation because it's sort of a trite word. But what you need to then add in is some people who know what the problems are and can help you transition it or translate it with impact. So the applied world occurs at the intersection of the discovery and the practical application. And really to have impact, we got to translate the basic science discovery into some usable solution. And it is critical to understand what are the pressing unmet needs of the end user. And that's true whether or not it's in surgery, whether it's undersea or spaceflight. And you know, with that, I'm a big believer in technology pull. So you need to have that need. And then you pull forth what is the solution, you know, from a whole bunch of different technologies and integrate them together. I am not a big fan. I don't know about, you know, can you or don't, but from the technology push, I think it is good to develop some fundamental technologies. But in general, there's a lot of people who try to apply technologies that are going to just not work where they're trying to apply them. So technology pull is important. And I'd say once again, probably the key for that is a team leader or a facilitator who can take the basic science tech people in the operational end users and then communicate the problem and the solutions well enough so you end up with some effective solution. Continuing on that theme and along the same lines, IHMC and you before you were at IHMC, you even started working together on a project referred to by their acronym Fight. That's PHITE. And could you expand a little bit on this multi-institutional effort of which you were the leader, just give us a squirt on Fight. Yeah, I love that project. I love, I should say I love this project because it's still going on. But that's another one. Don mentioned the Office of Naval Research. This is a multi-disciplinary university research initiative or Murie, which are sort of the, big, sought-after programs. Gosh, we're in it's sort of the end of the fourth year moving into the fifth year now. As you mentioned, the acronym is Fight for Precision High Intensity Training through Epigenetics. And I guess to give a better give a little background on what epigenetics is. So when it literally means upon the genome and when I was in medical school, everything was about genetics. And that's part of the reason why I didn't really pick genetics because our understanding at the time was like, yeah, so what are you going to be able to do with your understanding of genetics? Maybe as a cancer surgeon, you know, because there's a lot of ecological work I could have done something. But if you ask yourself a question, you know, why if all ourselves have this same DNA is one cell, the skin cell, another cell, a blood cell, another one, a brain cell. And that is what epigenetics is all about. So beyond the DNA, there's some chemical modifications of the DNA or chemical modifications of these things called histones, which the DNA wraps and stores around that are the mechanism that allows us, allows our body to differentiate into different tissues to develop as we age and to respond to environmental stimuli. A good example, you might, you know, think, you know, you lift weights, your muscles get bigger, you know, hopefully your muscles get bigger and stronger. So we realized that there's a lot of people currently in the United States across the world who are, I guess, comfortable with as sedentary lifestyles, maybe a good way to phrase that. And in an adequate physical fitness, it really challenges the warfighter and the readiness of our armed forces. So we proposed a project that would improve warfighter fitness by determining what training elements are best suited to individual warfighters by understanding the epigenetic mechanisms that underlie the changes to training, specifically hope to be able to determine when, for example, a warfighter has reached peak performance and provide them the quickest and most optimal path to getting there. Very good, good explanation. It's an exciting project, I think, and I do think it'll have meaningful results. Thank you for the kind words. And once again, I'm biased, but I agree with you. That's a good thing. So last year you came on board here at IHMC as our chief science officer and as a senior research scientist. Needless to say, everyone at IHMC is quite pleased to have you join our happy tribe. And right now, you're working on a project that is part of a DARPA program known as measuring biological aptitude program or MBA. The crux of MBA is correlating the externally observable physical, behavioral, and cognitive features as well as traits of specialized military operators. That is correlating their phenotypes with measurable elements of their biology to understand and ultimately anticipate how they will perform in various situations over time. Can you give listeners an overview of the goals of MBA beyond my brief description? Yes, so I won't comment too much on what the program goals are other than to say that we have been training war fighters as selecting and training them essentially the same way since you know, World War II. You do some, you know, old school, psychological and physical testing. You know, you see how they do on their IQ test, on some vocational tests. You have them run a few miles, maybe do some pull ups and you say, ah, hey, you'd be a good infantry guy. You'd be a good pilot. You know, you'd be a good, ah, special forces operator. And that obviously is not optimal. What we are, ah, hope to do in this is to improve the process of selection, but more importantly from our standpoint of training. Talking to the operators, they understand the limitations and the operators are pilots, they say, you know, what makes a good operator, what makes a good fighter pilot, we want someone who's consistently across their career as makes speedy and in high quality decisions as able to do that under great stress and recovers from that stress well. And then the other sort of ingredient to that, depending on which unit you're in, there's an understanding of teams. You know, you know, when someone's a good team member, but there'd be, you know, a good way to measure that and optimize that would be helpful as well. So that is the MBA sort of program goals. I won't talk for the program manager with that sort of a thumbnail sketch of what that program's about. Very good. So towards this end, you've assembled an interdisciplinary research team developing science and technology with the aim of raising the performance of elite warfighters and roles such as special operations and fighter pilots. And the project is known as peerless operator, biologic aptitude, or just peerless for short. Can you talk about how this project is being designed to increase the biologic aptitude of warfighters so that they can increase their adaptability and also their resilience in extreme conditions? Yeah, once again, the peerless operator biological aptitude is a mouthful. And peerless is a good short title for this because the goal is for us to have peerless special forces operators and peerless pilots. So the goal of the project is to develop a disruptive training platform that integrates, you know, this revolutionary molecular expression circuits that we briefly touched upon when we were talking about fight. Some advanced predictive models that uses the latest and greatest machine learning slash artificial intelligence. And then some novel real-time centers that allow us to measure the performance of the operator or pilot in near real time. So, and I'll let me go into a little bit more detail on some of those. So this molecular and metabolic analyses, we have like world leaders that are developing and then exploring probably and empholding this into this project that have things like single cell epigenetic analysis. So we talked a little bit about the DNA methylation in the old days. Still, I guess, you know, currently sometimes we do what's called bulk analysis. So you basically just like homogenize all the tissue or take all the blood cells and then you do these analysis across this big set of cells, different cell types, well that have been exposed to different things. And the interesting thing now is that we are looking at individual cells to start to be able to tease out this signal from the noise in these key but uncommon or rare cell types. And the other thing with the epigenetics are these liquid biotases that the listeners may have heard of, you know, the promise of drawing some blood from your vein in your arm and then being able to diagnose cancer throughout your whole body. What happens is your cells release little fragments of DNA or RNA and then have some epigenetic changes as part of them. And you can isolate these from peripheral blood and then sort of do a biopsy of the tissues across the body which is fascinating. For example, if you're interested in knowing what's going on with a brain in the special operator or a muscle or you know, some other tissues. So that's one of the cool parts of that project. I won't go too much into the multilayered bioanalytical platform. There are some very cool new techniques that we have one of our collaborators, particularly as a called plier pathway level information extractor. But I think that's probably better for another talk. Something that would I think the listeners would like to hear, you know, many of the listeners probably are wearing some, you know, wearable device like a iWatch or Fitbit. Well, I suggest an experiment. So take your watch off and then put it on the table and see what happens. And for the next minute or two, you're likely still going to have a heart rate recorded by that device. And needless to say, that is, it's not remotely monitoring your heart rate and there are some algorithms in there that because when you move your wrist around your arm around, you don't have high quality data, the algorithm sort of uses that data together and therefore estimates what your heart rate is. But what we're doing in peerless is developing technology, edge detection of some very cutting edge wearables that allows you to record like clinical grade electrocardiogram, you know, heart rate, heart rate variability data and only the good data. And another interesting part of that is we're also folding in this series related technologies that I talked about. So that's automated speech analysis and natural language processing technologies to be able to assess, you know, how people are working with each other, how stress they are and other things. So the integrated project has got some amazing team members and some amazing technology. Another important name of this project is to develop science and technology that might contribute to extending the career of warfighters in this special operations community in particular. Can you elaborate on this a little bit for our listeners? Sure, you know, we don't, I used to say as a DARPA, say it now in this project, if we are not going somewhere good, we're going nowhere and we ought to stop. So the end users are wholeness project is focused on. It has to provide them actionable information that they can use or we shouldn't be doing it. So I mentioned a little of the edge detection of the high quality phenotypic and physiologic data, that is something that they have interest in. They're used to wearing like garment and some other things, which by the way, I don't know if I should mention that garment got, as you saw, got hacked. But anyway, we need secure collection of high quality data. Not to bash on a garment, but so they are used to wearing that. They like that. We need to have the ability to connect that to the molecular and metabolic expression circuits that underlie that so that we can understand what will help them perform at a consistently high level and recover well from their training and stress. And then the interface has to be something that they're used to using. We're using something called smart-of-base, which they're familiar using. It gives them actionable information. So it gives them information about their training level, their recovery, their sleep, and their diet. And I think that is going to help operators and pilots train better, maintain their health and performance, and then hopefully in the long-term length in their careers. This fantastic Tim. So to give listeners a sense of what a major undertaking the peerless project is, can you talk about the stellar team that you put together, which includes not only IHMC, but also a number of others superb research organizations? Yeah, so we have a team that is just fabulous. I have to say the program manager commented that we have assembled the the best across many, many different fields. So a couple, I can go through a couple of the different sites that are with the collaborators, UAB, University of Alabama, Birmingham is one, the excellence in phenotyping and training, and then the molecular understanding of the exercise and performance. They performed, for example, also on the fight program in a big NIH program called MotorPack, M-O-T-R-P-A-C, that listeners might want to look at. It's interesting. We have translational genetics research institute or T-Gen. They are cutting edge from a molecular and metabolic standpoint across many different fields on ecology, traumatic brain injury, just to give a couple examples. Soil institute, we have had collaboration on once again, on fight as well as some other projects looking at epigenetics as it relates to environmental exposures, for example, in another DARPA program. But Joe Ecker, who is there, is one of the leaders in the world in DNA methylation analyses. Let's see, Khan School of Medicine and Mount Sinai, and also related institutions because they have sort of an established team as Princeton University and University of Pittsburgh as well. They have great expertise in analysis, including machine learning. If you look at the pathway level information extractor or plier, is a technique they developed. Actually, they're currently, I think, using some of those techniques to improve the diagnosis of COVID patients to the point where it's of the epigenetic changes may in fact be able to diagnose COVID patients before they are symptomatic. So the final one is SRI, international. They are the ones who are developing the next generation wearables for the context and vitals data collection. It collects the physiologic data, the voice data, and provides the contextual data to help make sense of it. That's a stellar or perhaps one would say a pure list gene. Yeah, pure list indeed. So Tim, you have a lot on your plate right now as our listeners can probably tell. When you want to take some time to get away, I understand that you like to spend time at the beach with your family, is that right? That's correct. As you can tell, I love the ocean. The golf, one of the things that I really love about Florida is the water. So my wife and daughters also just love we're just on vacation, great in beach, stay park. This one of the nicest beaches I have ever been to a couple of weeks ago. Just amazing. It's a spectacular beach. Yeah, absolutely beautiful. Also in your spare time, I understand that you enjoy listening to music and especially classical music. So is it true that you have three daughters who all play the violin? I do. I love all kinds of music. But after years and years of practice, I'm now quite familiar with classical string music. They took Suzuki. I don't know if listeners may be familiar, but my daughters started playing the violin when they were three or four years old and have played for decades and are, you know, unbiased. Once again, proud father, but fabulous violin players. And my wife has born the brunt of the Suzuki required parental involvement. I just get to go and enjoy and now I ask them because they sound lovely just to play for relaxation. But yeah, it, in the early days, quite squeaky as an instrument, but they are just lovely violin players and it is calming and comforting for me. And so that's transitioned over into some of my playlists, some of the violin classics. So yes, makes sense. Yeah, it's fantastic. I think we're all of the three of us are all definitely huge, huge music fans. So Tim, it's been fantastic having you on Stem Talks. Thank you so much for joining us today. Oh, thank you for having me. It's great fun. I always love talking with you and Ken. Absolutely, Tim. It's been great. Appreciate it. Thanks, Ken. Stem Talks. Stem Talks. Stem Talks. Stem Talks. So, Ken, I have to say one of the best things that you've done here at IGMC was the recruit Tim Broderick. I absolutely love working with him. Agreed, Don. Tim has had a substantial impact as a surgeon and a researcher. He has developed new technologies and systems that have improved as well as extend people's lives. Don, you and I work with a lot of people in the special operations community and have seen many careers cut short because of injuries. This is one reason why the work that Tim and his colleagues are doing to improve their resilience and careers of folks in special operations is so rewarding and important. We are very fortunate to have Tim as part of our IGMC family. It's so very true, Ken. If you enjoyed this interview as much as Ken and I did, we invite you to visit the Stem Talk webpage where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes. Stem Talks.us. This is Don Kernegas signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stem Talk. Thank you for listening to Stem Talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others. So please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website StemTalk.us. There, you can also find more information about the guests we interview.
