Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host Don Cunegas and joining me to introduce today's podcast as a man behind the curtain. Dr. Ken Forried, I agencies director and chairman of the Double Secret Sleshing Committee that sucks all the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Hi Don, great to be here today. So our guest today is Dr. Peter Peroli, who is a colleague of ours and a senior research scientist here at IGMC. Peter previously was a research fellow at the Palo Alto Research Center where he studied human information interaction. His best known for his work on the development of information foraging theory was Stuart Card, which led to Peter's book, Information foraging Theory, Adaptive Interaction with Information. So Peter received his doctorate in cognitive psychology from Carnegie Mellon University in 1985. And throughout his career, his research has involved a mix of cognitive science, artificial intelligence, and human computer interaction. And his current research interests include disruptive mobile health technologies for precision behavior medicine to support healthy behavior. But before Ken and I get to our interview with Peter today, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk, and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Solution Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the widest and most lavishly praised field reviews to read on Stem Talk. If you hear your review read on Stem Talk, just contact us at Stem Talk at ihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk t-shirt. Today our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker Robin OS. It's titled, Compelling and Consize. The Review reads, I listen to dozens of health and fitness podcasts, and some are tedious and wacky. Stem Talk however, is engaging and sensible. Don and Ken have pleasant rapport. They press their guests for relevant information without being confrontational. I feel smarter every time I listen to a new podcast. Well, thank you so much Robin OS, and thank you to all of our other Stem Talk listeners who helped Stem Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now onto our interview with Dr. Peter Peroli. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Hi, welcome to Stem Talk. Joining us today is Dr. Peter Peroli. Peter, welcome to the podcast. Hey, well, thank you for having me. And also joining us is Ken Ford. Hello, Don and hello, Peter. Hello. So Peter, welcome to the show. For those listeners who haven't checked out Peter's website yet, Peter LaVille, likes to hit the waves in his spare time. And it seems that surfing is indeed a fairly safe activity to enjoy in this COVID-19 world that we are living in today. So Peter, a little later in this interview, I want to talk to you about your most recent project here at IHMC, which is looking at incorporating computational models of human behavior into epidemiological models that forecast the rate of infections and deaths related to COVID-19. And this is a project sponsored by the National Science Foundation or NSF. But first, we want to give listeners a sense of your background. So you grew up in Canada, and I doubt that you learned to surf up in Ontario. In fact, I understand you were 40 years old before you took up surfing. So what's the story behind that? Yeah, well, I moved to San Francisco right across from Ocean Beach when I was 38. And of course, watching people surf, I was just amazed at how fun it looked. And around the same time, a good friend of mine who knew that I had moved to Ocean Beach and at a surf break called Slote sent me this New Yorker article that was written by William Finnegan about Ocean Beach and Slote. And a lot of people consider it to be one of the best pieces of literature ever written about surfing. And so that got me even more interested in the lifestyle and the idea of surfing. But I think the real thing that got me going was someone said, you cannot learn how to surf once you're past the age of 14. So now it was a challenge. And it was a matter of trying to figure out how I was going to learn how to surf. And my wife knew this. And Jackie bought me a birthday present when I turned 40, which was this week of surf camp down in San and Ophrey, California, down in Southern California with the past glitzes. So first of all, it was great because you just surf all day. You've got great instructors and it's the best way to get up to speed on surfing. And then it turns out that the past glitz family is well known as the first family of surfing. And they are the anti Brady bunch. The head of the family, Doc Paskwitz was a medical doctor. He gave up the practice to live a healthier lifestyle and just surf all the time. And he and his wife Juliet raised nine kids, eight boys and a sister in a 24 foot camper. And they lived this completely nomadic lifestyle going across the country and mostly up and down California and Baja. And there's a movie made about them called surf wise. And so it was not only learning how to surf, but hanging out with these people who were endlessly entertaining. They just had one story after another and every day was different and they just ragged on each other all the time. And Doc, who was probably in his 80s at the time, would give us these afternoon sessions where he would basically tell us how to eat healthy and live healthy and how to gain wisdom from surfing. So that's how I got into it. And once I was into it, I was hooked. It's awesome. Yeah. So Peter, as you mentioned, you grew up for the most part in Canada, but your father is Italian and rather amazingly, he decided to move the family to Italy when you were around eight years old. Italy is one of my favorite places. So that's a big move, culturally in other ways. How did that all work out? What happened? Well, it was terrible at first. I mean, I lost all my high school friends and I lost all my neighborhood friends and I got thrown into an Italian school. I didn't know the language. I probably got into more than my share of fights during that first few months. But in retrospect, it was fantastic. I learned enough Italian to get by and have enough Italian now that I can go there and be comfortable. My cousins were really great. They welcomed us with open arms. And my older cousin, Maria, who was a teenager at the time, used to take me with her friends out to the seaside. And I was their little mascot and they would feed me all kinds of good ice creams and gelatos and all the rest of that. One of the things that happened during that time was my mother and father would just take us on these weekend trips and we would not only go to see the big sites in Rome and Naples and all these places. But a lot of off-the-beaten paths kinds of things and just enjoy the fact that almost every little town in Italy has got something charming about it and every place has got a different dialect. Every place has got their own unique piece of cuisine and so that really led me to an appreciation of Italy, I think, as you have. And so my wife and I have now gone back, I don't know how many times and every time we go back, we have a great little adventure. So that kind of set me up for a lifelong set of adventures. That sounds wonderful. Where were you in Italy? Well, my father of all things decided to get into the restaurant business. And so one thing I learned is that I never want to own a restaurant. In fact, later my wife was asking my father and my aunt who had coo in the restaurant, you know, gee, you guys own a restaurant. I always liked my aunt's set in Italian. This is the thing that we never talked about anymore because it has been such a tough time. But anyways, we lived in a small town called Vanafro which is near Monte Casino which is a famous World War II site and it's sort of inland and in between Roman neighborhood tables which is really a perfect position for exploring Italy. It is and there's wonderful and some not so wonderful stories about that World War II battle site. Oh, yes, definitely. So Peter, as a kid growing up in Canada, you liked to go camping and canoeing and you also developed a love for astronomy and I hear that you used to keep NASA scrapbooks, is that right? Well, I still have those scrapbooks as a matter of fact. So as a little kid, probably even before I went to school, I got into science fiction and I got into Star Trek and my grandparents gave me this big book of astronomy and so that got me into it. My parents were good enough to buy me a decent telescope and somewhere along the line, I became a junior member of the local amateur astronomy club and used to go every week to hang out with these older kids and somewhere along the line in elementary school, a teacher told us that you could just write to NASA and get all these materials. So I started doing that and this was at the Heide of the Apollo program and so I started getting all these mission reports and glossies and posters and so my room was just filled with all this stuff. I still have those scrapbooks. They're somewhere in a storage bin somewhere and I dug them out recently when they had the 50th anniversary of Apollo 11 and one of the more exciting things that happened recently was that I got to meet Joanne Morgan at IHMC and she was the only female engineer in the lawn, the firing room at the launch of Apollo 11 and I kind of felt my heart fluttering and I felt like I was eight years old again and I was asking her all these questions about Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong and I had to sort of tell myself now calm down and don't act like you're eight years old but she was utterly charming and decent and she must have all kinds of fans because she dealt with me really well. Well, that's one of the great things about IHMC is when never knows what interesting person you might meet in the hallway or in the kitchen or as a colleague and speaking of Joanne Morgan, she certainly qualifies as an interesting person, a long time friend of mine. Joanne also served for many years on our Science Advisory Council and we're very appreciative of that. Well, that's great and I love how it all comes around full circle for you, Peter. Exactly. So, after high school you ended up at Trent University in Ontario and I understand that you have a pretty good story about the role that your mother played in that, is that right? Well, I guess so. So all through high school I worked on construction during the summer times and that was partly because my father who was a plaster at the time, of course he really wanted me to have a good education and go to college and buddy said, you know, just in case you better have a backup plan and so let's make sure that you have a good skill. And so when I was 16, I had enough money to buy a motorcycle and me and my friends traveled across country to Edmonton and Calgary from Peterborough, Ontario, which is a fairly good ride. I think I had 50 bucks in my pocket and I worked every possible job you could have imagined. Men and I chicken farms, factory floors and then of course construction and plaster and then the following year, which was the year before college, my friends and I said, okay, well let's do it again. And we started hitchhiking across Canada and I got as far as Northern Ontario and two guys in the van said, what are you going all the way out west for? We got a great job for you. And I ended up on a railway gang out in Northern Ontario, out in the bush. And our job was to tear up railway tires and replace them at a clip of about five miles a day. And it was like the hardest job I'd ever worked. We used to work these 12 hour days and consume massive quantities of food just to try to keep up with it all. And of course we were living and breathing and sleeping out in the middle of nowhere. And so there was no communication. And when I finally came back from laying track, my mother said, you know, I saw this application on your desk and I kind of finished it up and sent it into Trent. And so that's how I ended up at Trent. That's fantastic. And as a kid, you were fascinated with astronomy, which we've kind of talked about a little bit before. And yet you majored in psychology and anthropology at Trent. So how did that happen? Part of it is again through science fiction, I think. So I was always fascinated with this idea that you could study psychology scientifically. If there are folks out there who know Isaac Asimov's foundation trilogy, there's a guy named Harry Selden who is this psycho historian who develops this massive computational model of all of human psychology. And so that kind of got me fascinated with the idea that you could really understand human psychology mechanistically. And then of course anthropology is just kind of a thing that I think anybody who travels is interested in. And it turns out that the anthropology department at Trent was one of the better departments there. So they had really, really good people. And I got particularly interested in two things out of anthropology. One was linguistics, which at the time was really coming into fruition with these ideas that you could have these sort of computational like rule-based systems that could characterize all of human language. And that idea that you could do this in a formal way and really characterize language, which was really kind of fascinating to me. And in the other piece, which is somewhat unique to Trent, was there was kind of an approach to looking at culture from this very evolutionary ecological kind of standpoint, a particular way of looking at it called cultural materialism, which basically says that the way that we behave in the cultures that we have are kind of fit the environments that they're in. And so you can study these things very scientifically and understand why they work. So it was really this kind of very scientific approach to psychology and anthropology that I got interested in. And what attracted you to Pittsburgh and Carnegie Mellon University for graduate school? Well, at the tail end of undergraduate, I got very interested in cognitive science, which was kind of an emerging thing. And that was really at the intersection of artificial intelligence and linguistics and psychology. I was fortunate that in my last year, this young assistant professor, John Middler showed up, he was probably barely a few years older than me. And he really got me interested in computers and cognitive science. And we used to spend a lot of time just talking about philosophy and how to build models of human cognition. And he pointed me in the direction of graduate school and said, look, there's really only a couple of places to go. One is Carnegie Mellon and one is the University of California, San Diego. And of course, being in my early 20s, I really wanted to go to San Diego. And so I applied to both places and I was somewhat disappointed that I hadn't heard back from UC San Diego. I later discovered that they just never received my GREs and so they never considered my application. And so almost by default, I ended up going to Carnegie Mellon. And in retrospect, it was the best thing that happened to me because Carnegie Mellon is just full of really great people. For sure, that turned out to be a blessing in disguise, I think. Exactly. At Carnegie Mellon, you had the opportunity to know and work with Herb Simon and Alan Null, who backed in the 50s as well as into the 60s and 70s, of course, were the early pioneers of artificial intelligence. They won the Touring Award in 1975 for their contributions to AI and the psychology of human cognition. And Simon, as most people know, went on to win the Nobel Prize in economics in 1978. So how did a psychology and anthropology major end up working with these two really pioneers of AI and much else, too? Yeah, I think at some level, it kind of goes back to the kind of psychology and the kind of anthropology that I was interested in. And I was really just completely enamored of this idea that you could take all this complexity of human behavior and human culture. And it was analyzable in a formal way. And of course, Null and Simon were not only motivated to develop artificial intelligence and intelligent computational systems, but they were really interested in understanding complex human information processing and cognition and sort of buried in their approach. And I think this is less appreciated. Was this idea that human behavior is really a fit between these internal mechanisms and computations and the environment in which it's embedded? And so again, there's this notion that the environment is really one of the key aspects that one has to understand if you really want to understand intelligence and you really want to understand anything complicated about human beings. I have favorite stuff of theirs. There's many, of course, was the whole physical, simple systems discussion and the papers around that. Do you call that? Oh yeah, so the physical symbol system idea is that intelligence is partly about computation and computation involves patterns. And when can think of these patterns as being symbols. And of course, these things are physically instantiated either in brains or in computational systems. Part of the idea of symbols is that they are a way of representing something about the world so that you can work with them in order to act upon the world. And real intelligence systems are constrained. You can't know everything and you can't think infinitely fast. And so you really have to consider the physical part of things if you're really going to understand intelligence. And so it's really this rubber meets the road kind of view of things where you say, there's this abstract stuff called logic or symbols or intelligence and computation. And then there is the physical substrate in which it exists. And you have to understand how those things meet and work. And they described it, I thought, elegantly. Yeah, so the other thing to say is, Alan Newell kind of summarized a lot of that thinking in a book called Unified Theory of Cognition. And for anybody who really wants to understand how to think about intelligence generally, I would advise just reading the first four chapters of that book. It goes over the physical symbol system hypothesis. He is sort of a fundamental way of looking at intelligence and cognition in just an elegant general way. Indeed, it's beautiful work. No one Simon, as we alluded to, were interested in developing computational models that could mimic and simulate what the human mind was doing in a sense. But in addition to AI, they were so broad and they conducted research that looked at information processing, decision making, problem solving, organization theory, and complex systems among other things. This must have been highly motivational working with these two. Could you talk a little bit about the influence it had on your thinking? You started on that path on your thinking. But also on your career and the research you subsequently conducted. It's hard for me to think of anything that I do in my research career that isn't influenced by them. My entire perspective at looking at problems and looking at research problems at some point draws upon something that I learned from them. And part of that approach is just thinking about things computationally. So whether it's an applied problem or a fundamental scientific problem, my first thought is, how do I analyze this as a set of computational processes? What's involved here? But there was also a style to how they worked and aesthetic to how they worked. I'm not quite sure I can put it into words. But one was that they were not afraid of successive approximations. So they didn't need to know all the details at first. They could figure out a first order approximation, a second approximation, a third approximation, always from this computational perspective. And just watching them in action was always interesting and sometimes amusing. So sometimes you would see Herb Simon sitting in the back of the room looking almost asleep at a talk. And he would perk up at the end and just give a complete explanation for all the phenomena that had just been presented from a computational standpoint. And Nuel could also do the same kind of thing. So this idea that often one kind of starts with a rough analysis computationally and sort of progressively refines that is kind of just a style that I adopt on a lot of challenges that I face in research. The other thing was that both those guys worked very hard. And both of them were talking about the 10,000 hours that you need to be a world class expert long before anybody in the popular press picked up that idea. And they kind of lived and embodied that. They were very hardworking people. And I remember Herb Simon would tell the graduate students, you know, within the first week, you know, if you don't put in 80 hours a week, you're not going to make it through this. And so, you know, that idea that it's really hard hard work and dedicated effort that gets you to kind of progress at the margins of your level of expertise. That was really something that they embodied. Hmm. And I can imagine that their influence permeates your thinking and mine too, frankly. Simon introduced the concept of satisfying. And we've sort of alluded to that already. He's credited with revolutionizing economics in a way. The classical concept of a rational man, if those of you who remember your economic classes, a rational man assumes that when people make decisions, they use all the information about all the alternative choices to make an optimal or best choice. Simon proposed in contrast that people actually operate under what he termed bounded rationality. And this implies that people are unlimited by time and resources. And this has had an enormous impact on their decision making, of course. Now in retrospect, this seems obvious, at least to me, but this is not how economic models worked and it's not how people thought about it. Can you give listeners an overview of satisfying and how this applies in our time today, you know, when you think about the World Wide Web? Could you talk a little bit about that? Sure. I think Simon used to tell us something like, you can analyze and optimize very simple problems or you can have these very general rules that work for a lot of problems. And he had various ways of saying it. But of course, human beings really don't have infinite amounts of time and can't track down all the information and ordinate decisions. So they have a lot of simpler ways of making decisions that are satisfactory for what they need to do. And one way that we do that is using what are called churistics, these very kind of simple rules of thumb that seem to get us by in day to day life. And if you take something like the World Wide Web, which I did a kind of satisfying analysis many years ago, you can look at things like take the example of, you know, searching for hotel rooms or restaurants, two things unfortunately that not a lot of people are doing these days. But you go to some websites, you might use some applications to do this. You pull up a list of hotels or restaurants that are possibilities. There are little tiny bits of information about each one of these. And at some point you might say, well, okay, that's a good one. And you might continue your search and say, well, that's a little bit better than the one I was looking at. And at some point you kind of hit diminishing returns. There's just if you could keep searching essentially for a very long, long time to get a better answer, or you could just stop now and go with the thing that you have in hand. And that kind of process, which I think we're all familiar with, is kind of the essence of satisfying. You don't go and look at every car in the nearest 200-mile radius to buy a car. You sort of go long enough and you sort of go, you know, this is good enough. I'm not going to look any further. So Peter, SCMU, you became very interested in building artificial intelligence systems to tutor people one-on-one. So can you talk to us about this work and also how it eventually led you to travel across the country to work in Berkeley, California? Yeah. My dissertation research was on studying how people learn how to program. And in particular, I was interested in how people in introductory programming courses learn how to do recursion, which is a very difficult concept for most people to learn even though the code itself is really quite simple. This was at a time when I thought we were building some of the most complicated models at the time. We were modeling people going through entire courses of programming materials and modeling them computationally, modeling their performance, including their errors, as well as the skills that they were learning as they progressed from one problem to another. So scientifically, that was kind of a big achievement at the time that you could build these models of individuals learning these very complicated things that would take weeks and weeks and weeks of time. And now having those models, my advisor, John Anders, and had the idea that, well, if you really understand something, you ought to be able to do some good with it. And so we took those models of students and then embedded those inside of some simple tutoring algorithms. And the way that the tutoring algorithms worked was basically by monitoring every piece of code that you wrote, every symbol, every parentheses that you put down, and would choose problems that were predicted to be ones that would challenge you just a little bit, and would intervene with the right kinds of hints and the right kinds of instruction when you made a mistake. So it was kind of an over-the-shoulder tutor that monitored your progress and monitored the knowledge and skills that you were learning. So we actually built these systems. Some others in that group deployed them into the high schools, some algebra tutors. I worked on a programming tutor that was deployed into first-year courses at CMU. So these actually had applied applications. And because of that work, some folks at Berkeley who were starting up a program in the education department around education and math and science and technology, they recruited me to come out there because what we really wanted to do was to address some of the challenges that were happening in education at that time of how do we promote good science and technology education in the K-312 classrooms. And I was there for about six or eight years before I left. Your particularly well-known for developing the concept of information foraging along with Stuart Card in the late 1990s, while the two of you were together at the Xerox Research Center, which is now known as the Palo Alto Research Center. And this term, information foraging, I think it's a great term, by the way, was inspired by animal behavior theories about how animals forage for their food. Can you talk about the development and what you see as the significance of this concept and where you sort of went with it? Well I ended up at Xerox Park in the early 90s after Berkeley and I was in Stuart Card's user interface research group and they and a bunch of others were working on what they were calling intelligent information access systems. And this was really at the beginning of the internet and the worldwide web. And so the real challenge was now building these new browsers and search systems for this massive amount of content that everybody was getting online. And it was pretty clear that the existing theories and models that had been developed in human computer interaction were not really going to meet the demands of understanding these new kinds of systems. And so at some point, some of us, Stuart Card, Dan Russell, Mark Steffick, John Van Geesh from Cal State Sacramento, said, well let's actually go study people who have to work with large amounts of information. So we looked at business intelligence analysts who spend all their day just collecting information and writing about it. We followed some MBA students around as they worked on some big projects. And it was kind of clear that the phenomena that we were looking at were a little bit different and it looked a lot like foraging. People are foraging for information. They are dealing with these massive volumes and they have to make these complicated decisions with a great deal of uncertainty. So I had to think of how to try to understand this stuff. And so there were two things that I drew upon. One was at the time John Anderson was working on these things called rational models of cognition. And the fundamental idea was that if you start with an analysis of the environment and the constraints of how that environment is structured, you can come to a better understanding of cognition because cognition is trying to adapt to that environment. The second area which was related to my interest in anthropology and psychology at Trent was this notion of behaviorally ecology and optimal foraging theory. And this idea that again, if you could understand the resources and cost structures in the environment, you could understand how behavior is adapting to that. So I quite literally had this aha experience one night while I was talking to my wife, where I said, you know, look, if you just understand the information environment and how it works, you could understand how human beings adapt to that and you could build more adaptive and better designs to help people engage with that information environment. The way that optimal foraging theory works is it says, let's look at organisms or human beings and assume that there are energy resources out there in the environment, whether it's prey or patches of food that are out there. And we can come to a better understanding of why they decide to search for things in particular ways and why they make decisions about whether to stay in one place or move on in terms of the costs and benefits of each of the actions that are in front of them. And so I took that basic approach, which is founded on how do organisms get energy from the environment and transferred that over to the information environment and said, can we analyze things in the same way but say, how do people get wisdom and knowledge from the information around them, given the costs and benefits of the information structures that they deal with? So that was kind of the insight, but then having taken that as an approach, the real next aha experience was we took one of these intelligent information access systems called the scatter gather system. And we had all these data from people doing this kind of just massive behavior with these systems while they were doing these tasks. And it was sort of incomprehensible. So I said, well, let me apply one of these optimal foraging analyses to try to understand the behavior that we're seeing. And all of a sudden, everything just lined up. So everything that was predicted was there in the data. All the lines were nice, beautiful, straight lines. And so I said, there's something here. And in that led to decades of fruitful research. So Peter, this research led to your book, Information foraging Theory, Adaptive Interaction with Information. And in the book, you write about a concept called high information sent. Can you explain what high information sent is and how it affects a web search? Sure. High information sent is typically associated with more efficient search and the way that that happens is as follows. So what I mean by information sent is just the idea that on a standard interface or in a browser or in an application, there are these cues, whether it's texts or images that are telling you what's down that path. Should you select that button or click on that link. And so those cues give you some proximal information that allows you to make a prediction about the distal information that you might get. Now, navigation through most applications and certainly through the web has a very branchy structure. That is, if you at every point in time chose to go down every link, you know, pretty soon you're going everywhere and you have this huge branching search structure that goes on forever. And if information sent is not good, if then you're going to see much more of that kind of random exploration of all the different branches that you could go down. And so you have what's known as an exponential cost structure. Now, what information sent does is if it's really good, it helps you go ballistically directly to the target that you're trying to get to. So a well designed interface, you don't poke around, it sort of go down lots of rabbit holes that don't lead anywhere. You go directly to the thing that you want. And that's fundamentally a different kind of cost structure. It's a linear cost structure. You can see this if you look, if you do any kind of analytics on things like websites, and so this core idea of information sent was kind of a very simple thing that we could focus in on that would have this enormous impact on how well people could search for information. And one of the things that was a value beyond the scientific idea was that it was sort of a simple concept. A lot of website designers picked up on it. And so now if you look for information sent on the web, there's all kinds of people that talk about this and give courses about it, et cetera. STEM Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research lab pioneering groundbreaking technologies aimed at leveraging and extending human cognition, perception, locomotion, and resilience. So Peter, your book is aimed at an interdisciplinary audience, people who might have backgrounds or interests in the application of cognitive science, computer science, information science and economics, and how these applications are related to the way humans interact with information. So can you give our listeners an overview of the book, and also your overall goal in writing that book? One of the goals was that there are very few homegrown theories of human computer interaction. By that, I mean, the field of human computer interactions are very applied field, and often they borrow theories and ideas from other disciplines. And information foraging theory is really one of the few cases, there are others. It's one of the few cases where the theory emerged from the field itself and it drew upon a lot of different ideas, but fundamentally it was built around human computer interaction problems. So I had several goals here. One was the theory itself. I wanted people to understand at a deeper level what information foraging theory was about. The term evokes all kinds of general ideas, which are quite useful, like information synthesis, a useful idea. But there is a very technical underpinning, and there's a lot of mathematics, and there's computational cognitive models in there. And so I wanted to really show that there was a deeper foundation to this idea. And not only promote information foraging theory itself, but as an example of the fact that you could do very rigorous theories about human computer interaction. So that was one of the goals, two of the goals. One was to present the theory in a very integrated way, and to show it as an example of a way of doing science in that HCI human computer interaction area. And then related to that, I was hoping that people in other areas, like cognitive science and economics and library science and so on, would see that human computer interaction is a really good field to advance fundamental theory that science isn't just about mathematical models divorced from reality or laboratory studies of people pressing buttons, that you could study people doing real things and really advance some fundamental science. So apply applications in fundamental areas like cognitive psychology and cognitive science are typically relegated to a lower tier. And I wanted to really advance the idea that applied science is really where it's at. Following up on that, another concept that you've written about is called cooperative information foraging. And could you give us some examples on that and just elaborate a little on what you mean by that? Well, I was interested in that kind of at the beginning of what we now think of as online social media, which was sort of a different thing back when it first got started. And to my mind, the models that I applied to thinking about this again were very computational in nature. I borrowed a lot of ideas from my colleague at Park Bernardo Huberman. And the general idea is if you think of information foragers as working in these large spaces of information that can be found and foraged, one of the things they can do is sort of signal to one another that, hey, I found something that you may be interested in. And of course, many areas like science try to work this way. So the whole idea, I think, I shouldn't say the whole idea, but one of the key ideas of how we make progress in sciences that every scientist is sort of studying some problem of interest and communicating to others that, hey, maybe there's an idea here that you might find interesting or beneficial to your research. And that collectively, when you do the computational modeling, you can show that that kind of cooperative process where people are not only finding stuff for themselves, but communicating hints and ideas to other people is one that will go beyond what any individual can do, that you can find more innovative ideas and more good ideas than could be found otherwise. And it's especially important that you have diversity in the foraging agents in the sense that people have different interests and different heuristics because that's really the thing that kind of uncovers the good ideas. Now, as I said, I started working on that kind of in the early days of online social media. And for a variety of reasons, the place where I was working decided that there was really nothing that would ever be productive about online social media. So I kind of moved away from that. And of course, social media has evolved into something quite different than it was at the beginning. So Peter, once smartphones became so pervasive, you particularly became interested in the possibilities of using smartphones to support behavioral change. So can you talk to us about the research that you're doing all ways to use smartphones to support health and also lifestyle changes and alter people's habits? Yes. So the thing that smartphones are really making possible now is in conjunction with other devices, of course, that you can collect massive amounts of data about what people are doing on a moment by moment basis. And on the flip side, of course, smartphones give you the potential for interacting with people again, kind of on a momentary basis. So the promise is that we have not only through smartphones, but through the Internet of Things, this pervasive technology that allows us to interact with people in the ecology of their day to day lives, collect information about what they're doing and interact with them, hopefully to support them. So that's what the advantage is. Now, from my perspective, this is sort of like what we were doing with intelligent tutoring systems in the sense that if we've really had good models of people's health and their psychology, then we ought to be able to provide really personalized targeted help to help them eat better, have a more active lifestyle, to have more things that will prevent downstream health problems. And from my perspective, the way to look at this is that if you want to help people change their lifestyle, you have to think of it as weaving together many small habits at a time. So you can't just tell people, you know, eat better. You really have to get into the nitty gritty of kind of all the day to day small habits that you have to build up in order to weave together this more complex but healthy lifestyle. And so we started to do some work down this path in a system called fiddle and we've had considerable success in modeling some of the interventions and the impact that we're having on people's acquisition of these different habits. In fact, I'm really pleased with some of the early successes that we've had. We have one version of the system that really doesn't have a whole lot of AI in it, but we were just testing the feasibility and it is out in Miami and in Manhattan working with elderly population who, of course, are often isolated, especially now and often do have a lot of challenges in living a more healthy lifestyle, especially around physical activity and better nutrition. And we're having a great deal of success right now. A lot of people really love this system. It sounds like really interesting research Peter and I'm guessing this type of research makes more sense to be conducted in the real world is you've been talking about in real time rather than studying people in a laboratory environment. Is that right? Yeah, I have nothing against studying people in the laboratory and I often do it myself, but takes psychology, for example, psychology is supposed to be the science of human behavior. And what it often is is the study of finger presses and survey answers. It's not really about behaving people doing things that are meaningful to them in their everyday life. Now, you know, one could make an argument that back in the day, it really was much more about helping people and understanding behavior in everyday life. So my interest is, is really I want to understand the full complexity of the human mind and human behavior as embedded in the ecology of their everyday life. And here we now have these platforms for doing this and we could let some of these big tech companies sort of do it all, but boy wouldn't it be great if we actually did some science and tried to do some good with those systems. So when I work with our mobile health systems like fiddle, I'm of course interested in helping people, but I also think that it's just an enormous scientific opportunity that I wish more people would be involved in. Yeah, and Peter, one of the primary reasons and you know this and kind of alluded to it already that we study people in the lab is so that we can control outside variables that could potentially influence our bias outcome. And when you study people in the field or in the real world, how do you track and ultimately integrate these outside variables into your analysis is something we have to consider to when we're doing field experiments for some of the external environmental work that we do. Right. So the reason why you go into the lab is to gain experimental control. Now, of course, another way that you can gain experimental control is by measuring more things. So if you really do know more about the context in the variables that are impinging on people, you can in some sense factor those out or include them in to the analyses that you have. So one thing is we are now to position where because of all these great platforms, we could measure more stuff. Now, I think that the challenge is also in the fields of machine learning and statistics probably because this idea of studying individuals embedded in these very complicated multi-dimensional environments is not something that we've really tackled from a measurement and experimental perspective. There is lots of good AI out there that's doing these predictive analytics, but to really understand how to incorporate it into a causal understanding, which is what we try to get at when we do experiments. I think this is going to be a big challenge for those fields. Peter, I've known you for at least a couple decades now and I've always thought highly and of you and in my major work. In 2017, I think I played a role in finally convincing you to join IHMC as a senior research scientist. What attracted you to come here and how have you found it thus far? Well, you are absolutely instrumental in getting me to IHMC and IHMC was always an interesting place to me. There's many things that I find interesting about IHMC's. One, of course, is that there's just a lot of interesting people doing a lot of interesting things and a lot of interdisciplinary work. And those are the kinds of environments that I like to work in. Of course, it's always pleasant to be surrounded by people who think like you, but I think that good ideas really come from working with a lot of people who think differently than you or at least look at things differently than you. And so I've always tried to choose places where there's a mix of disciplines and I think that that gives you an opportunity to learn. So it is not easy to be interdisciplinary. In fact, I sort of have this rule of thumb, this heuristic, if you will, that it takes at least a year to really be able to talk to someone from another field because the nuances of the language that they speak and the aesthetics about what they think is good science or things that take quite a while to really get an appreciation for. So IHMC does just this great mix of projects and robotics and artificial intelligence and natural language processing and of course psychology. And so the thing that really attracted me first and foremost was to be able to work with all those interesting people. And then IHMC is unique in comparison to academia and commercial research centers in the sense that it's an environment for intellectual freedom. And so I think that's a very intellectual freedom which has pluses and minuses to it. The pluses are that if you're an entrepreneur and really want to go after some ideas and you can make that happen that you've got all the freedom to do that. The minuses of course is that the flip side is there's nobody telling you what to do. So you have to stand on your own two feet and that that's sometimes a scary for a lot of people. The second thing that I found is something that of course you can't predict when you join is that I'm working with a bunch of people that I never would have predicted that I would be working with because I didn't really know them at the time. And I am working with folks from robotics and natural language processing and people interested in collaborative teaming. And it's just been great because I've been pushed in directions that I never would have gone to. I'm working with people focused on human performance issues and biological approaches which might be new for you as well. Yes, so on that note Tim Broderick who is our chief science officer here at IGMC was just on STEM talk as well. And he discussed the interdisciplinary research team that he's put together for the peerless operator biologic aptitude project also known as peerless. And Peter you're a key player on peerless and as you know this project is being designed to increase the biologic aptitude of warfighters so that they can increase their adaptability and resilience in extreme conditions. Can you talk about this project a little bit and also the role that you're playing in it? Sure, so I'm particularly focused in on what we're calling the cognitive and behavioral and teaming aspect of this. And the idea is that we're going to try to develop these new ways of assessing aptitudes that may be important to this kind of high level elite performance. And hopefully these things will also carry over to helping us assess regular folks in general. There's multiple aspects of to this. So one is historically a lot of cognitive aptitudes let's say are measured and fairly straightforward ways. You know reaction times in this very simple decision making tasks answering survey style questions on an intelligence test and those things are good. But there's a lot of other stuff that we've discovered in the basic science literature that I think people are interested in that one thing that we're doing of course is also incorporating a lot of new technology for measuring things. So we're interested in using various ways of collecting biomarkers like EEGs eye tracking and probably doing various biological markers from blood draws and saliva that will all be interrelated to see how they relate to predictions of cognitive performance. And some of the things that were interested in on the cognitive side are for example the ability to learn new tasks rapidly. So people seem to have different parameters for their learning rates and it would be interesting to be able to pick that up. We're also interested in understanding the things that make teaming work and we have a variety of complicated neuro perceptual tasks where multiple people have to work together and communicate to one another and we're going to collect a ton of data and relate that to predictions of how people do in real teaming situations out in the field. We are also quite interested in tasks that resemble the actual performance that people will have to do out in the field and so we're dealing with military applications so things like targets shooting and stuff are important. But we're interested in decomposing that down into the component elements of perception and cognitive decision making that go into that at a very granular fine grain millisecond scale. But I think one thing that many people are interested in is the idea of resilience and the idea of what's called hot cognition. So hot cognition is when you're stressed, how does your system behave? Is your decision making nice and stable even though the body is going through a stressful situation? And resilience is this thing that I think we see that sports commentators make a comment about all the time. Will he get his head back in the game? Something bad happens. Do you rebound reasonably quickly and you're at high performance almost immediately? So those are the kinds of things that we're trying to drill down on down into the substrate of cognition and biology to better understand. You are also the principal investigator of a new project at IHMC that was recently awarded by the National Science Foundation. The project is focused on improving the epidemiological models that forecast the rate of infections and deaths related to COVID. And Don mentioned this project earlier, but now is a good time to discuss it, I think, in more detail. Can you give us an overview of this project and its significance and how it might be useful? Well, I think anybody who's living through this pandemic has seen on the news these projections of what the case rates will be and what the death rates will be. And if you go online, there are several hubs where many of the models that are used to make these predictions are collected together. And you can look at these plots that show all the different models and the confidence intervals around their predictions. And the first thing you notice is that some of them are really bad. I mean, in the sense that you could make a better prediction by just predicting that tomorrow is going to be like today. And often the difference between kind of a lower confidence bound and the upper confidence bound might be an entire order of magnitude difference. And so, in the dark inside of these models, many of which are quite complicated and seem reasonable. The one thing that's really missing is kind of a deeper modeling and understanding of individual perceptions and attitudes and beliefs and intentions. Things that are called NPI's, non-pharmaceutical interventions. So how messaging and regulations and mandates, how do those things have an impact on individual attitudes and beliefs and intentions? And how do these things vary over time? So we see a lot of analyses about people of this type aren't listening to the government and people of this type are actively disobeying. That's a lot of psychology. And the fact that we talk about things like pandemic fatigue, the fact that people can stay in doors for a little bit of time and then eventually they sort of get tired of that and they go outdoors and sort of flaunt whatever recommendations they have. So for these things that are considered non-pharmaceutical interventions, they really do rely on human psychology and human behavior in order to make them work. And unfortunately these epidemiological models don't have very much that's very deep about human psychology that's inside of them. So there's kind of a big view and a small view of this project and I'll go through the big view. The bigger view that we have of this project that this is a multi-university multidisciplinary team. It includes computational cognitive psychology, natural language processing, computer science. We do have a well-known epidemiological modeler and someone who does agent-based models. We have a very good team and what we're interested in is being able to build individual level behavior response models that are reacting to the environment around them and the information messaging that they're getting things like Twitter, things like the news. And from those individual level behavioral agents, we want to build up these collectives, these social networks or these populations of multi-agent systems that represent different regions. And in a sense build these synthetic populations of psychologically valid agents. And from that we want to be able to predict things like their mobility patterns, whether they will wear masks and what their attitudes and behaviors are, what their judgments about the credibility of the information sources are that they're listening to. And we have tons of data that we can use to see these models and to test their validity, including things like Twitter and polling data. There's polling data that is done at the granularity of every day and we have access to that kind of information. And we are not only interested in modeling different regions but also the dynamics. So things change daily. What people do on a day-by-day basis and how they react to the things that they're hearing and the things that they're seeing changes on a day-by-day basis. And so we're very much interested in those dynamics. And hopefully all of this will lead to essentially something like a module or a computational component that could then be fit into these other epidemiological models and produce better predictions. Peter, so I heard you talk about how you believe that your interdisciplinary background is responsible for the productivity and the success that you've had throughout your career. And I know that one of the reasons you agreed to join IHMC is because you believe the Institute fosters an interdisciplinary approach. In an academic world that insists on specialization typically, can you talk about the importance of an interdisciplinary background? Well, I believe, and I think my brief foray into cooperative information foraging models sort of backs this up, I believe that when you bridge multiple disciplines, you're more likely to get good ideas. There's some empirical work that shows this that people who bridge different networks of scientists tend to generate more interesting ideas. And it kind of makes sense in multiple ways. So one is that it gives you a different kind of over-the-horizon radar on ideas. So everybody in your discipline is kind of focused in on a set of ideas and kind of following certain research trends. But if you're looking at another area, you might see something that nobody else does. And you might see a connection between things of interest in your own area and things in this other area. And if you can pull those two things together, you might sort of have a good idea that nobody else has. You know, information foraging was kind of an example of that. That just by having had this variety of interests, I was able to pull together a bunch of apparently disparate ideas that solved a particular problem that I had. And I think you are right in the academic areas tend to be this way that you are, you know, you need to publish in the right journals. And you need to publish about certain kinds of trendy things in order to get tenure or to advance as a professor. And then your corporate research tends to often be that similar that you, you know, you just need to keep focused in on whatever the trendy, you know, new AI deep learning systems are and apply it to the problem of selling more ads or whatever it is that you're supposed to do. And the advances are going to come from ideas that are somewhat innovative and even going back to Herb Simon, now that I think of it. Herb Simon did a lot of writing about how science progressives and he also had this idea that it's people who often kind of bridge across multiple disciplines that see some things that are somewhat mundane and one discipline that are kind of innovative in the other. And the challenge is again, it's really hard to do work across multiple disciplines and it takes a long time, as I said, to just understand how another discipline works. And so that's probably the reason why a lot of people shy away from interdisciplinary work. It sort of takes, it has an overhead to it to sort of get embedded in multiple disciplines. And it's definitely an overhead, but I think it's worth it as well. Shifting gears a little, what advice do you have for young aspiring scientists who are still in college? Do you have any sage advice? Well, it's been a long time since I was a young scientist in college, but I do think that again, going to this idea of being somewhat interdisciplinary, I've always found that, you know, you really do want to be centered in a discipline. But it's really important to have an adjacent thing that you're very interested in that you think has applications or innovations to the ideas that you're pursuing in your own research discipline. And again, there is an overhead to that and sometimes your supervisors or your dean will say, why are you publishing in this other area or why you're interested in this other area. But it is one of those things that I think if you do it right, you will come across some ideas that your colleagues don't have. Absolutely. And I've personally though, this was many, many years ago and it's somewhat better now, but I actually got called in to a boss's office when I was a young scientist and asked, why was I mucking about with these other disciplines. And I should knock it off immediately. Well, I've sat on tenure committees when I was at Berkeley and also I would say on some graduate student committees where this was exactly the problem where people would say, well, you know, are they getting a dissertation in our field or are they getting a dissertation in this other field? Why are you know, despite the fact that maybe they had published a bunch of great work. There was this kind of I don't know territoryality about it that didn't make any sense to me, but it is it is a challenge. But, but if you do it right, you're going to come up with some ideas other people don't have. Thanks Peter. Yeah, I have to say I've been super lucky in the sense that I've always had supportive mentorship as far as the research that I've done. And I think part of that's being from the clinical academic side of things. Yes, a little bit more spread, I think, and flexibility and what it is that you study, but yeah, from what I understand traditional academia can definitely be that way. So we're going to turn make a turn towards the personal for a little bit here, Peter, a lot of the work that we do here at IHMC involves helping elite warfighters improve their performance and resilience and extreme environments. Yeah, we talked about your your love for surfing and surfing definitely has different aspects of it that include extreme environmental exposures and specific to that in your experience. I understand that you almost drowned as a result of hypothermia. So what happened and I'm super glad you're okay. Well, as I said, I'm out here at San Francisco Ocean Beach and this is not like your Baywatch surfing out here. It is a challenge. So often we get swells out here that are 20 foot, not that I go out in 20 foot winter waves, but it is challenging out here. And I've seen it's maybe 55 degrees is kind of the average here. So you have to wear four or three wetsuits often when I'm talking to my friends. One of the questions is, you know, how much of a beating are we going to take paddling out into the surf? And I've seen guys experienced veteran surfers out here side by side, a pair paddle out. One guy gets into a channel a nice little rip current and is out there surfing in a matter of minutes. And the other guy gets sucked the quarter mile north gets pounded gets sucked the quarter mile south gets pounded never makes it a hundred foot from shore and gets spit up onto the beach an hour later. Head between his legs, tail between his legs and then just take the walk of shame back to the parking lot. And so one day I was out here with some friends reasonably big day, but more to the point was kind of just messy. And I got caught in a vortex of rip current and broke my leash lost my board. And I was in a position where I thought, well, okay, I'll just paddle back to shore. But the rip current was such that I couldn't go to the sides and I couldn't paddle in. And I also couldn't paddle through or under the wave because it was just so big and mushy. And so at some point I was just getting caught in this washing machine of getting sucked up the face of the wave and getting pounded in my wetsuit started to flush. So I was getting the cold water kind of flushing through my wetsuit and I was starting to get hypothermia and I hadn't quite panicked yet, but I was starting to lose the ability to actually swim. And I was taking on water and just at the right moment my buddy, how came like surf or cavalry over the wave and said, it looks like you're having trouble here and put me on the board and got me up to shore. And took me a while to get the water out of my lungs and to get my feet underneath me and to stagger back home. And I said, well, it looks like you had a scare, but you're okay. And I forgot warmed up. I realized, ah, damn, I have to go into work for a management meeting. So almost dying by Dr. Drining was not the worst thing that happened to me that day. I actually had to go in for a moment. That's not well said and talking about the conditions out there, Peter, you know, living here, I'm a windsurfer. And living here in Pensacola, you know, it's balmy water, even in the winter compared to what you're talking about. And I had the brilliant idea that I was going to rent a windsurfing board. This is when I was at NASA Ames, which I did. And let's just say, went out, jibed, came back, checked the board back in. One turn. It's cold. Yes, it's cold. And on a day where it's kind of real mushy and messy out there, those are not conditions where you want to be in any kind of sail craft out there. No, exactly. It's hard to explain if a person is not a use to windsurfing, but it's very squirrely failing. I was happy to complete the turning, come back, and that's enough for the day. Right. The other challenge out here that most even surfers from elsewhere don't realize is, you know, we've got the bay here. And it kind of, you know, it's, it will, the ebb and flow from the bay causes like, I don't know, these six to eight foot, sorry, six to eight knot, long short currents. Yeah. So you will just get pulled up in one direction or another and you just can't fight it no matter, no matter how hard you paddle, you just can't fight that. Well, I'm glad you survived your washing machine experience. Absolutely. So am I. So am I. So continuing on the personal vein for a little longer on your website, you have a wonderful quote from a great author, Carmack McCarthy. And from his famous book, The Road, could you read us that quote? Yeah. So the quote goes as follows, once there were a booktrug in the streams in the mountains, you could see them standing in the amber current where the white edges of their fins, windpulled softly in the flow. They smelled of moss in your hand, polished and muscular and torsional under backs were vermiculate patterns that were maps of the world and it's becoming maps and mazes of a thing which could not be put in place. But back not be made right again in the deep glands where they lived, all things were older than man and they hummed of mystery. It's the last paragraph of his book and I just think it's a great, great paragraph. It is. He's a remarkable author and very famous and yet I would say underappreciated. Absolutely. And if you have a succinct reason why you have that on your webpage. Actually, there's multiple reasons. So one is just the sheer poetry. I mean, when was the last time you used wimpled or torsional or vermiculate in a sense? And yet those are, and those are all words that are just perfect to describe trout in a stream. I mean, it's just amazing to me. But the second part is that to me, it's also an image of what I think of as evolution and nature delivering us these near perfect things. So the idea that there are these maps and mazes through which evolution has kind of searched for these perfect organisms for the environments that they're in. And I often think of, when I think of evolution, I often think of these vermiculate patterns, these marvelously branching trees of life that get us to where we are. So it gives me an image of nature as experience, but also nature kind of in principle as this evolving process that gives us these mysteries. And I think the third part is that it is a great statement about conservation that when we lose these things, we lose a lot. That there are just these mysteries of nature that once they're gone, they're gone. And we should not kid ourselves. There is a lot that we don't understand about the world and about the beings that are in them. And I'm always struck by the hubris that we have about thinking that we understand intelligence, for example, when in fact there are these alien intelligences around us all all over the place. Ravens and crows and dolphins. And we really don't understand them at all. So nature has all these great mysteries and it is our duty almost to make sure that we keep them around as much as possible. Well said, and Hemingway had a lot to say about trout as well. And yes, and on an earlier podcast, we had a podcast about bird brains. Do you remember that done? Absolutely. How it's not an insult to be called a bird brain. Very neuronal. Yeah, in fact, just as in a side, one of my fascinations is with the Ravens that we have around here. And I will claim, and I have a picture somewhere to back it up, that I have seen a Raven windsurfing in a different way right off the berms here using a paper plate catching the updrafts. So literally holding the paper plate, pulling the paper plate in its claws and sort of getting on on the air and putting its wings back and surfing on the air. So they are there and they're made there are many ridiculous birds. Exactly. Peter, I understand that you've been reading William William Gibson's books. So do you think the idea of uploading our minds to the cloud as a possibility or do you think it's just science fiction? I love William Gibson and I've just in the middle of finishing his most recent book. And I hate to say it. It's I think that the idea of uploading minds is probably more science fiction than probability. It is in principle, I would guess possible, but the there is a lot of things that have to happen if you want to really upload a mind. And I just suspect that it's largely intractable. So one issue is the issue of just embodiment. I mean, we like to think of of our minds as being these encapsulated things that exist in our brains. But really, we are embodied and embedded in the world. And you would have to you would have to duplicate a lot of processes that capture what's going on in the body and in the environment in order to duplicate or you know, upload a mind. And that would really require duplicating a lot of those processes a long way down into all of those substrates. You would have to capture a lot of reality and a lot of the environment in order to do anything like an upload. And I just think that it's probably going to be intractable and feasible for as far as I can see. Well, Peter, this has been great fun. And I think we need to wrap this up because it's about time for you to take your dog Jake on one of his four walks of the days. That's pretty good for him. I have to say on your website. I know it's a photo of you and Jake on a paddle board. So does Jake enjoy paddle boarding? And in the photo, he I have to say he actually looks like he's really enjoying it. Yeah, he has a good time paddle boarding, but I have to say he's sort of getting up there in years. And so now he just treats it as a springboard for swimming and he gets to dictate what he does. So I have to go on with him. Yeah, as always, we work for our pets. That is true. I know my place in the world. Exactly. Especially cats, if you have a cat that cats the boss have multiple cats. So they know how to. Yeah, I'm just the feeder and the square. Well, I think we all I think we also kind of live through our pets a little bit. So I, you know, I would love nothing more than someone to drive me in around in a truck while I stick my head out the window. I'm trying to make a happy face. Exactly. That's been great, Peter. Thank you. Yeah, thank you. Yeah, thanks, Peter. It's been fantastic. Stim talk. Stim talk. Stim talk. Stim talk. So it was great to have Peter on the show, especially immediately following Tim Broderick. If you haven't listened to episode 112, you definitely need to check it out. The work that Peter and Tim are doing on the peerless project has so much potential to help not only elite warfighters improve their performance and resilience, but perhaps somebody in the general public too. I agree, Don, and that's just one of the many reasons the peerless project is so fascinating. I also really like the point Peter made about the importance of an interdisciplinary education and perspective. The important thing in life, of course, is to keep learning and to keep growing. And like Peter, one of the things I love about IHMC is that we're definitely the home of interdisciplinary research. And we have the freedom and encouragement to reinvent ourselves. And Don has done that. I've done it lately. It's a good thing to do. I definitely agree, Ken. And if you enjoy this interview as much as Ken and I did, we invite you to visit the Stim talk web page where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes. Stim talk.us. This is Donk and I get signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stim talk. Thank you for listening to Stim talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others. So please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, Stim talk.us. There, you can also find more information about the guests we interview.
