Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host Don Conegas and joining me to introduce today's podcast, The Man Behind the Curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, HMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Slection Committee that selects all the guests who appear in Stem Talk. Hi Don, great to be here today. So our guest today is Dr. Stuart Phillips, a professor of kinesiology at McMaster University in Ontario, Canada, who is best known for his research into muscle health and the benefits of dietary protein. Stue is the director of McMaster Physical Activity Center of Excellence, a state-of-the-art exercise research and training center that is devoted to studying and improving the health and well-being of older adults, as well as people with chronic diseases and disabilities. In addition to his work in the kinesiology department at McMaster, Stue is adjunct professor at the University School of Medicine. He is a fellow of the American College of Sports Medicine and the American College of Nutrition. He also received a new investigator award from the Canadian Institute for Health Research, the Ontario Premier's Research Excellence Award and the Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology Young Investigator Award. But before we get to today's interview with Stue, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk and we are especially appreciative of all of the wonderful five-star reviews that have been piling up on iTunes and elsewhere. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher and other podcast apps for the widiest and most lavishly praised field reviews to read on Stem Talk. If you hear you review Red on Stem Talk, just contact us at StemTalk at ihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk T-shirt. Today, our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker, Wild Doggy. The review is titled Fascinatingly Mind Blowing. The review reads, I was directed to Stem Talk from Rob Wolf's podcast. I'm learning so much about physiology that my head is spinning. Love that such interesting research is happening and is expanding. Keep finding these great researchers, Double Secret Selection Committee. Well, thank you Wild Doggy and to Rob Wolf and thank you to all of our other Stem Talk listeners who've helped Stem Talk become such a great success. Absolutely. And now onto our interview with Dr. Stu Phillips. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Hi, welcome to Stem Talk. I'm your host on Knages and joining us today is Stu Phillips. Stu, welcome to Stem Talk. My pleasure. Thanks for having me on the show. And also joining us is Ken Ford. Hello, Don and hello, Stu. So Stu, you've lived in Canada for a long time, but you were born in the United Kingdom. How old were you when your parents moved to Canada? Yeah, I actually came to Canada in 1980. At that time, I had just turned 13 years old. So I still carry the British passport, but I think I consider Canada my home. And as a kid, I understand that you played a lot of sports and that the harder you could hit somebody that was even better. So what sports did you play? Yeah, I enjoyed rugby. I liked soccer a little bit, although wasn't enough hitting for me. I really enjoyed ice hockey and football as well. Makes sense. And I also understand that you had a high school science teacher who was responsible for getting you interested in biology and even chemistry. Is that right? Yeah, Guy named Marty Rich. Still in touch with him on Facebook. And I tell him he's the man who started me out on the path in science, for sure. That's very cool. That's great. After high school, you headed off from McMaster University. So what led you to decide on that campus in particular? Yeah, well, so McMaster in Hamilton is only about, I would say, about 20 minutes away from where I was going to school to high school. And so it was close enough that I could sort of run home on the weekends to do laundry if I needed to, but it was far enough that I had to live out of my parents' house, which was an important point for me. And at the time, they had a pretty good rugby team as well. So those things sort of came together. And they had a good science program. So a lot of things just came together for me there, I guess. Speaking of rugby, I understand that you were captain of the rugby team your senior year. And it looked as if you were headed to a really great season. But things didn't turn out as you planned. Can you tell us what happened and how the season, in some ways, led to your decision to focus on nutritional biochemistry? Yeah, it's bizarre when I look back on it, how things might have gone very differently. But two weeks prior to the season starting in my senior year of university, I broke my leg, actually playing rugby in a summer game. And all of a sudden, I had a lot of time on my hands. And so I decided that a senior research thesis was the way to go. I looked up a professor in the department of biochemistry where I was doing my degree. He said, sure, come into the lab. And it was a real, I guess, eye opening or epiphany experience and really turned me on to research. And I really haven't looked back since. So how did you end up at Waterloo University to work on a doctorate in physiology? Yeah, so I did a master's degree. And that was in nutritional biochemistry. And then at the end of that, I was looking around for something just a little bit more, I guess, applied to human sand. I met with a professor named Howie Green. He's another one of my touch-done mentors at the University of Waterloo. And he was doing some human training work. And it seemed to then combine everything that I really liked. So I had exercise physiology in one hand. I had human subjects on another. There was a training stimulus. There was nutritional aspects to it. So I looked him up and he was open to taking me on as a PhD student. So after graduating from Waterloo, why did you decide to head off for Texas? Yeah, again, it's a situation where I think you pick the people that you think are the best in the field. I spent a lot of time reading articles by a fellow named Bob Wolf. Bob was another one of my sort of, I would call him a key mentor in my career. And he was down in Galveston, Texas at the time. And really, I really wanted to go and work with him. He was the top dog in the field. And I was fortunate enough to go down there and spend three terrific years in Texas. So is it true that after three years in Texas, you moved back to Canada to get married? Yeah. I think of my wife for telling you the story. She probably agree with that assessment. But I moved back for her. I think it was a confluence of a lot of decisions. It was time for me I thought to start looking for faculty positions. But yeah, my now wife of almost 22 years was also doing her PhD and she soon, I think quite plainly told me at one point, you have to come back if you want me. So it made the decision fairly easy. I think that's a good decision on your part than it sounds like. So what led you back to McMaster to study among other things, protein, exercise, and muscle synthetic versus catabolic dynamics? Yeah, so part of my master's degree was with a fellow named Mark Tarnopolski. And at the time he was a PhD student, he's an MD, and he's probably still one of the most influential people in my entire career, a great mentor, a really great friend. And I think I could say, and it's not a cheap thing to say, is that I wouldn't be where I am today without him. So Mark at the time had a part-time appointment in the Department of Kinesiology. And he said to me, you know what? I'm thinking of getting out of the teaching here, going back to full-time sort of clinical and research. So I think you should probably come back. And then you can take over my teaching and who knows what's going to happen from there. So Mark's field was protein metabolism. It was the thing that I started off doing my research in, and the combination of that then with the Kinesiology Department ended up in a job offer eventually. So early on in your career, you became known for your research into muscle health and benefits of dietary protein. Because all the tissues in our body are broken down and regenerated on a daily basis. Protein is one of the only macronutrients that we have a daily need for. So can you talk about how you first became interested in this process and also give us an overview of the importance of dietary protein? Sure. I mean, there's an analogy that I use that I think works fairly well is to think about all the proteins in your body as if it's a big brick wall. And bricks are being put into the wall. These are the amino acids, nine of which are essential, that are making the wall. And then at the same time, bricks, as you said, are being pulled out of the wall. So there's this constant turnover of proteins in our body. And particularly I was interested in muscle protein because it related to the performance of at the time physical activity and exercise, which is what I was interested in. So the stimuli that are responsible for muscle growth or muscle atrophy, if you like, in the other situation of disuse, I thought were particularly important. It also applied to a lot of clinical situations. People lose muscle mass, for example, when they're on bedrest. And it just really pushed a lot of, I think, intellectual buttons for me. I was intrigued by its study and it was the advent of sort of molecular biology techniques in which people were beginning to look at genes, to sequence genes and to really get a handle on their expression. And I saw the two of these things sort of coming together and it really just turned a lot of my intellectual buttons. So how well do lab metrics correlate to what we really care about in real life? So for example, a lot of your work has focused on muscle protein turnover or the sum of protein synthesis and breakdown. So do changes in muscle protein turnover directly correlate with changes in muscle growth? Yeah, the theory that we've been working under for the probably about the last 20 years is obviously, it's the balance between these two processes. So synthesis is building up the wall, breakdown is obviously breaking it down. When we're kids, the wall's growing so the net effect is that synthesis is exceeding breakdown and as we age or if we get sick, breakdown is exceeding synthesis. I don't think that there's any doubt about that. The process is that we measure acutely, particularly over periods of hours. And I would say broad strokes align with some of the things that you see in the real world. In other words, muscle gain or muscle loss. In certain scenarios that they haven't worked out as well, a more recent method that we've been developing and using which measures protein synthesis and then abundance of proteins over periods of days tends to do a bit better job. So it does align in some situations, but I would admit not at all. Hmm. Many protein intervention studies use supplementation in the form of way protein. That makes sense. In a way has a clearer benefit given its high leucine content and convenience factor. However, recently some researchers are starting to look at interventions with whole food protein. In particular, I'm thinking of a recent 2017 study that showed that whole eggs promoted a greater amount of muscle protein synthesis than egg whites, suggesting perhaps that there might be benefits to the extra nutrients found in the egg yolk. Protein powder may in fact be very convenient, but is it possible that by taking an isolated protein supplement, like way or casing, that we are missing out on a spectrum of other nutrients that could augment the antibiotic effects of the amino acids alone? So I think the short answer to your question is, is yes, absolutely. I mean, most of us don't ingest enough isolated proteins as way or casing for them to be a substantial portion of the protein that we would ingest. And I think that the biggest advantage that those proteins have is clearly that they are convenient. They also don't provide other nutrients, macronutrients in particular, if you're looking to just get protein into your diet and not fat or carbohydrates. But I think that the work that you mentioned, and I'll just give a shout out to a former PhD student, Nick Bird, who's lab conducted that study. And I agree. I think that that's a terrific study, and it's a really interesting example of showing how the food matrix is probably doing something that's different than the isolated egg protein itself. So there's some synergy within food that clearly we're missing when we're studying isolated proteins. And the advent of the method that we have now to measure changes in synthesis over days is really going to help us begin to understand some of those things. Fascinating. So you and many others believe that the recommended daily allowance for protein is too low. So why is that? So I think that there's two things. The current method to establish recommended protein requirements is nitrogen balance. And the shortcomings of that method have been documented for a long, long time. It would be fair to say that it's a method that a lot of people don't agree with as a way to establish protein requirements. And yet it's the method that's still used. That's mainly because there are newer methods that are out there. There's no agreement on which of those is actually either valid or superior and could be used as forging an estimate. So there's a little bit of a difference of a scientific difference of opinion as to which method is still the best one out there. But I think that most of the evidence that we've collected and that we've looked at, particularly from the standpoint of focusing on skeletal muscle, would really indicate that 0.8 grams of protein per kilogram body weight per day, which is the current recommended dietary allowance, is insufficient, particularly for older people to maintain their muscle mass. And so that's the point that we've made probably over more over the last decade in a lot of studies and publications that we've had. So I'm a vegetarian and I have to be a little bit more creative about making sure that I eat enough protein as you can imagine. So can you talk about the differences between animal and plant-based protein? Yeah, I mean, I think it's probably my writer's statement when people talk about vegetarianism is to say that it's a very healthy way to eat. And I have absolutely no issues with vegetarian diets. It's not my personal choice, but I don't have a problem with the diet per se. I think that the big point with vegetarianism or veganism in particular is just to be judicious about how it is that you plan your diet. And protein is one thing that it might be a little bit more difficult to get something of. The generalism is that animal-based proteins are higher quality than plant-based proteins. And so you don't have to actually eat as much animal-based protein to get all of the essential amino acids as you would with plant protein. So beyond that, I think plant proteins generally tend to be a little bit harder to digest. And that's predominantly because of the preponderance of fiber that's present in there. If you remove dietary fiber and you have isolated proteins like soy, for example, then it's a very high-quality protein and is very well-digested. Stu, do you think it might be helpful for a vegetarian or a vegan to supplement with essential amino acids provided that their vegan approved? Who would seem that that might be helpful? I think in certain situations, again, it depends on how well the person were to plan their diet. And in certain situations, I might suggest that that might be something that somebody could do if they were having a hard time either planning their diet or finding sufficient protein through the foods that they were eating. So it's a potential strategy. I'm not a huge fan of individual amino acids supplements. My social media shout outs on that have been pretty clear. I'm not a big fan of single amino acid supplements. But I try to tell people to get protein via their food if they can do it. But it is a possible scenario in which people could use amino acid supplements, sure. Yeah, this would be all the essential amino acids, not just a single amino acid. Yeah, yeah. And there are some clinical studies where people have done that and shown that actually it does tend to improve protein balance when you're able to do that. So Stu, you've mentioned that muscle synthesis and catabolism are like a sinusoidal wave going from animalism to catabolism. Over a 24-hour period, you may see more anabolism. Then you may have a net improvement in muscle mass and vice versa. So can you elaborate on this? Yeah, so it's not just our experimentation, but in studies that we've done a number of other labs around the world, it's pretty clear that when you give somebody protein, they get a transient period in which protein synthesis is stimulated. It exceeds protein breakdown and you get a state of net muscle protein accretion. The flip side of that, the longer you go then without food, the rate of synthesis declines quite sharply. And the balance is that breakdown is exceeding synthesis. So quite simply, you go from these states of being fed in which you're anabolic and then fasted or at least post-prandial for about three to four hours after a meal in which you're in a net catabolic state. And usually those two states are our balance, for example, in someone who's maintaining their muscle mass. But when you have somebody that's either reading insufficient protein or doing insufficient physical activity, which is the other big stimulator of protein synthesis, then net catabolism, in other words, when breakdown is up and synthesis is low, tends to predominate and muscle mass is lost. The currently except an amount of protein required to achieve maximal stimulation of protein synthesis, following resistance exercises, typically in the literature that I've seen something like 20 to 25 grams. And we're talking about young people here. The more recent evidence from Kevin Tipton's group indicates that the dose response relationship may depend on the amount of muscle tissue that was recruited during the exercise. So with the ingestion of 40 grams of protein, they found further increase in muscle protein synthesis rates during recovery from whole body types of resistance training workouts. From reading the paper, it was not clear to me that the difference in muscle protein synthesis was, first of all, that it was enough to really matter outside the context of perhaps elite sport. And secondly, I was wondering if, for an older population, his finding might even be more relevant. And I wondered if you'd talk a little bit about this paper. Yeah, sure. So the initial number that you mentioned, the 20 to 25 grams probably comes from some of the work that we did earlier where we showed in young men who were just exercising their legs, that that was a sufficient dose of protein to maximally stimulate protein synthesis. When we gave the same young man 40 grams, there was about 11% increase in protein synthesis versus 20 grams. So the process was effectively saturated at 20 grams. It may be a bit of a statistical nuance in that the paper you mentioned by Kevin Tipton, also a very good friend trained with Bob Wolf. And so my three years in Galveston, Texas were some very good times with Dr. Tipton and we remained good friends. That paper, and it's Lindsey McNaughton, one of Kevin's former PhD students, the first author on that, the difference between the 20 and 40 gram dose is about 16%. So to me, I agree with you, Ken. I think it's a rather small difference and it wouldn't necessarily say to me that maybe these younger people need to eat a little bit more. But I'll agree to sort of split the hair on that one and say, okay, maybe it's relevant. I do think to your point about an older population who have a condition that we refer to as anabolic resistance. In other words, they don't tend to use protein as efficiently that they could stand to maybe eat a little bit more and 40 grams might be more relevant for that population. We've authored a review paper on that topic with Luke Van Loone and Tyler Churchwood Van A. And we asked the question and it certainly does appear that the evidence would support higher intakes in older people. So aging impairs the sensitivity of skeletal muscle to anabolic stimuli such as amino acids and resistance exercise. So in a very interesting 2013 paper, your group reported that in the context of resistance exercise, it appears that the myofibral or protein synthesis machinery and older muscles is less responsive to low and modest doses of protein. And the key finding from this study was that in middle-aged men, ingestion of beef promotes a dose response relation for MPS with the greatest response occurring with ingestion of 170 grams of beef, which is roughly six ounces containing 36 grams of protein. Can you elaborate a little bit on this study and its findings and implications from mitigating the age-related loss of muscle mass function and also the quality associated with older age? Sure, I mean, I think that the important point, this ties in very nicely with the point we were talking about with Ken before. So as you mentioned, don't the anabolic response to stimuli like protein ingestion or resistance exercise for reasons that we're not fully aware of, probably a number of reasons in older individuals, or in this case, as you mentioned, middle-aged individuals is somehow impaired. And so it either requires that they do more exercise to make themselves more sensitive or they ingest more protein to get themselves sort of back to if you like younger levels. I think the paper, which as you said, it's 170 grams of beef for about 36 grams of protein. The finding kind of speaks for itself. The per serve that people really talk about with beef is in Canadian and and US guides is about three to four ounces. And so substantially less than the six ounce dose, which we showed stimulated protein synthesis to a greater degree. And it goes back maybe a little bit to the food matrix effect is that there are things in beef that are beyond. Simply it's protein content that might be aiding in the anabolic process, but it certainly does suggest that older people would require more protein on a per dose basis to stimulate protein synthesis. Given the losing oxidation responses that you reported in the study, does it seem reasonable to think that the 170 grams of beef might be close to the maximally efficient or the maximally effective dose after which additional protein would fail to increase muscle protein synthesis? Yeah, that's a good question. It certainly does appear that that kind of dose that we're beginning to see oxidation, particularly of the amino acid loosing, which we're measuring here, which was suggest that the amino acids themselves are not being used for protein synthesis. Now, it may well be that you need to get to those doses and see the consummate stimulation of amino acid oxidation to get that protein synthetic response. The only cross-sectional or cross-study comparison that I can make to answer the question of we're probably near the top is a study done by Doug Patten Jones and Brock Simmons is the first author in which they gave older men 12 ounces of beef, so in Doug's word, he calls that the outback dose of steak or beef, and they saw no further stimulation compared to a smaller dose. So I think that we're with six ounces of beef we're probably close to the top end, I agree. We have a colleague here that 12 ounce steaks are mere appetizers. Yeah, and there's lots of people out on social media on the full out all meat diets, so I don't doubt that people are getting more. Yeah, he carries a large amount of muscle and he's convinced that, therefore, he needs much more beef. Yep, lots of people like that out there, for sure. So on a related topic, there's a lot of talk today about protein timing. I know this is something that you've looked into as well. So can you discuss the importance or maybe even the lack thereof of a protein timing in relation to a bad resistance training and a total protein intake over the course of the day? Yeah, sure. I have to go back to a study that I did when I was involved in both lab, which was published in 1997, and I just like to say the number 1997 to convince my current crop of undergraduate and graduate students, the good science was done prior to the widespread advent of the internet and the TN. You may actually have to go to the library to look this one up rather than it. Yeah, I know, I know, it's scary. And what we showed in that study was that the effect of just exercising alone actually stimulated muscle protein synthesis, even in the fastest state for up to two days. So, and I agree, it was a pretty heavy leg exercise workout, but I think the point would be, is if exercise alone is stimulating muscle protein synthesis and then food is adding onto that, which is what we know happens, then I don't think that that anabolic window is so called is closed, you know, an hour or two hours later. So I don't think that protein timing with respect to a bad resistance exercise anyway is affected to the degree that most people would think. I do get a bit of a chuckle about people walking around in the gym carrying a shaker of protein because I just don't think that it's that important. So get a meal after you lift weights, certainly. If it's within three or four hours, I don't think that it makes much difference whether it's between three or four hours or, you know, 30 or three minutes. But if you go a little bit longer, I could see maybe a slightly attenuated effect, but it's really not that big a deal, in my opinion. Yes, in some weightlifting gyms, you could get run over by people charging out to drink their way protein shake within 30 minutes or they've squandered their time. It's a big deal. Yeah, yeah, and it just doesn't work like that. Yeah, it's too. I've read several different papers suggesting that, I hate this term, but let's just use it anyway. The anabolic window shortens in many ways with age. So a young athlete may have a longer period where they still could receive maximum protein synthesis from exercise and eating and that it may be briefer in the older population. What are your thoughts on that? I think that that's probably true. There's something as we've said that is associated with aging and we really can't put our finger on exactly what it is, but it does appear that older people have this sensitivity or the sensitization that occurs with exercise, not quite as robust as you get in younger individuals, but we do think that that affects does not last as long. So the window, as you call it, and I'm not a big fan of that phrase either, tends to stay open a little bit for a little bit shorter time. So it does make some sense in the timing issue maybe more relevant for older individuals than it would be for younger individuals. Continuing on this theme of nutrient timing, there've been several studies coming out of Van Loone's lab and others suggesting that a 40 grams, roughly 40 grams of protein ingested before sleep can be beneficial for muscle protein synthesis. Again, especially perhaps in older individuals. While consuming protein before bed, I can see that it would have potentially some benefits. It might also be detrimental from a circadian rhythm and sleep perspective. 40 grams, as you know, of protein is a lot of protein, particularly if taken in the form of whole food. You know, it's like something like seven eggs or five cups of milk, or a big steak. Maybe a shake would be a lot more convenient. One constantly hears though, that eating immediately before bed is a very bad idea. So given the importance of sleep to anabolic and other processes, what are your thoughts on the recommendation of pre-sleep protein feeding? Yeah, so I think that there's, and I commend Luke and the folks in his lab for doing the work in this area. There's a felony, Mike Orn's B, who's at Florida State, Lynn looking at some of the effects of that pre-sleep meal as well. I think it's an interesting point to make about the ingestion of things pre-sleep and we're beginning to understand some of what that does to changing circadian rhythms. And so there's definitely something that we need to do some more work on in that area. My take on this is that, you know, if you're somebody who is an elite level athlete, this might not be a bad strategy to try. If you're in a clinical scenario, if you're on bedrest or if you're sick for whatever reason you're looking to hang onto as much muscle as you can, then maybe also this is something that's beneficial. I'm not sure I'd recommend it for everybody. Some people, they say it works great. Other people, it's not such a big deal. But I see it as a strategy that might be practiced by people who are on the elite end of sports or who are in a clinical scenario where maybe muscle is particularly important. But for most mere mortals, the rest of us in the middle, I don't think it's something that, it's certainly not something that I do. I try to have my dinner time meal be the last meal I eat and then again, and sort of falling in line with, if you like a time restricted feeding type regime, I try not to eat before I go to sleep. They're same with me. I was wondering, reading that study, it was unclear to me whether that was really a timing benefit that is having the protein immediately pre-sleep or perhaps the result that they reported could be driven more by topping up essentially the day's total protein consumption. Or is the timing critical? In other words, is it possible that's a total protein effect? That's a lot of protein. And if you added 40 grams to most people's daily protein consumption, you might see a benefit. Yeah, it's the variable that wasn't controlled in the initial study that Tim Snyder's published. And certainly, if you were to go back and do it again, you would say that the perfect sort of control group would probably be somebody that got the same amount of protein pre-sleep but at another point in the day. And so the total intake was the same between the two groups. And in the absence of those data, it's impossible for me to say. But I appreciate your criticism. I think it's worth mentioning that Andy Holwerda, who also is a former McMaster guy and a rugby player, am I that? Published a study out of Luke Van Loone's lab that showed for older individuals that pre-sleep supplementation actually didn't augment any gains in muscle mass. So maybe it's a strategy that we might want to think about for elites, but maybe not for older individuals. Great, that was a good explanation. You were talking about rugby. We've discussed it several times today. Just as an aside, the gentleman that eats the prodigious loads of beef is a former rugby player. So the stereotype is complete right there. I try to get rugby in whenever I can. For sure, that sounds great. In a 2017 paper, Bob Wolfe published in the Journal of the International Society of Sports Medicine. He concluded that the consumption of dietary branch chain amino acids do not significantly stimulate muscle protein synthesis. I found this paper interesting. What are your thoughts on this? And in the hierarchy running from high quality animal protein like we've been discussing eggs and beef, then perhaps to essential amino acids and then to BCAAs branch chain amino acids. How do they stack up and why? Yeah, I really admire Bob's article. He's a great thinker when it comes to protein metabolism, amino acids and really the understanding of the concept. And I think it's important to mention that the three branch chain amino acids, when you go back and really look at where the concept that they are, either anabolic if you want to phrase it that way or anti-catabolic, comes from data in looking at what we call X-Vivo muscle preparation. So where muscles are taken from animals, put into a bath and essentially kept alive in a bath. When you have branch chain amino acids in that medium, it tends to suppress the protein breakdown that's going on. Remember, that's a muscle in a bath. So it's essentially a muscle that's, for all intents and purposes, it's dying. I'll be at a slow death. And that observation has persisted as a reason behind why branch chains exist as a supplement. And I think Bob quite convincingly makes the argument in his paper that you've got three of the essential amino acids out of the nine. And we need all nine for a full anabolic response. And so the best that you could expect from a branch chain, amino acid combination is that would result in complete suppression maybe a protein breakdown and a mild stimulation of synthesis. But it never does that. They never do that. And so he makes the point that if you were to put them in the hierarchy that you just suggested, Ken, that really we're talking about one individual branch chain amino acid, which is loose scene. And it sort of enjoys a position of prominence of the three because it's the one that triggers protein synthesis. And the other two are kind of along for the ride. Then when you go up to all of the essentials, then you clearly you can get a full anabolic response, assuming that the non-essentials were never to become conditionally essential, then that would be a good strategy. But I think putting all things together and coming back to the argument about whole proteins and every other nutrient that may be present in the whole protein that would support the response. Then what you're really talking about is clearly whole protein and high quality proteins are going to be the winner when we look at sort of from a nutritive standpoint at the anabolic and anti-catabolic response at inducing a positive protein balance. That was a terrific paper that Dr. Wolf did. I wonder he must not be the favorite child for the multimillion dollar branch chain amino acid supplement industry. Yeah, no, I don't think he made many friends in that industry with that paper. But it's a true go-to paper for me. It's beautifully written and it's it's perfectly done. It's it's it's a rarity in some ways. Stem Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research lab pioneering groundbreaking technologies aimed at leveraging and extending human cognition, perception, locomotion, and resilience. We were discussing earlier the pre-sleep ingestion of protein and some of the objections I've heard to that are a long health lines having to do with digestive processes and sleep. Do you think they might mitigate some of those objections if the person, particularly older folk were ingesting the appropriate amount of essential amino acids, but not it's not getting a big insulin pop from drinking way protein or even casing. Do you have any ideas on that? Yeah, it's a good question. I mean, I think that there's a lot of things that we still have yet to take a deeper look at and about spreading protein intake, for example, across the day and trying not to have it all concentrated in the dinner time meal. So maybe more at the breakfast, more at the lunchtime meal, and then sort of a little bit less at the dinner time meal might be a more efficient strategy rather than this skewed, back-end-loaded effect. And again, that's a very westernized view of how people tend to consume their protein. If you were to go probably to Latin America, then it's around the lunchtime meal, rather than the dinner time meal. The interesting question, I've always sort of asked myself and I experienced this when I travel and spend time in France and Spain and Italy, is that those people eat their last meal usually at nine o'clock at night. And I don't know about people who are listening to the podcast here, but that's when I'm getting ready to go to bed. But then I'm up early. So nine o'clock is, I suffer a little bit when I'm over there and people eat that late, I'll be honest. Yeah, Italy is easier for me because they do eat late for dinner, but I'm asleep by then. So it has no influence on me. And if they want me to join them for a meal, it's lunch. And so the Italians consume often the biggest meal, the most protein is often at lunch. And that's true. And that suits me. Yeah, fair enough. So Stu, you're the director of the Physical Activity Center of Excellence, more popularly known as the PACE Center, which is a state-of-the-art exercise science and training lab at McMaster. And a lot of the research that you and your colleagues do examines how nutrition and exercise interact to affect strength, the muscle mass, and older people, as well as people who are overweight or suffer from chronic diseases such as type 2 diabetes. So can you give us a history of the lab and also an overview of the research that you all have going on there? Sure, yeah. So PACE, it's probably existed in one way, shape, or form for about 33 years now. It's a community access facility that we cater to five different populations, those seniors, people undergoing cardiac rehab. We have cancer patients, most of them either undergoing treatment or survivors. And then we have two mobility limited populations and those are people with multiple sclerosis and people with a spinal cord injury. So all of those programs with the exception of our cancer program, Guru Out of Research Studies, where at the end of them, our participants sort of said, well, what happens now? And so we created these community access programs and we today have probably close to about 500 members. Most of the research we do is around physical activity, obviously, in that center. I talk a little bit about nutrition, but I'm very, if you like, I love the Jack LaLane quote about exercise being king, nutrition being queen, and together they form a kingdom. And I think it's true, but I think if you were to put your money on one thing that absolves a lot of sins and really is the most beneficial activity you could do for your health, it's about physical activity. So we're interested in questions surrounding the dose of exercise that people would require for optimal health and fitness, the types and the forms of types of training. But we're very flexible about trying to fit it in to people's likes because we find that attendance is probably the best predictor of positive outcomes rather than a particular program. So as long as we can get people to the gym and get them to work out, then that's the real key, in my opinion. I agree. So following up on the discussion of the aging and older population, lots of muscle mass, strength and quality starts much earlier in life than many realize, especially in highly sedentary individuals. Also this unfortunate transformation typically accelerates as one ages. What are some of the warning signs that people need to look out for? Yeah, it's a great question. The concept and the syndrome that we've given the name to there is circopenia. And circopenia is a decline in muscle mass, a muscle function, which is a more recent addition to the definition. As we age, as you point out, it probably starts in some people. And I hate to say this, probably in their 30s. Definitely, I think most people are experiencing some degree of it in their 40s and their 50s. Personally, for me, this year it's starting at age 53. And that's not a reflection of anything other than my own age, of course. But I think that the main point would be that it is something that's starting earlier than most people think. And it's very difficult to detect what it is and when and how much it is that you're losing. So I don't know if I can give you a great answer as some of the warning signs. There are not particularly sensitive tests, things like standing out from a chair or trying to do a six minute walk test or a 400 meter test. And those are pretty prognostic for people in their senior years, but not really for people in their 30s and 40s. But I think it's fair to say that if you're unable to do some of the things from a physical activity standpoint in your 30s and 40s that you could do in your 20s, then it's not just a fail complete that you should accept and say, well, this is aging and it's gonna get me all just accepted. With enough physical activity, you can overcome it and to some degree, even probably reverse it or definitely keep it stable. And you shouldn't just accept the fact that it's a steady, slow, and sipped decline. So I don't know that I can say exactly what I would point to as an early warning sign, but definitely a compromised physical ability would be something that I would take note of. Maybe grip strength might be one. I don't know if you saw the paper stew. And see, I always thought grip strength would be a good indicator and perhaps leg press for older people, but last year I read an incredibly annoying paper that the result of the paper was that young millennial age men were 20% weaker than their average cohort of their parents population in grip strength. And essentially, the same is their spouses or just a little different. And the takeaway wasn't, oh my God, this is a problem we're growing a population of weak men. The takeaways, we need to re-normalize. You know, we need to re-normalize what's normal. So now the grip strength standard for that age group is going to be downward adjusted. I've just rattled my brain. Yeah, just lower the bar, lower the bar. Yeah, I probably shouldn't get into it, but there's a lot of that going on with respect to physical activity guidelines and programming around the messages now and no longer, let's be physically active, but let's reduce sedentary time. And it really, it kind of works me that that's what we're really talking about now. But you know, that's a whole another conversation. So can you talk about why it's so important to maintain healthy functional muscle mass and function as we move into middle and later life? Yeah, I mean, I think that the bottom line with that question is really about mobility. It's become much more apparent to me, I think in the last three to four years, the more dealings I've had with people who study aging from a number of different perspectives to talk about how physical, but then also just community and social mobility are concepts that are interlinked. Without physical mobility, it becomes far more difficult for older people to remain socially active. It means that they're far more likely to be socially isolated, along with those two consequences, then comes a lot of mental health issues around depression. And I think then the whole situation begins to spiral out of control. So the scenario that we paint is somebody who loses their physical mobility, subsequently can't do as many things and then doesn't have as big a circle, for example, of friends or peers, or activities that they participate in. And so now there, if you like, sphere of movement begins to shrink. They just simply don't get out as much and they tend not to do as well. So I think the functional muscle mass issue really comes down to being physically mobile as you age. Yes, I'm in my mid 60s and so, people in the age group of my parents and a lot of my friends are suffering the consequences of sarcopenia. Just as you say, I wanted to use that one other point it really leads to a loss of independence. So in almost all the cases of people that I've seen need to go to the nursing home, they were otherwise more or less okay, but they couldn't get up off the floor or they couldn't get out of the seat adequately and they essentially lost their independence and they went into a facility and they typically declined rapidly after that. So I think it's a really important issue that as a society, we don't attend to enough. I couldn't agree more. System curious, do we know if sarcopenia progresses the same way and westernized versus non-westernized populations? That's a great question. I think we have data from a number of Asian populations now that suggests that the rate of muscle loss is relatively similar. I think it's interesting to see how people treat older people in some Asian cultures that's a little bit different than westernized cultures, but there are differences between men and women as well, albeit subtle. Women obviously outlive men, so you would like to think that women would pay a little bit more attention to being physically mobile because they're going to spend time if you look at the average statistics without a spouse. But I think that it's not quite clear at this point whether we have cultural differences that exist outside of what I mentioned. So mostly Caucasian populations versus Asian, there probably are some nuance differences, but I think it relates more to the habitual level of physical activity that these people have rather than to their ethnicity per se. So you had a paper published in the journal Frale T an aging title, muscle disuse as a pivotal problem in sarcopenia-related muscle loss and dysfunction. Can you talk a little bit about that study? Yeah, that was a paper actually that was a review paper trying to summarize what we knew at the time about these periods of water, what we call disuse periods that happen with greater frequency in people who are older, mainly because of the health conditions that they suffer from. So these disuse periods are periods that might be due to some type of illness, they may be due to a surgery, or they may be due to, and we're experiencing a little bit of it right now in Canada to flu season. So what happens in these periods of disuse is that people experience an accelerated rate of muscle loss. And I think most of us are familiar with having an acute disuse event, for example, fracturing a limb, putting a cast on and then watching our muscle disappear. If we have it when we're younger, that's not a big deal. We gain it back, but older people simply have a much, much harder time gaining back the muscle that they lose. So we think these disuse events are pretty critical. They could be something like a surgery, which I think everybody appreciates the bed rest that you would undergo is necessary to have some form of rehabilitation. Or something as benign as convalescing from flu, maybe spending one or two days in the hospital, if the flu is really bad, but then essentially sitting around your house for the next, say, 10 days to two weeks. And older people simply have a much harder time recovering from those things. Some experts in the longevity field strongly believe that dietary protein should be very limited. When arguing against keeping protein relatively low, especially in older populations, is the occurrence of anabolic resistance and the subsequent risk of muscle loss leading to sarcopenia. We touched on this earlier, but for our audience, would you please briefly explain what is meant by the term anabolic resistance? Yeah, sure. Anabolic resistance refers to, and it's an analogous concept to sort of insulin resistance, if you like, and that the muscle that is anabolically resistant, and it generally happens in older people, or it can happen in younger people if they're inactive as well, would mean that for a given dose of protein that we get far less muscle protein synthesis or bricks going into the wall in an older person than we do in a younger person. So they're resistant to the normally anabolic effects of the protein that would be ingested. So I think it's important to say that there's a component of aging that is in there, but there's also a component of inactivity. We can make younger muscle very anabolically resistant, for example, by making it inactive. You also see other anabolic hormone receptors turn down, if you look at these older folks, a lot of them are quite insulin resistant, and also not surprisingly, IGF-1 resistant. Yeah, I think that these are the hormonal resistance that you talk about and the decline in androgen hormonal status is potentially important. The loss of estrogen and women who are a postmenopausal are all important hormonal changes that would contribute to this for sure. Last year, we interviewed Dr. Walter Longo on Stem Talk, and we will provide a link to this episode in our show notes, but in his book, The Long Jevvy Diet, he recommends a vegan-style pescatarian diet. But once a person reaches the age of 64, Dr. Longo recommends eating somewhat more protein, such as eggs. So can you talk about the need to add more protein to our diets as we get older? Yeah, I think a lot of the discussion that Dr. Longo has provided there revolves around a single paper, the first author is Levine, that was published in cell metabolism, in which the data that Dr. Longo's lab provides, which is a lot of animal-based data, is actually quite compelling and supports the case that he's making. It's the human-based data, which comes from endhains, which is probably the message that came out that most people remember, the protein is as bad for you as smoking, for example. We've published a pretty sharp critique on that paper. It wasn't just myself, but I included about six other protein experts. I think that the important point is that the prescription that Dr. Longo is talking about with more protein as you age is really one that's in line with the concept of anabolic resistance, prevention of frailty, and likely support, we have a theory that it's likely that there's protein that's needed for support of immune function as well. So the trend that he showed in people prior to the age of 64, the protein was, in fact, detrimental, reverses itself in people after the age of 64. I'm not saying it's a pure age 64 phenomenon, but somewhere as you get older, protein becomes more important. And those data, actually, whether you look at the animal and data or the human data would support that concept, I don't disagree with the vegetarian, pescatarian-type diet, very healthy way to eat, of course, again, standard rider, not my choice, but that's no problems at all. The source of protein is X, absolutely. High quality protein, nutrient-dense food, very affordable, not bad advice. Where the argument about the high protein earlier in life sort of comes apart, and we're about to undertake, and analysis that's a little bit deeper if the N-hane's data is that I still don't agree with the way that the statistics were done and the people prior to age 64. Yeah, the N-hane's data by itself is somewhat problematic, but my recall of the paper was essentially, there was no significant result until the population was divided into two groups, one of which the younger and one of which the older, that is not surprising then you would get the result that they got. Yeah, and I think the low protein group that they talk about was pretty arbitrary and where that line was drawn. So let's just say is that we're on record as being critical of that paper, as a lot of other people were. So clearly more work needs to be done. Absolutely. That was another paper where relative risk was used as opposed to absolute risk. Yeah, again, those nuances are big if you're in the area, but on people who are just casual readers, the headline that protein is like smoking 20 cigarettes. If anybody really believes that that's the case, then I know I just have to shake my head a little bit to be honest. And the medium misinterpretation of those papers as well, right? So. Yeah, yeah. I think it's important. I really admire Walter Longo's work. It's very, very elegant stuff. And the models that he has from a rodent standpoint and everything are really compelling where I have to sort of suspend my disbelief is in translation of those to humans where things are far more complex. And I'm not saying that I don't think that there's a grain of truth to what he says. I just think that the degree of if you like effect is not as substantial as he might like to paint. So Stu, can you talk about the myth that too much protein creates kidney damage? Sure. I mean, I think you can trace this line of thinking back to a hypothesis put out by Brenner and somewhere in probably the early 70s where he noticed an increase in glomerular filtration rate and acutely in the kidneys of not just animals but human beings on an ingestion of a higher protein diet. And then went on to hypothesize that that over time would essentially wear the kidney out and so it would create death of the nephron, the functional unit inside the kidney and lead to progression of renal disease. It seems that there's been reinforcement of that concept when you talk to people who spend time in renal wards with patients who are an end stage renal disease, for example, who are put on lower protein diets and then subsequently obviously their life is prolonged because they have compromised renal function. That doesn't mean that protein caused the decline in renal function. And in fact, we just completed a meta analysis and it goes hand in hand with a very nice systematic review done by Mary Van Ellswick showing that we couldn't find clinical evidence for the Brenner hypothesis. In other words, the more protein that you eat, there is no decline in renal function. If anything, it goes up and even in long term studies, there's no evidence of the decline that people say is going to happen. And even if you look at populations who consume higher protein intakes, there's no higher incidence of renal disease. So I think a lot of those things just speak to the absence of evidence for that hypothesis and stressing the word that it's a hypothesis and not something that's based in evidence. Hmm. So intermittent fasting has gained a lot of attention in recent years as well. And Mark Mattson discussed intermittent fasting in episode seven of STEM talk. And more recently in episode 79, we interviewed Sachin Panda of the Salk Institute about time restricted eating. Can you talk about how fasting affects muscle protein turnover? Yeah, I think going back to what we talked about earlier, clearly when you're fasting, muscle protein turnover is favoring a net catabolism. I think it's important for people to realize that the net turnover you experience in muscle protein in a given day is in the order of three to four times the amount of protein that we would need. So we're actually quite efficient at recycling amino acids that appear as a result of breakdown. So the intermittent fasting scenario is one where you're creating a situation where you're actually favoring catabolism within muscle. But the degree of catabolism is actually quite transient and not particularly stark when we compare it to, for example, somebody who's fasted for either days or is in a clinical scenario of muscle wasting or muscle loss. Fantastic. That was good. Thank you. Like intermittent fasting, ketogenic diets are gaining popularity and are quite popular with our audience. Some have asserted that substantial muscle loss may be a negative side effect of ketogenic diets due to their moderate protein content as originally formulated in the context of a diet for epilepsy. But even here, the evidence for this is far from conclusive. In fact, some animal studies, including a fascinating study conducted by Keith Barr's group at the University of California Davis, suggested that a ketogenic diet can actually preserve muscle mass and motor function with age. Others have provided evidence that the ketone body, acetoacetate, may be a signaling molecule in muscle cells and an important player in attenuating age-related decline in muscle function. Unfortunately, and this is where the rubble lies, many folks practicing a ketogenic diet overly avoid protein. And given a well-formulated ketogenic diet with sufficient protein, roughly following the guidelines that we discussed earlier, is there any reason to believe that it would be detrimental to muscle mass? So I think it's an interesting dietary paradigm. So somebody who's on a ketogenic diet would obviously have very low insulin. And the one, I think, role that we can ascribe to insulin with good evidence is to say that it suppresses protein breakdown and muscle. So that would seem to favor the idea that you would lose muscle mass. And if you are on a very low protein ketogenic diet, then I might begin to worry about something like that. The great, however, offsetter of that type of fact would obviously be physical activity. So the more physically active you were, particularly, the more resistance exercise that you did for weightlifting, you would hang on to probably a great substantial amount of muscle mass. However, as you said, Ken, I think that the point is, is that if you are on a ketogenic diet, it's possible to still remain in a state of dietary ketosis and consume sufficient protein that's well in the range in which we were talking about to maintain and support your muscle mass and other protein requiring functions like, for example, immune function. So, in short, I don't see it as a big concern. I think activity tends to trump diet in terms of hanging onto muscle mass. But for most people who are not all about how high can you drive ketosis, an intraconal ketosis in this sense, then you can actually stay in a ketotic state and you can consume sufficient protein and still not worry about. I think where most people worry is that the protein raises insulin to the extent that they go out of ketosis. And if you're judicious about choosing foods that are higher in fat, that just simply doesn't happen. So, I don't think that it's a valid concern to be honest with you. Right. I tend to agree. And also, when you're in that state, your insulin is suppressed as is IGF1, but the receptor sensitivity is typically increased. And so, that's another factor. But the biggest one is you said is, many people on that diet are really not consuming. They're so terrified of being kicked out of ketosis that they're not consuming adequate protein. Yeah. And I think that some of the sort of odd comments that I've heard is that then if you consume more protein, it effectively is a way of generating sugar via the process of gluconeogenesis. And there's very little data that I've seen that gluconeogenesis is a supply-driven process. In other words, the more protein you give it, it just wildly makes glucose beyond the levels that you would need that result in an insulin response. And again, when you go back to the original studies and look at this, it simply doesn't have... No. And currently in modern versions, not the old Johns Hopkins epilepsy version, but the modern versions of the Kid of the Jank Diet, you don't see that. You don't see people having a major affect of gluconeogenesis from eating the recommended amounts of protein. And you see people gaining muscle mass, not just not losing it. So that's an area of a lot of confusion because it's become sort of a buzz diet or a trendy thing. So Stu, as you pointed out, physical inactivity impairs insulin sensitivity and that's exacerbated with aging. And a paper that you and your colleagues produce examined the impact of two weeks of acute inactivity and recovery on glycemic control. And integrative rates of muscle protein synthesis and older men and women. So what did you find in that study? Yeah, that was a heck of a study to undertake. As you might imagine, asking people for two weeks to take no more than between 1,500 steps per day. And everybody sort of said, that's just crazy. The interesting part is we tried to sort of remodel in that period, the type of physical activity that somebody who was in a clinical scenario. For example, patients in hospital take no more than about, you know, seven to 800 steps per day, mainly because the de facto treatment when you're in hospital and on the ward is to be in bed. So what we found was that the patients who underwent that protocol saw the onset of what we've talked about, anabolic resistance through inactivity. They saw the onset of essentially type two diabetes. And I think the most shocking result to us and we didn't expect to see this was that with two weeks of a return to their normal physical activity, they weren't quite back to normal. They didn't get the full restoration if they're muscle protein synthetic rate. And they actually were still mildly, in some cases, diabetic or at least prediabetic. And these were overweight prediabetic people to start with. And so we were really highlighting, again, Dawn, back to your question about, you know, what these disused periods mean is it takes, if I, in my heart of hearts want to say that these people did recover, but it's going to take longer than the two weeks that we saw. So as a matter of protocol now, we put anybody that we put through that type of protocol through an exercise program on the backside just to make sure that they do recover. But that shows you just how benign, a stimulus like two weeks of inactivity can have on somebody's metabolic function. So, Stu, much of the research that we've discussed today is in males. And for our audience, can you discuss why that's the case? And further, please share with us whether the same rule regarding protein applies when it comes to females and what may be different between males and females in this regard. Guilty is charged. Yeah, probably like a lot of other researchers and applaud any funding agency, which calls for sexual and gender equality with respect to the testing of whatever it is that you're doing without any firm evidence to show that maybe sex is an important factor that we need to consider. So I think that the important point is that young men and young women look very much alike. When we get into older men versus older women, something happens around menopause, obviously a substantial change in hormonal status that means that older women for reasons again are probably related to estrogen and its mildly androgenic role in women become much more anabolically resistant than do men. So the amount of physical activity and the amount of protein in older women may be even greater than we're talking about in older men to try and restore that response to sort of youthful levels if you like. So we're doing a lot of work now, actually. We have several studies ongoing and we just published a couple of papers in older women. But I want to say that a big grant submission that we have coming up will be looking at men and women on the younger and older side as well because it's just high time that we did a lot more work in women. So I'm definitely guilty as charged on that front and we just need to do a better job. Great. Yeah, it's awesome. A couple of years back, several people sent me papers, a certain that HMB, officially known as beta hydroxy, beta methyl butorate, a metabolite of lucine in the free acid form, in this case, was as effective, this was actually somebody quoted this to me, as effective as steroids in promoting muscle protein synthesis. And I was interested when I saw that your group did a study that was conducted on behalf of the American College of Sports Medicine that found that supplementation with HMB, in this case, in fact, failed to enhance body composition to a greater extent than the placebo did. Can you talk a little bit about the HMB claims and your study and its results? Yeah, sure. I mean, I think that the most important point to make with beta HMB or beta hydroxy, beta methyl butorate is that it's a metabolite of lucine. And as I said earlier in the show of the three branch chain amino acids, lucine is the amino acid that enjoys this position of prominence. It's the one that turns on muscle protein synthesis. It has anti-catebolic properties and it's not just simply a substrate. So it's probably of all of the 20 amino acids. It's the most important amino acid for skeletal muscles. So it probably is not surprising that metabolites of lucine, so like alfakeetoysochroproic acid, which is another supposedly anabolic supplement and beta HMB have similar actions. And in fact, when you give people beta HMB and this is work that we've collaborated with Phil Atherton over in the United Kingdom with, and you give them lucine, you see potent anabolic stimulation. You see a stimulus of muscle protein synthesis. But the stimulus is about the same. The advantage that HMB might have is that it sticks around a little bit longer and whether that means something is debatable. Our work in which we compared way protein added, with HMB added to way protein with the equivalent amount just in terms of mass of lucine added, showed that our subjects gained in using this same training protocol that you talked about in the paper with these steroid-like gains. They gained about, I think it was about 30% of the muscle that was gained in that steroid-like paper. So I think importantly, first we couldn't reproduce their HMB-like gains in muscle mass. And probably more importantly, when we compared the HMB supplemented group with the control or lucine supplemented group, there was no difference between the two. So the numbers to bear in mind in that steroid-like paper, you're talking about seven to eight kilograms of muscle in 12 weeks. Yeah, yeah, it's just stunning. And whereas we saw in that same period of time, about two and a half. So our numbers are sort of more in line with what you would expect and no difference with HMB. So I'm very skeptical of those data. I don't know how they're achievable. As you said, it's as good and or maybe even better than a classic 1996 paper showing that steroids are obviously highly effective. Yes, did just for the audience, were the resistance training protocols that they used and you used very similar? The identical. And that was our point is that we wanted to use their protocol and we wanted to see if we could A reproduce their results and B, whether we could show this ostensibly superior quality in terms of stimulating muscle gain of HMB. And A, we weren't able to reproduce their results and B, we simply weren't able to show the superiority of HMB over protein and lucine. And frankly, if it had the effect reported in that paper, there would be no HMB to be found in the world. It would be, well, you know, I mean, it would be probably, it would be banned. Because it's a diet, it would be banned. Yeah, that's, you know, Phillips rules of supplements. If it sounds too good to be true, it probably is. And if it is too good to be true, then it's banned. There may be some exceptions, but not many. Not many. Agreed. So Stu, if you had a $20 million budget and could undertake any research project without limitation, what project would you study and why would that be? That's a great, great question. You know, more than I think anything now that I've researched and studied in the past, the thing that really pushes me forward and where we're trying to take a lot of our work is in aging. You know, the statistics are the same globally. It's going to be something that everybody will have to face. In Canada right now, we're looking at about 17% of the population being over the age of 65. By the year 2050, that will be 25% of the population. So one in four people over the age of 65. So we're going to have to find viable ways to keep these people as independent as long as possible. You know, clearly my mantra is to make them as physically active as possible and to get them in tune with the best dietary approaches to support muscle and musculoskeletal functioning, but also good health, clearly. The $20 million would probably go to a multi-site randomized trial to look at the effects and impacts of different physical activity regimes, trying to enhance compliance with those regimes, trying to reduce the barriers to coming to, you know, be it a physical activity class or just going for a walk. I think most people still think that the amount of exercise that needs to be done to achieve health benefits is requires monumental effort. And it just doesn't. The biggest reduction in risk happens in people who go from doing nothing to doing something. So trying to get people to just even be a little bit physically active, I think is a big deal. But it would be definitely aimed towards older people and definitely trying to sort of remove the barriers or any stigma they have around being physically active, but not just aerobic, you know, walking activity, but also to make them strong, to improve their muscles and their bones and their balance and gate as they get older as well. So some sort of multi-site trial around that type of theme and then trying to figure out the dietary piece, which is very, it's much greater than physical activity. I think it's easy for me to talk about physical activity, but the dietary approaches are much more difficult and nuanced to try and understand. That's a good answer. Stu earlier, you were talking about the effects of estrogen and the need for more work in that area. Just today Keith Bars Group published a paper of effective estrogen on musculoskeleton performance and injury risk. I haven't read it yet, but it just popped up on this screen today. Good time. Yeah. So I know that you played rugby for as long as you could, but finally had to give it up in your 40s. So what does your exercise routine look like today? And do you still play any sports? I know that you got to love on your plate right now and have a very productive lab in addition to all of your outside activities. Yeah, yeah, no, I don't engage in anything that could damage anything in my body anymore for me. I spent too many, too much time injured when I was younger. So falling down is a major incident for me these days. My day usually starts at about five in the morning and it always has been that way. It's not some sort of draconian regime. I've always been a morning person. It generally starts out with a cup of coffee and then the next thing, you know, within about half an hour I'm in the gym. I'm generally finished my workout by about 6.30. I don't have enough time to spend more time than that in the gym. So I try to be efficient at what I do. I have a colleague, Marty Gabala, who is convinced me that high intensity training is the time saving device that I need and to maintain my fitness. So I utilize it a lot and clearly mostly resistance exercise now. The longest I'll ever spend on an exercise bike in terms of, you know, or treadmill is probably about 30 minutes. Anything longer than that and I lose interest. So that's my sport these days. I occasionally get the skates out and try and show young people how to play the game, but I have three boys and they've all now exceeded their father and their ice hockey prowess. My only advantage is if I get them in tight, I have a little bit of a weight and size and strength advantage. But beyond that, they're far more talented and skilled than I am. So my workout regime right now is trying to maintain my strength and my fitness for as long as I can. Stu, it's been awesome having you on the podcast. Thank you for joining us today. Yeah, it was really great, Stu. It's been an absolute pleasure. Thanks for having me on. Yeah, you are excellent, yes, thank you. Stim talk. Stim talk. Stim talk. Stim talk. Well, so Stu is really doing groundbreaking work in the field of exercise science. That was such an awesome discussion. Yes, Don Stu shared a ton of knowledge relevant, not only to young athletes interested in improving their performance, but also for the aging population determined to maintain their strength, mobility, and independence into their golden years. Strength training coupled with appropriate nutrition is indeed the best prevented of medicine for much of what else is. If you enjoyed this interview as much as we did, we invite you to visit the Stim talk web page where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes. Stim talk.us. This is Don Carnegie signing off for now. This is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stim talk. Thank you for listening to Stim talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others. So please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, stemtalk.us. There, you can also find more information about the guests we interview.
