 Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Dawn is continuing to play hooky, so I am Marcus Baume and I'll be your host today. Joining me to introduce today's podcast is the man behind the curtain, Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Selection Committee that selects all of the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Hi Marcus, great to be here. Today we have Dr. Alicia Vassano, here with us in the studio for his second appearance on Stem Talk. Alicia is considered the world's leading expert in celiac disease and gluten-related disorders, although just two million Americans have celiac disease and estimated 20 million Americans suffer from gluten sensitivity. Alicia is a professor and director of the Micocial Immunology and Biology Research Center at Massachusetts General Hospital. In addition to celiac disease and gluten-related disorders, Alicia's research is also focused on the microbiome, intestinal permeability, and autoimmune disorders, which he did discuss in his first interview on Stem Talk episode 20. Since Alicia's first appearance on Stem Talk in 2016, he has published two books, one called Gluten Freedom and the other Gut Feelings, the Microbiome and our Health, which we discussed in today's interview. We also talked to Alicia about an exciting new project that's bringing together an international consortium of researchers and scientists for a long-term study that will follow infants who are genetically at risk of developing celiac disease. Alicia is a researcher and physician who wears many hats. He's the director of the Center for Celiac Research and Treatment and Chief of the Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition at Mass General Hospital. He's also a professor of pediatrics at Harvard Medical School and a professor of nutrition at Harvard's TH Chan School of Public Health. Before we get to our interview with Alicia, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk and we especially appreciate all the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the Double Secret Selection Committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher and other podcast apps for the widiest and most lavishly praised filled reviews to read on Stem Talk. If you hear your review read on Stem Talk, just contact us at Stem Talk at ihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk t-shirt. Today, we have a follow-up on our recent winging review that was posted by someone that goes by the moniker, Kanuk Supporter. When he wrote us to claim his t-shirt, our Kanuk friend added a few additional comments about Stem Talk that we think are worth passing along. His new review goes, I was thrilled yesterday to hear my review was selected by the Double Blind Selection Committee. I enjoy listening to the podcast so much. My daughter got me into it. She has two years from completing her PhD in neuroscience and has turned me into a neuro-nerd. Your podcast is much more than that and touches on subjects that really interest me. I improve your never-too-old to learn even at 61 years old. Keep up the fantastic work and by the way, 61 is not old. Well Kanuk Supporter, please let us know the t-shirt size of your daughter so we can send her one too. And thank you very much for your kind comments. And thanks to all of our other Stem Talk listeners who have helped Stem Talk become such an excellent success. Okay, and now on to today's interview with Dr. Alicia Fosano. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Alicia, we covered a lot of your background in episode 10 of Stem Talk. And since your interview in 2016, you've published these two great new books, Gluten Freedom and Gut Feelings, The Microbiomanter Health. Later in the interview, we will talk about each of these books. But first I'm curious about when in your medical training at the University of Naples, did you become interested in both pediatrics and gastroenterology? Well, pediatrics was first sight love. I realized from the very beginning from medical school that dealing with kids will have more fun. And it's interesting, you know, involvement both in terms of clinic and research enterprises. I was interested in research, you know, since the gikou of my medical school. And that's reason why when I was offered an internship, my second year in medical school, there are six years in training in Italy. For medical school, I decided immediately to become an intern in pediatrics. And happened to be there was a time in which of course you have to choose also a mentor. The mentor is somebody that will really impact your professional life for the entire span of its journey. And this gentleman was somebody that just came back from University of Chicago that spent some times there to study the real diseases. I thought that was unglumorous. I said, you know, I want to save the world. I want to do something on cancer or HIV that was at that time at the beginning of the journey. And just educate me that in at that time, every year five meaning kids would die of that real diseases. So if I want to do something back to all, I better focus on that. So that's how the journey started. That makes perfect sense. You move to the United States in the 1990s and spent 20 years in Maryland at the Center for vaccine development in Baltimore. While in Maryland, you founded the Center for Celiac Research in 1996. And in 2003, you accepted an offer to join Massachusetts General Hospital, which was quite an undertaking as I understand it because you essentially had to move your entire lab there or a big chunk of it. How did that move come about and what was that all like? It was a military operation actually. First of all, the reason why I moved to Maryland from Italy is mainly because I decided that in this study and interaction between a bug that makes you sick with the real diseases and the host, I learned a lot about the host. I really had no idea how my body would eventually exploit the capability to interact with the host and create conditions like that real diseases. So that was something that I definitely need to feel as a gap on knowledge. And my mentor said, you know, there is only one place in the world where I think that it will be worth it to go. And that's Baltimore. And that's the Center for Vaccine Development. They do vaccine development for entire pathogens. That was the beginning of the aerodynamics to manipulate the genome of this micro-organism and so on and so forth. So that's the reason why I moved from Italy to the United States. In Italy, I was also involved in CEDA disease because, you know, University of Naples was a hub of the situation there. I was supposed to move to Maryland for two months and I ended up to be there for 20 years. And then I was offered a job at Mass General Hospital. And the first time that I was offered a job, I turned that down because, you know, as Ken was mentioning, I would have been moving a big large operation and I thought this is an invisible plus. I'm not a really competitive guy. Comes professionally. I thought that, you know, Harvard was going to be too, you know, inquisitive and, you know, a professional aggressive environment. And I said, I'm not going to drive there. So I first offered a pass and, you know, a few months passed by and a month in a year. And then they continue to come back and then I realized that, you know, at that point, stay in Maryland. The science could only be incremental and not transformational because we didn't have the critical mass of people around. For that reason, I stuck with the people on lab and we had a general discussion. And finally, you know, we decided to give it a try. So 21 people and two trucks moving from Maryland to Boston in a military operation because, you know, as you realize, when you have a deport for your science, you can't afford to be, you know, a year without doing anything. So we had to shut down the lab on a Monday in Maryland and prepare to have the labs on in Boston, you know, within the same week. And it really took, you know, a lot of organization, but eventually we made it. So early in your career, as you began to study cholera in the early 90s, as you were working on cholera, you discovered the Zonula occludens toxin that the toxin producing bacteria, fibrio cholera uses to cause intestinal infections. Can you talk about the key insights you gained by studying the Zonula occludens toxin? This is an interesting question that has been asked to me over the years many, many times. And the answer is there are two ways to, you know, address your question. One is the quote, quote, quote, sanited, you know, version. So that, you know, I say, oh, I was thinking about this. I was smart enough to hypothesize that cholera was using, you know, different tricks to achieve its biological goal and so on and so forth. And so there was all planned, but that's absolutely not true. And you can read that, you know, in the papers that we published for this toxin, the reality of the story is much less glamorous, but serendipitous. That by the way is my favorite English word. There is no such thing in Italian to really encompass what serendipitous is all about. Long story short was when I moved to the United States from Italy, as I mentioned before, to learn about bacteria, pathogenesis and how macroorganisms interact with us and talk with us and so on and so forth. I dig in immediately in a project to develop a, an attain-way-delive cholera vaccines. Again, cholera was claiming a lot of lives in pediatrics. And the idea of the people at the Center for Vaccine Development was you need to have a live vibro cholera to induce an immune response that will protect you, but you need to take the weapons out. Because otherwise, this people will be sick, of course. The only weapon that we knew at that time was cholera toxin, very powerful toxin, just to quantify this. If you go on the beach on Pensacola and you take three grains of sands, that will be enough to give you 40 liters of diarrhea if there was pure cholera toxin. So that was the time in which I also had the opportunity to talk with that time, recently Nobel Prize that discovered the restriction enzymes to cut and paste these genes, to cut the genes that encode for cholera toxin out and bottom my after a year and a half, a trying all this. And in the meantime, learning about macroorganisms, I developed what I thought was the acooloxyxane. The cholera toxin genes was out. Cholera was still alive. I gave this to the animals, the animals were happy, didn't got any sickness and so on and so forth. So at that point, you know, you got to try in the real deal, volunteers that at that time were students at Maryland School of Medicine. And you know, they got the possibility to participate with, you know, three arms, one plus evil. You don't got anything. So you got your money for free to, you got my vaccine. Also you're not going to get sick because I was very confident that you're not going to get sick. Three, you got the real deal, but we would take care of you. Don't worry about it. They had to be locked in the facility because of course you can't spread this cholera stuff around for a week in exchange of $250. There was heck of a money for them, but not that much to go through this aggravation of be locked in the facility for a week. Well, long story short, the placebo didn't got nothing. The folks that got the real deal, they got, you know, purging diarrhea that we took care of that. But unfortunately, the vaccine didn't work. It was not like the real deal, but there was still residual diarrhea that made that not, you know, feasible of the vaccine. So literally a year and a half flushed in toilet, you know, point intended. Now this is the split between different kinds of scientists. You know, there are people that, you know, give up and say, this is it. I failed and we'll want to do something else. Well, the inquisitive mind said why that happened, you know, what is, what is all this about? So after two, three days, I got completely wasted because I got drunk and didn't show up in the lab because I was very, you know, frustrated about the entire deal. I went back to the blackboard and tried to reason. And I said, you know what? Got to be something else. And that led to the discovery of this toxic you were mentioning, the zone of cluedin toxic zone of cluedin. This is the Latin name for, you know, this tight junction, this sort of doors in between cells that were just discovered a few years before by a Japanese group because in the past, until then the space in between cells was considered like sealed by a cement. So everything that to negotiate the exchange between the environment that us has to go through the cells of this single layer is a cell in the intestine, but not in between. So it was a pretty new concept. And now we find the toxin that exploit that device. I just sort of door to open it up to induce additional diarrhea. Now, why color wants to do that is pretty obvious. I was pretty obvious to me. Color doesn't like to live in a gut. It's too hot. It's dark. There is none in a oxygen. Color likes to live in a pond out there. And if a fellow would drink that water and cut the color into the gut, the first thing that color wants to is to get out of there. And color is very famous to be a great swimmer. Matter of fact, color is a microorganism with a tail that swims very fast in the water environment. And to swim out of there, you need the element of water. And that's the reason why color toxin is there. But being a smart paladin, it input all the effort in a single direction. He said, if something goes wrong with the color toxin to purge the diarrhea, I have a backup that is open this gate in between cells. And I have fluids got into the intestine. And I will be washing out of there. So that was the first time that a mechanism other than the typical maximum to induce diarrhea was found. And again, it was surprising to us. It was difficult to publish something like this because it was out of the ordinary, of course, nobody believed that you can make it into a leaking so much so with the toxin. But eventually it got on a very prestigious pre Juno, and the Precision National Academy Science published this stuff. And you know, the next step was why we have this machinery there just to be target of a bug that makes us sick. And you know, we the few years that follow focus on what is machinery for? Why we have all this? And who is the actual physiological modulator all this? Because you know, can be just this, this is all occlusion talks and that is doing this. It's most likely that February during evolution learn physiology of the host and mimic a modulator of this permeability. And that's led us to what I believe it was another transformation of the squary. You can already contemplate it's a zone occlusion talks and then it's a zone win. It was the squaring 2000. Yes, and speaking of Zanielin and cholera, you discovered that molecule, Zanielin, which is present, as you've said, in the gut of humans and whose function is to control gut permeability. Can you give us an overview of how this research led you to investigate celiac disease and its trigger, which is gluten? Yeah, I mean, you know, another actor, CerenDBD, that was no plant because you know, again, at that time I was working to parallel apparently completely disconnected routes. One, the clinical interests of celiac disease and reason why I was interested because I came from an environment, I Europe, which celiac disease was extremely frequent to another environment, like United States in which pretty much was considered no, not to be existent. And at that time, we knew that there were at least two elements to make your risk for celiac disease, the genetic predisposition that we share between Europe and United States and ingestion of gluten containing grains that we also share. And yet, one was present, the other one was not. So that, you know, used my intellectual curiosity, epidemiologist speaking why this is happening. On the other hand, I was following this, you know, route of, you know, the communicator. At that time, microbiome was a term that was not created yet. But, you know, how microbes communicate with us and for which reason? And, you know, using Vibriacolera as a paradigm. And as I mentioned before, you know, discovering that it was mimicking something that we do with this molecule of Zonelin. From there, I also realized through the epidemiological data of celiac disease that genetics and exposure and environmental trigger are necessary, but not sufficient. The reason why this was discovered because we start following people are risk with celiac disease for which we know that, you know, again, the risk is 10 times more than a general population. And interestingly enough, we saw that there were people that were eating gluten for 10, 15, 20 years and non-gatin sick. And then all of a sudden, they eventually developed the problem. Yet, the two elements were there. You know, they were bored with the genes and they were eating, you know, gluten-containing grains forever. But, you know, some people they were able to tolerate this, you know, gluten for that long. And we ask ourselves, how that's possible. And, you know, that led to a revisitation of what it really takes to develop any chronic inflammatory disease, human kind, including out immunity, like celiac disease. Genes and environment are necessary, but not sufficient. These two worlds are segregated by barriers, the most evident is the skin because we see it. They protect us against, you know, stuff that comes from an environment. But the largest interface is definitely the intestine. If you spread the intestine of an adult on the floor, you call it double-teninco-acquart. And it's very complex. The ecosystem there has friends and foes, nutrients and pathogens. And you have to distinguish between friend and foes to decide what to do with that. And all this is due to segregation, this barrier there. If you lose that barrier function, so in other words, the intestine becomes leaks. And, you know, you don't segregate the lack for the color of toxin, business that we were talking before, the zone of gluten toxin. Then you have a consequence. The stuff from your body can go out, like for, you know, what happened for the zone of gluten toxin, but stuff from outside can come in and can instigate inflammation. Then we realize that the fourth element has to be an immune system that becomes hyper-belligient. And the fifth element to explain why I can eat gluten for 20 years and then I cannot anymore is the microbiome that epigenetic put in motion genes that I'm born with, but not express or repressed. That starts my march from genetic predisposition to clinical outcome. But without losing that barrier function, all this will not happen. And that's how we linked CLE disease with an exciterate production of Xonomin that eventually created a shortcut for undergestiglundent to come in and instigate the entire process that leads to breaking tolerance and then the onset of disease. That's a great explanation. Thank you. I wondered about that actually, some aspects of that over the years. You know, historically, CLE act disease really didn't seem to be taken too seriously. By most of the medical community, perhaps especially here in the United States, but I remember friends having CLE act and having a tough time with the medical community taking it seriously. Why do you think that was? Well, because again, if you have a definition of something that doesn't reflect the reality, you may overlook it. You know, if I've never seen an elephant and I am an a zoo and there is an elephant there and say, do you see an elephant here? I would say, no, I do not because I don't know what I'm talking about. At that time, the definition of CLE disease was one is a pediatric condition. That's the reason why most of the experts in the field, including myself, are pediatrician. Two, it's a gastrointestinal disorder. You know, this implies a inflammation of the gut and therefore you have to have gastrointestinal symptoms. And three, these symptoms should be the typical symptoms of chronic diarrhea, weight loss, muscle wasting and so on and so forth. If that's the description, the physician at that time were correct. There was not such a thing. You know, it was extremely rare to see kids with the big belly and you know, muscle wasting. Like the malnourished kids that we see now in a third-world country, that was not the way it said, you know, disease was present itself. Little win you at that time that see the disease is an inflammation of the gut, but it's a systemic disease. There is no organ and tissue that can be spared. And when we did in 2013, this huge epidemiologist study that involved more than 16,000 people in United States will learn the following. One, this is not epidemiology conditions. Any age you can be involved. Two, gastrointestinal symptoms are frequent, but not the most frequent of all. Matter of fact, the most frequent way the disease present itself, both in kids and adults, now is anemia and fatigue. No GI symptoms whatsoever. And it's explainable because you know, the gut of an adult is roughly 20 feet long. And if you have one foot over 19 that is inflamed, you know, an FGI symptoms, you know, an F, diarrhea or stomachache because the rest of the intestine subsidize. But if their foot involves the part where we absorb iron, there is absorbed only in a very few inches, no backup, you will have anemia and nothing else. But then you can have also any other symptoms like joy and pain, you know, headaches, you can have short memory loss and, you know, infertility and so on and skin rash and so on and so forth. So when you see the entire spectrum, then you realize that this was not rare here. It was just to present itself in different ways. But the other thing that is fascinating, my humble opinion, that like any other immune disease, if you embrace a worse than lifestyle, it's increasing over time in terms of prevalence. In other words, celidases double every 15 years in United States. And I think that, you know, again, by our certain deeply working on one hand on cholera and discord zone and the other hand, an epidemiologist, celid disease brought this together to answer the key question, what is accelerating this process of our immunity that we see in the Western M and Sphere? Meaning, you know, this is the same destiny for MS, type 1 diabetes, multiple sclerosis and so on and so forth. And celid disease turns to be a phenomenal, phenomenal model to answer this question because of all, you know, chronic inflammatory disease on out immune basis is the only one for which we know the trigger that is good. And we don't know why people got sick with type 1 diabetes and MS. So it really answered a lot of questions that was not, we were not able to answer with other models. So to go into the opposite end of the aging spectrum, this is very interesting to me, this zonulin and these sort of gatekeepers between cells because as we age, there is evidence that we get a leaky or gut, right? And you can study this by looking at the levels of microbial DNA in the serum in the blood. And that's actually highly related to the chronic inflammation, the sociod with aging. And so this sort of reverse flow, right, from the gut into the blood stream is interesting amongst those who are aging. And I wonder how much of that is actually linked not so much to the biological aging process, but to an adult lifelong, you know, dietary habit and other insults that might lead to the leaky or gut. So we were talking about this and they will take a different podcast. But to make a long story short is that there are strong evidence as you mentioned of an involvement of changing the biology, particularly in controlling the antigen trafficking with aging. Aging is a irreversible, common process that we all will go through. It's something that we still do not have a capability to manipulate. However, talking about regenerating medicine, contrary to what we believe before, even at advanced age, we have the capability to regenerate tissues, cells, pathways, metabolic, you know, signaling. So what is the process of aging? You know, if you define the biological terminology of aging is when the steady state between destruction and construction goes off of balance, we all from birth to death have that steady state in which, you know, 100 cells are produced, 100 cells will kill, will be killed by a program death, what we call up, optosis. And we maintain the steady state. For example, our bones, when we finish the growth seems to be, you know, statics, they are not, they continue to be remodeled. You know, there are some cells that are coalsier, clastier, chew them and there are other cells also bust that will produce them. The shape will stay the same, like a 3D printing, you know, have a program and you need to maintain the femoris in certain dimensions and so on and so forth. Then what happened that you start aging and the process of chewing will continue if not increase, but the process of building will be less efficient and typical friability of an elderly person is osteoporosis because, you know, the bones are not produced and maintained in a steady state anymore. What is now clear, as you mentioned, is that this process implies that you lose this compartmentalization with a certain world so that, you know, you have, first of all, a different microbiome composition, you have a load of endotoxin that's higher and you have less efficient maintenance of this barrier. So when this happened, you know, you have a flow of this endotoxin, the meal system does its job, seeing an animal with fights and that will generate inflammation, what we call inflammation, and that starts to spiral down of destroying more than reproducing to finish up with its own business, two elements that I believe that will be nice to say. Fruit flies, predicting when they are dying is not the chronological origin of fruit fly, but when they lose the better function, when they do, they know it's only predictable when they die. And if you manipulate the genes that control their gut permeability, you can double their life expectancy, like that, you know, for a man, for a human, you go from 80 to 160. The other elements associated with Zonen is that if you look at the level of Zonen in ultra centenary, it's extremely low compared to 40, 45 years old folks that they have myocardium faction, that is the zone level is much, much higher. And the zone level is inversely proportional to agility. So the more it's only you have the less age you are by, you know, the measurement agility and it's directly proportional to coordination decay. The more it's only you are, the more your condition will, will it, will it, will it take to reach it? Due to the effect and the blood brain barrier. It is due to a variety of conditions. One, as Mark was mentioning, this flow of endotoxin into the blood barrier starts to suffer. So you have newer inflammation. That is not a common denominator. By the way, it's on in control also the blood barrier. You mentioned the rapid increase in the rate of diagnosis of celiac. How much of that do you think is an actual manifestation of increased disease? And how much do you think is attributable to a better appreciation by clinicians of celiac and they're taking it seriously and diagnosing it more frequently? Do you think it's a mix or is it more one than the other? It definitely makes. It was much more increase awareness at the beginning, but now everybody knows and this much more now a true increase in prevalence as we see for chronic inflammatory diseases. If you embrace a Western lifestyle. This is actually really a transformative idea when it comes to aging. It's fascinating. Thank you for over viewing that. You covered a lot of this in your book, Gluten Freedom, which you co-wrote with your colleague Suzy Flaherti. Came out in 2018 in the Celiac Disease Foundation referred to this book as a must-have work and an excellent reference for those with gluten-related disorders. In reviews of the book, some readers have referred to it as a life-changing book. You must be pleased with the response you've received. Yes, I am, but once again, to be not glamorous but factual, the reason why we end up to write that book is because there was a lot of confusion at that time. We went from an obscure obsolete condition to very fashionable and we had people that claimed to be experts in the field making some statements that were now defendable. There were books that start to be popular out there. That will suggest that we all have to go gluten-free as a human species otherwise will be extinct and others that continue to say, listen, the only reason why you have to be gluten-free is if you have Celiac Disease. If that is ruled out, you have no business to be on a gluten-free diet. So to be factual and be an open-minded, we decide to write this book and say, well, what's the state of the art and knowledge that we have? That one is not true that gluten is offensive for everybody. Two is not true that the only reason why you can be in trouble, clinically speaking, what is supposed to do with the gluten-free disease. We're talking about the spectrum of gluten-free disorders now. Celi disease being the out immune form, you know, with knowledge being the allergic reaction and then this, you know, gluten sensitive, you know, non-Celiac gluten sensitivity to be this third element that you mentioned before that seems to affect many more people that, you know, Celiac Disease. So, and that's what the impetus to write the book. Very interesting. So as of today, even though there have been many attempts genetically and otherwise, the only available treatment for people with Celiac Disease, really the only viable treatment is a gluten-free diet. For a long time pharmaceutical companies were not interested in Celiac Disease, but today there are more than two dozen drug therapies in development according to the Celiac Disease Foundation. Can you talk about the progress that's being made in these potential therapies other than just diet manipulation? So the impetus to a gluten-free diet alternative stems from a couple of observations. One that the gluten-free diet that was considered to be extremely efficacious to control Celiac Disease seems to not be the case. So the efficacy of the diet is, you know, not even close to what we believe before. And secondly, because the gluten-free diet imposes a change in lifestyle for you or your family for life. And that really has a negative impact on quality of life. Imagine teenagers, for example, that, you know, needs to adjust their lifestyle. They tend to blend with your peers and now you're different because you have to add differently and so on and so forth. The second impetus for this is that, you know, since we start this journey, the knowledge of the steps involved in, you know, from the very beginning to the brick tolerance and develop Celiac Disease now much more in depth understood that before. Meaning that you have targets for a possible alternative or complimentary approach to the gluten-free diet. So as you mentioned, there have been many, many clinical trials. Many are still ongoing. If you go to clinicaltrials.gov and you put Celiac Disease Keyword there, you will find more than 200, you know, clinical trials. Many are ongoing. As we speak, we have four of them ongoing on our center for Celiac Disease at Treatment in Boston. They go from using macorganism that can completely dismantle gluten. We don't have the digestive enzyme to do so. And therefore, this undigestible peptides can induce an immune response to inhibited zoning. So you stop the trafficking to, you know, other drugs, the target, other steps that leads to the presentation of gluten to the immune cells so that they can fight and create inflammation to demigration or activate itself to the gut so that you prevent the damage. There are different stages of development. One of them did zoning inhibitor got to face three trial and then by a flukin design in my envelope, you didn't go the next step, but now there is a revitalization of that trial. Other, they are in face two. Other, they are repurposing drugs already on the market to prove for other indication that can be useful for Celiac Disease. So there is a lot of interest in the field right now. Something else that's been ignored for a long time is gluten sensitivity. You know, we hear a lot about Celiac these days, not so much before, but a lot of people have really serious gluten sensitivity issues. It's estimated that 20 million Americans have a sensitivity to the gluten protein and yet these people don't test positive for Celiac. This is somewhat seen as a nebulous kind of condition. When you talk to the average physician, it's kind of not taken seriously, I would say somewhat dismissed. Can you talk a little bit about that and explain for the listener what really is involved in this disorder? Let me elaborate off the skepticism first. Anything that is novel is acquired with skepticism. You know, novelty has very few friends and I experienced first hand this when I, for example, published for the first time, the epidemiologist study of Celi Disease. That was an environment which the people say you're trying to sell, you know, refrigerators in the North Pole. There is no such thing here. And now nobody will dispute that. Same story with Zononin. That was Woodoo Science at that time. I said, you know, Likigatis or Likigat Syndrome, the way that typically people describe that lost barrier. It's stuff of Woodoo complimentary alternative medicine and not, you know, streamline science. And now we know by genome studies that that's the same story. That is well accepted. Nobody will dispute that. Same story with the non-Celiac gluten sensitive, gluten sensitive for short. A lot of skepticism at the beginning. But now people are growing into the idea that that's a real deal. And I have to say that at the beginning I was also skeptical. And again, to be factual, so not to be, you know, appearing smart that, you know, we thought about this and therefore we discover this new entity. The reality of the story is very unglamorous. You know, we had people coming in our center from all over the world and they believed that gluten was creating problems and we did this typical test for Cedar disease and they were negative and as typically we'll have done. I said, listen, you have no business to be on a gluten free diet. You have to see somewhere else the reason of your symptoms. And then eventually they did and then they said, you know what? I tried everything under the sun. The only thing that makes me better is going gluten free. So call me whatever. But I'm going to stick with gluten free diet, even if I'm not sitting there at that one, become 10 and 10 hundred and a thousand and none at that point, you need to ask yourself, am I seeing this by myself or this is a real deal or people they went on nuts or this is all placebo effect. So you start, you know, to talk with your colleagues all over the world and they start to say, you know what? We do see this kind of stuff as well. And then you have the first consents conference and then a second and so on and so forth. And that led to the description of this new entity in which unfortunately not having a biomarker, you can't make it a diagnosis. So like forcied disease, we have a biomarker due to the blood test and you can eventually suspect that or it's the same for whithology, but we don't yet and for gluten sensitive. And a lot of people are working on it. But the reality of the story is that again, the confusion also stems that, you know, the state of mind was forcied disease, 100% of people withcied disease, they have a gluten reaction and they react gluten. But just to name one of the many conditions in which gluten sensitivity has been involved. Let's say irritable bowel syndrome. It's a condition that, you know, translate in English means irritable. Your gut is irritated. Bawal, because it's your gut to be the object syndrome. I don't know what I'm talking about. That's in the term what what syndrome means. Once in a while, we pull stuff out of there, meaning that, you know, people they have stomachache, bleeding, you know, changing their bowel habits and so on and so forth. We find a cause and 10, 15% of people with IBS, they have gluten sensitivity. And those are the ones that when you go on a gluten free diet, they feel better. However, if I have to do a trial because I want to answer the question, is gluten fuel IBS? I take all 100 people, you know, that IBS put all of them on a gluten free diet and 15 out of 100 will respond. The answer will say, no, gluten doesn't have anything to do with, you know, IBS because the vast majority did not respond. But if I preemptively identify those 15, if I had a biomarker and I would put only those 15 on a gluten free diet, that efficacy will go from 15% to 100%. And you will have a different kind of attitude toward that. What I try to explain is what is the concept of personalized medicine. And that's what we need, you know, eventually to understand who definitely are the people that have probably gluten, having gluten sensitivity and trying to help their lives in, you know, implementing gluten free diet. Yes, you see that phenomena of the way much research is conducted, it blurs out the individual differences and it makes it seem like an intervention is not effective. When, as you said, it would be, in this case, it would be remarkably effective for the right people. Absolutely. And you see that in so many areas of medicine and science in general. Well, you know, consider that the most effective drug that is on the market has a 50% efficacy, the best, meaning there's a 50-50 chance. So that really exemplifies another concept that is very dear to me. Any kind of disease that you want to discuss, gluten sensitivity, you know, CD disease, or rheumatoid arthritis, whatever, I find a destination. So how you got there is very different from one on the vision other. And if you have to stop that journey or start to slow down that process, there is no magic bullet that will fix them all. Got to be personalized. Yeah, I agree 100%. I mean, even in what we do for rehabilitation focused efforts, precision or personalization is the key. Because regardless of the treatment, I always say, you know, it's at least a 30 to 35% non-responder rate. Right? And you've got to figure out how to tap into that. What differentiates these folks and how can you address that 30 to 35 to make them a better responder? Right? Absolutely. So as you've talked about, celiac disease is a genetic disorder, certainly has genetic linkage. There are a group of genes called HLADQ and DQI genes involved in the development of the disease. And about a third of the population actually inherits these genes, but not everyone ends up developing the disease. Can you talk about this? Do we really understand why that is? We do, actually, as we were mentioning before, one of the five key pillars together with environmental exposure to gluten, the leaky gut, the immune system that becomes hyperbologians and microbiome, genetic counts a lot. And like many other autoimmune disease, there is a certain penetrance of HLA genes. What is another peculiarity besides knowing the environmental trigger and celiac disease that the penetrance of these genes is unparalleled? So almost the totality of people with celiac disease, they must have either DQ2 and or DQ8. These two aliels of the HLA is to compatibility genes, but 40% of the general population, 35, 40% they also have these genes that would never develop celiac disease. How you explain this? Because these are a piece of a puzzle. You know, these are multi-fatural conditions, so there are many genes involved. And those are a must. Without those, you cannot develop celiac disease. And the other peculiarity, we know why? Because these genes are sort of docking station on a specific immune cells called antigen-percentive cells. So when gluten leaks through the barrier and comes in our body, needs to be accommodated on this docking station, the HLA DQ2 DQ8, on what we call antigen-percentive cells. And when they dock, then they are presented to other immune cells that will create the damage. If you don't have the dock, you can't develop the problem. That's the reason why you got to have either both of these genes. But having the dock station, but not the rest of the machinery that genetically will lead to the presentation to the, you know, immune cells that damage the intestine would not do the trick. So the presence is necessary by no sufficient. There are many other genes involved. That's really interesting. And you talked a lot about this in your book, Gluten Freedom. And as we talked about folks at the celiac disease foundation refer to the book as a must-have and an excellent reference book for those with gluten-related disorders. The best compliment that I got from this book for our reviewers is that this was written for the General Leadership, to the point in which one of the reviewers said this was like a a a romance or a thriller. I cannot put down the book until I finish from, you know, the beginning to the end. It's very conversational, but factual. And in which we discuss many things, including this genetic situation, including, you know, the evolution epidemiologist speaking of the knowledge about celiac disease all the way, the role of the microbiome of epigenetic and so on and so forth. You worked with Bob Prior at MIT Press and publishing this book that had to be a good experience. It was an interesting experience. Again, I want to be factual. Bob approached to me and said, listen, it's time to write a good book on microbiome. And I said, Bob, I appreciate and I'm flattered, but there is no way that I will do that. And he said, why? It's an impossible mission. What are you talking about? Well, if I have to write a book in which every month on its object, in which every month there are 700 papers published, this will be obsolete by the time that I finish it. And Bob, with his sour fear, said, listen, you just set the rules. Of course, you know, the dynamic will change, but something that would never change are the rules of the game. You know, what can be done? You know, working on the microbiome, something that factual would not change over time. And it's also interesting to know the history of how we end up to move from the single microorganism mechanism that interact with us to the entire community and what this does in terms of our clinical destiny, so to speak. So at the end, I capitulated. And again, with Susie, Flarektony, that is, you know, a very smart scientific writer, as I said, Susie, this is the almost impossible mission. And we got to do this in a year. So let's start writing this using, you know, Bob's direction. And we start to write the book. And of course, you know, you got to the chapter three. And then you have to go back to chapter two because something really impactful is published the week before and so on and so forth. And then Bob said, I want this book by this date. You cannot touch other than cosmetically this book anymore. And we eventually end up to, you know, fulfill the requests. We gave the book to Bob and guess what? COVID came aboard. I said, Bob, I can't give you the book without mentioning COVID. And what this is doing to the microbiome world. So it gave me a pass for another two, three months. So we had to really scruple the puts stuff in the air in the midst of the pandemics. You know, it was an art of love. But you know, honestly, it was one of the most difficult enterprise that I have to go through because, but I have a lot of fun because I also had to rely on interviewing colleagues there much better than I am in understanding the world, the microbiome, the history, how we got there, fascinating. Yeah. He's a very accomplished editor. And you do realize who indirectly caused you that pain. Yes indeed. Stem Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research organization investigating a broad range of topics aimed at understanding and extending human cognition, locomotion, health span, resilience, and performance. One of our associates here at IHMC ended up in the intensive care unit of a local hospital because of a lower GI bleed. When he asked his gastroenterologist, what he thought was going on, Leaky Gut was offered as a likely possibility. I understand and I think I understand why that you're not a particularly big fan of the term Leaky Gut. I don't like it at all. And again, Leaky Gut or Leaky Gut syndrome has been used and abused over the years to explain everything that goes wrong in the world. If you have a flood in Pensacola, it's due to Leaky Gut. So the election went wrong as the Leaky Gut. So that term was vilified. I think even the concepts is the same. I rather prefer, you know, got buried this function, for example, or impaired, you know, got permeability, but not Leaky Gut. But you know, again, one of the major challenges in the world of the role of got permeability and antigen trafficking is that we did not have a good biomarker to study this. That was one of the limitations. We did the scorer at Zonin in many companies start to generate, you know, testing to measure Zonin in the blood and the stool sense of resonance of words. Now, it seems yes to that, but again, flood times fly. Zonin was the scorer 25 years ago. There are thousands of papers out there now using Zonin as a biomarker. And I can go through the lists of from aging again to neurodevelopment to disorder to neurodegenerative disorders to autoimmunity, to cancer, to benabolic disorders like type 2 diabetes and, you know, nonacodifact liver disease, to GI bleeding, and so on and so forth. The common denominator being inflammation. So your associate, you know, may have been lending in the ICU because of this massive passage of endotoxins due to a sudden increase of antigen trafficking that can translate in a situation like this. Interesting enough, you know, this biomarker is a got permeability that routinely used in Europe now and not prime time here in United States yet. But I think that is a question of time. Again, as I was saying you, transformation of science would take time to that kind of, you know, streamlined acceptance, so to speak. I think you're right. Absolutely. Thank you. Right. Back in 2018, you gave a talk at the Institute for Functional Medicine's annual International Conference. The talk was titled Autoimmunity and the Interplay of Genes and the Environment. You began your talk by pointing out that medicine is still relatively ignorant about human biology in some regards. And you talked about how and why people get sick. Can you expand on that and tell us a little bit about your talk in that experience? So in the past, we were convinced that if I'm born with this genes for colon cancer or Alzheimer or, you know, sarcopenia, whatever, it is my destiny to get there. There's nothing I can do about it. And, you know, lead the weanew that's not the case again, lesson learned from silly disease. There were people that for 40, 50 years were able to tolerate gluten and then something happened that made them to lose that luxury despite the all the elements were there. And that led to the conclusion in my humble opinion that, you know, the presence of the genes is simply a predisposing factor. If this translate in clinical actuality, it really depends on how you play your genetic cards, meaning your lifestyle. You know, that brings also another concept that is very clear to me and very dear to me. That is epigenetics. So playing genetic cards means if I, one and how I put emotion this genes to start my journey from genetic predisposition to clinical outcome. And if I understand that journey, if I understand, for example, what we've been doing wrong in the Western atmosphere to justify this surge of chronic inflammatory diseases, we will have strategies to slow down if not reverse the process. And this knowledge can be applied also to something that we thought that was, you know, not, you know, negotiable like a aging in a gracious way. You know, I don't have the ambition to leave 200 years, but I would love to leave whatever is my genetic plan in an independent way so that I would not be a liability, rather than a resource for the society. And with an aging society, that's important. So all this to say, what we have been doing wrong in playing our genetic cards. And if you just go through the process, the reality is the following. Anything that manipulate the microbiome in the wrong way so that our interaction is not in a friendly relationship, but is more on the belligerent side translates in deviation derailing for what was the plan of evolution that leads me to play my genetic cards, you know, on my disadvantage. That's the long the short. I understand that you consulted with Claire Frazier as you began writing your book. She's wonderful. And she's been a pioneer in the microbiome in genomic medicine. And what's our guest on episode 32 of Stem Talk just for curiosity sake. How did you folks meet? So I was a Maryland. She was with correct vendor institute because at that time, they were married. And she was very much involved in the human genome project. And when she moved, you know, at the University of Maryland, and as soon as she moved, we have got acquainted because of our share interest. And Claire is a fascinating individual. Very, very smart. And, you know, we start reasoning about, you know, the entire human genome project, what that meant, what was the premise and the expectation of that. Remember that was two parallel approach. One was the public approach, the NIH, you know, approached to do the, you know, this big, you remember, you know, genome project. The other one was Greg's approach, the fast, you know, approach of a very interpeneer person controversial in Simon aspect, but smart enough to surround himself with very good people. And Claire was one of them. And, you know, one of the genome project was completed and was, unfortunately, not, you know, leading to the expectation. So they said, okay, we find the key of, you know, the reason why we got sick and by doing the human genomics. And we realized that genomically speaking, we are very rudimental made only by 23, 27,000 genes. We end up talking very often what else is going on here. You know, what is, what is the key of the elements? How modern nature can create such a unbelievable machine like a human being based on only a handful of, you know, genes that translate in products, I protein. And what is the rest of the stuff? What we call junk DNA at that time that is useless. And, you know, Claire and I, you know, again, spent a lot of time reasoning about all this. And, you know, once again, and this also in the book, Claire, you know, remind me the beginning of the human microbiome project. It was all, you know, how we recycle all the knowledge, all the technology, hold the hardware and software that was used to do the human genome project so that it would not be trashed. And that's how the human microbiome projects were started. But was not appreciation at that time. How revolutionary this could be in terms of understanding the basic genetic transformation. And therefore, the impact of the microbiome are, you know, clinical destiny. When I started writing the book and I decided to go to source of facts, you know, Claire was on top of my list. And she was kind enough to accept the imitation. And, you know, I believe her contribution to the book has been instrumental to be very, very factual. How do you feel the human microbiome really started? This is actually a great lead into some of your current work. One of the relatively new projects you've been working on is called the Syliac disease genomic environmental microbiome and metabolomics study. Project features a team of physicians and scientists for a long term multi-center trial that will follow infants from birth through childhood in an effort to better understand the many factors that contribute to the development of Syliac. Some of those you've talked touched on already. It's your hope to my understanding that this study will lead to a historic new conceptualization of how we identify, predict, and prevent Syliac disease. It's quite an ambitious project, isn't it? That's an understanding. And then Marcus, again, I'm general very humble, but I'm very proud of this because when this was conceptualized, was more than 15 years ago, we were at the darn of, you know, the microbiome field. And what I realized at that point was, you know, it is a multifatorial component that, you know, dictates our cleaning of destiny. You need to know who genetically you are. You need to know who you're dealing with in terms of, you know, this ecosystem that we co-volve with. You need to have the metabolic understanding of what this interplay would distranslate in metabolic pathways that can detail the balance between tolerance and immune response, eye health and disease. And I also realized that the only way to do this right was to follow a court prospectively because all the study of the microbiome, all the stuff that is out there, including our stuff, it's very descriptive. So I can take, you know, 100 people without Zymer and 100 people match for whatever you want. There are controls. And I found a different microbiome and leap of faith. I said, okay, they got a Alzheimer because the microbiome difference. What about a other way around? Because I've out zymer ate differently. And therefore my microbiome is different or I have different physical activity and therefore this would change my microbiome. The only way to mechanistically link the microbiome to disease pathogenesis is to follow a court, you know, from birth, ideally. And I'll tell you in a moment why from birth and see the dynamic before, during and after the onset of disease, how this really change and how mechanistically can be linked to the clinical outcome. You can do this without Zymer because he can't follow people for 70 years. It's unfistable. So you need to choose a disease that materialized rather early in your life. And once again, celid disease was, you know, our target. The other thing that you want to do is to trick the system to your advantage. If the prevalence of celid disease in the general population is 1%, you need to recruit 100 kids to get one with celid disease and we require a huge number of kids to be followed. But if you take kids at risk because somebody in the family has celid disease, you enrich your population 10 times because the risk is 10%. And that's what we did with the CDGEM study. Now fast forward in 15 years after we've been following these kids for, you know, 10 years now. We recruited more than 600 families because of course we also do studies on the rest of the family, including the proband, either once than the family mom dad or brother sister, the half celid disease. We know everything about this kids. One of the key elements that surfaced by, you know, study the microbiome, it's like to look at Egyptian geroglyphic without knowing the key if you don't have metadata. So in other words, clinical data, you need to know mom's style if this kid was born by C-section of Agile Delivery. What was the vaccine calendar? What these kids have been eating the first year of life? A number of infections, pets in the household and you can go on and on and on because all this dictated the change to the microbiome. The other thing that we learned to this process was something that I find simply fascinating. The first thousand days of life from conception to two years of life would be in through mental to dictate your clinical destiny because that's the time in which we have to find that nice compatibility between the host and the microbiome. You know, the microbiome is strongly dynamic. It's not that once you got it, it's there. And there are a lot of elements that can disturb that ideal symbiotic relationship to find each other. If you look at the microbiome of these kids with a CD gem, first of all, we realize that in graphments start to be for birth. We start to see a blood microbiome and then the placenta microbiome of this mother's that has a sort of signature, so to speak. Then we realize that at the beginning from birth, until two years of age, is completely chaotic. It seems to be chaotic. So some folks they come in, they leave, they are substituted by others, then you start to introduce baby food once again. There's another shift and everything quies down around two years of age. That's no chaos. It's searching each other. The host, the baby, analyses the microbiome and say, you metabolically can be compatible with me. You can stay. You on the other hand, you're not. You got to go. Conversely, the microbes that got there, and they found a good biologianish day stay. But once they consider that biologianish to not be appropriate for their survival, they will leave. Imagine during this delicate time elements, there were not planned by evolution, use of antibiotics, pollution in the air, stressful mother, bottle feeding. That's not a part of the cease action, of course. There were not part of the evolution. That will derail that delicate time in which you have to search each other. Why this is so important for our destiny? I mentioned this before. Two million years ago, when we start our journey on the face of earth, our love expectancy was 14, 15 years. And there are two ways that you'd finish your journey. A dinosaur we eat you or an infection. You didn't have a time to develop cardiovascular diseases or cancer. Luckily, it wasn't a dinosaur. Not likely, but if you were lucky. Because infection, you can survive eventually, but not with the dinosaur. So the immune system was generated to fight only one enemy infection. And in matter of that, what is inflammation? Nothing else that generate a very stall environment from microbes to grow is too hot. There are chemicals like cytokines will kill you, immune cells that will eat you. You destroy the tissue, so you pay price, but you save the organism. So a should not come as a surprise. It is the microbiome that program like a computer programmer, the immune system to decide if, when, why and how to generate inflammation and when to stop. Because generate inflammation when it's controlled is a good thing. And it's good thing that you will stop the inflammation where the enemy is being defeated so that you know, you have a repairing situation there. In the evolution plan, the good programming of the microbiome of the immune system will lead to healthy immune system that does the job. Now we're born more C section. You know, we eat junk foods, you know, there is a lot of stress, serious pollution and so on and so forth. The microbiome program the immune system to put the bar of inflammation way too low. And it's a matter of time that on a specific genetic background, this will translate to the clinical outcome of an inflammatory condition like cd disease. That's where we learn through this project. But most importantly and dramatically important is that follow these kids over time. We were able to identify microbiome signature years before that were predict with almost 90% who developed cd disease who does not. Of course, this is all AI generated information. So in other words, you have 32,000 genomic, you know, data from the human genome, millions of genomic data, the microbiome that is, you know, you know, modifying all the metabologin profiling, all this metadata and you feed the system and say, I have a court of kids that they start from the same start line. This one left and develop cd disease. This went right and not segregate them and tell me AI wise, where are the minimal denominators that were predict? And again, to make long story short, they were systematically the loss of protective elements of the microbiome of those that develop cd disease that led to five strains, only five strains. All of them, they are probiotic strains compared to the ones that did not develop it. We took these five strains, we do the whole genome sequencing these five strains, we find 2% of mutation compared to the reference strains in some key elements that we knew pathogenically important. Genes that control the host's baryfunction, genes that control the host, you know, program death apoptosis, genes that control the anatomy response and the adaptive immune response. And finally, to close the loop of epigenetics. If you take biopsy from these kids and you make organoids like small intestine in the tube, now you can do that because you know, the intestine has, you know, the stem cells that regenerate very fast all the time and you make organoids. And you expose these organoids to gluten. If you have cd disease, three things will happen to you. Gluten will make your cell to die very fast. So increase the rate of apoptosis. Gluten will increase your gut permeability, you lose, you know, this tight junction because you gluten-induced over production and zoning. Gluten-induced a battery of pro-inflammatory cytokines. If you take the same organoids and you protect this organoids with this protected bacteria, they are lost by the kids that develop cd disease, they epigenetically reprogram the epithelium on those elements. Salt turnover, baryfunction, innate adaptive immune response. So if I suppose to gluten, you will respond like a normal individual, meaning nothing. You do not have increase apoptosis. You don't have increased caprimability. You don't increase, you know, the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Long story short, if those strains are there, epigenetically, the epithelium is programmed to tolerate gluten. When you lose it, you lose that capability and you start your march. And that's the reason why you can develop cd disease in your fifties because you may lose those protective elements later on. Well, thank you for that description, Alicia. The study we're discussing really is a remarkable study in so many ways. And you had participants not only from the United States, but also from Italy and Spain. Could you tell us about that and how did that come about and what was the rationale? I can, I think I know, but I want to ask you. Yeah, I mean, you know, these three sites, genetically, they are very similar. So we didn't expect a difference there. What we expect on the other hand is the environmental factors that can be a play. And that's the reason why we decided to do that. And compared to United States kids with in Italy and Spain, they lose tolerance earlier. So in other words, we see that the average onset of cd disease in United States is three, four years later than in Spain and Italy. And now looking at the metadata that we try to understand, where are the elements that makes these kids to lose tolerance earlier? Because that's the now information I can help us intercept the disease that is the oligiriall this study. So is the overarching goal of this project to pay the way for personalized prevention of celliac disease? It's exactly that. Because now by making all theomics and with AI analysis, this is what we learn. The first thing that happened is these bios. You lose this protective element that I told you. The second thing is the your zone and start to raise, increase over time few months before the onset. So the antigen trafficking increases. And only in those that are destined to develop cd disease. The third thing is that you break tolerance. So you start to see the biomarker that you know, you're developing immune response against gluten and so on and so forth. And then you develop disease. So with that in mind, our idea, if this will be conferring a large numbers, is you know, surveillance the microbiome when we see that these bios of these people that eventually will have these loss of protective elements, we can supply those elements because we isolate them. And therefore, they are, you know, now, you know, strains that we can give to kids. And we use biomarkers like the zone and you know, the biomarkers for breaking tolerance to see if this indeed is intercepting the disease or not. CDGM really is a gem. I have to say it's a, you know, not very many projects in science are of the duration in a cohort study. It's really kind of amazing. Let's talk about some of your other work as well. Last year, you published a paper in the American Journal of Gastroenterology titled Early Antibody Dynamics in a prospective cohort of children at risk for cd disease. The aim was to identify possible serum biomarkers that could help predict cd disease in at risk children. Can you tell us about this study a little bit about the design and what you found? Yeah. Same story. We exploited the cd gem study so in a prospective cohort and what we found that some antibodies that are called the amity, the anti-glane and antibodies, they are biomarkers of break tolerance are going to include them. They surface a few months before the onset and they follow, you know, the other two steps that I was mentioned before, these bios as anti-increased zone on it. So what we understand is that these bios is caused zone in a pregulation because this has been demonstrated by many others beside us. And that includes antigen traffic and gluten and that gluten will induce this deaminated antibodies that are biomarkers that unfortunately you went over the threshold of tolerance and the next step will be, you know, the onset of disease. Interesting. Cd gem will produce many, many offsuits I would imagine. Yeah. I mean, again, as you mentioned, these are very difficult courts to maintain for so long. We have the dedicated research coordinators. Every year we have the lab codes, you know, a ceremony. So we have this one, two years old kids, they come to the lab, they got the lab code and they do the tour of the lab. They look at the freezer where the poop is in there and they are very excited about all this. A study you published earlier this year in the journal pediatrics looked at Zonulin. We've been talking about Zonulin now for hour and a half. This study evolved from the observation that increased intestinal permeability seems to be a key factor in the pathogenesis of a variety of autoimmune diseases, including, of course, celiac disease. It's unknown, however. And I think this is really interesting, whether increased permeability actually precedes the onset of celiac disease. So please tell us about this study that I think this is really interesting. Yeah, I mean, as for the microbiome, when you do the studies where the horses are at the barn, so that's the people they already have the disease. Same story with Zonulin, a lot of people have been publishing the Zonulin that is elevated in a variety of conditions, but you don't know, again, if the cause of the consequence, an epiphenomenon, so they are not related. The CDGM and the study that you mentioned allow us really, prospectively, to see that indeed it's an indicative part of the story that precedes the onset. So we see this rise of Zonulin way before that these kids develop celiac disease. And interestingly enough, the slope of this increase of this rise increases with the number of antibiotics that these kids have been taking the first few years. The more antibiotic, the more steep is the curve, meaning that there is a close correlation that we knew already between the Zonulin and the microbiome. Thank you, that really clears it up. So as a pediatric gastroenterologist, you also work with autistic children. In addition to social challenges and repetitive behaviors, there are a number of other symptoms related to autism, spectrum disorder. Can you talk about experiences in working with these children? I think as a pediatrician, work with kids with autism, spectrum disorder is one of the most frustrating experience. It really drains you out. And the reason why is one, we don't understand really the intimate mechanism why this is happening. Two, we are in the midst of a unbelievable increase. We were more impactful than any other chronic inflammation that we see increasing in Western hemisphere. Just to quantify this, we went from one in 10,000 in the mid-70s to one in 36, one in 36 now. And last and not least, when you make a diagnosis like this, you are telling to the parents the following, your child is lost, is in a parallel world. And I don't know how to bring him or her back. That's pretty much the sentence. And that's been this till the recent past. This is kids that they are verbal kids and nonverbal kids. So there is a degree of severity of the condition. But these are kids that really live in the parallel world. And you can't communicate with them. They have their own behavior that or your synchresies, one of the most frequent, you know, they eat always in a steered up way or they really want a certain environment. And if outside of that, they got extremely agitated. When they are in pain, they cannot communicate. So they change behavior that is, you know, communicating pain. In other words, you know, I can only imagine putting myself in the mind of this kid's how scary it could be that you are physically there, but not capable to communicate with the surrounding world. And how frustrating is for the families, knowing that your child is there, but it's not there. So it's becoming my crusade if you wish at the, you know, stage of my career in which if I want to do something impactful, I should spend time to try to understand all this. And this is an smash of what we call the God brain access. That the brain communicate with the God has been known forever. If you're nervous, you know, you have some cake, but that the God can communicate with the brain is an irrelevant new notion. And once again, not to be monotone, but the microbiome seems to play a huge role in all this. And we have a similar project now that we have for CDGEM, a school Gemma for autism that is trying really to get the root of this. And again, I know the animals are not humans, but you know, we have a component in this project in which you eventually take, you know, a mouse, a humanized this mouse with tools from an autistic kids and you resemble in this animal, some osteotype, you know, conditions that seem to suggest the newer inflammation, the different pruning of the synapsis that happen in kids without it's also not only it's also dictated by a relay from the environment that is the microbiome. Remarkable. And I think the impact of the microbiome is so broad and so amazing. I particularly like it as a way of understanding how a super complicated creature like a human he mentioned this earlier can be assembled out of only 23,000 genes. That's right. And again, not to be politically incorrect, but you know, there's another concept that is is to be very clear. And it's the concept of one health. The microbiome is extremely dynamic. It's not that one's a choir stays there. I share my microbiome with you guys if I touch anything here, but definitely also, you know, my tools are going in the ground and you know, eventually in the water and the soil and in the vegetable that somebody else would eat is a circle of life or in the livestock that I eat. So if I have an environment is polluted, if my soil, my air, my water is polluted, everybody suffers. So I think that the the challenge of the 21st century is to take a good care of our microbiome. We cannot overlook how important is for our clean and destiny. And that goes through taking care of the environment because it's a one health. Mm-hmm. That's for sure. When we last talked to you, you were involved in renovating a 13th century monastery in Solerno, Italy, which is your hometown after all. Solerno is home to the school of Medica, Salerni, Tana, which is considered the world's first medical school. And this dates back to the 9th century. You and your colleagues have really transformed this former monastery into the European Biomedical Research Institute of Solerno. Can you give us an update on the institute and its continuing development? Yeah, the initial rational to have this institute there was because this monastery was abandoned and there were some you know, funding for your repeal and commission that they were going to use for a museum. And did at that time mayor, and then I was the governor of the region there, want to do something more impactful also in connection with the reopening of this school of medical Solerno, Tana. There was close for two centuries because it was moved to Naples and then was reopened and then you know, he designed to invest this in this research institute. The focus in institute is on nutrition and health and how the nutrition can impact the microbiome. And now it's an institute that has almost 40 million dollars of 45 million dollars of funding. Mostly are involved in nutrition and gut brain access. So the two are one in son outism and the other one is on depression. But we also have some very cool project that will be more in the in the reals more of the IHMC rather than us. The last one that is very ambitious that we just got you know, submitted is a project in which we use 3D printing of biological material to regenerate tissues. So the idea being to use AI guidance and organoids and different you know, biological scaffold to reconstitute a piece of gut or a lung or a kidney or a liver so that you have you know, a transplant of your own organ. This is just to give an idea and this of course relies also on abigenetic information that you have to put into the equation to make this compatible with the host through the microbiome study. And then you know, other projects are for example, optimization and triage of people that they got stroke and they are in an ambulance so that's you know, again, through 3AI algorithms to decide which hospital to go to optimize in the outcome. This just to give you a few example how different it's now every from the original concept, so the organization. So matter of fact, now we have a microbiome core that of course is a heart and soul what we're doing and an immunologic core that is important. We have an AI core that does a fraction what you guys do here, but specifically this project. So all this to say I see the feature of personalized medicine and preventive medicine and healthy aging as a corollary of how AI and biology needs to work hand to hand in order to do this right. And you know, for what I heard, you guys are really pioneering this kind of concept. So I'm so glad that you're really investing that direction. Well, thank you. It sounds like a real hub of innovation. So congratulations on the new institute. Sounds like rapid progress in a short amount of time. So keep it up. That's exciting. Since our interview with you in 2016, your son, Stefan has joined us here at IHMC as a research associate. I know that you've always enjoyed Pensacola during your visits here to give lectures, but now you must really enjoy Pensacola to come visit Stefan. How is he liking it here? You know, I am the kind of father that I want to stay back and not pushing, you know, my kids in any direction. I never conceptualize that. I will have a rocket scientist in my family, but you know, and I remember and I don't know if can remember that when I came here, one of the first time to give a talk, I brought Stefan with me and Stefan spent, you know, half of the day at that time, very early stage of your robotic lab, and he got so entangled that I believe that that's really imprinting that desire to eventually support this direction. And when he graduated from the Space Engineer Program at University of Maryland, among the other places, he applied here and he didn't tell me. And then, you know, he told me in his typical way, guess what? I'm going to Pensacola. Is it to do what? Well, I've been accepted there. And, you know, of course, I was thrilled. I don't think that I mentioned this to Ken because I didn't want to, you know, get into the dynamic of the matter. And, you know, is my younger kids, of course. So I was a little bit trepident. There was the first time that he was by himself and so on and so forth. I have to say I'm very proud of him. First of all, because he really entrenched in the community here. So he showed me around that kind of stuff. But also in this community, he really, really likes the philosophy of the place. He said, you know, there is no chain of command. You're allowed to really exploit your creativity here. And it's not that, you know, people will eventually impose you one direction or another. Of course, there are boundaries, you know, that is all of normal. But, you know, he said, this is the place in which I can see myself growing professionally. This is also a kid that when was in kindergarten was triply bored because it was not enough stimulating. And we decided to put him in Montessort to try to simulate him a little bit more. But I said, you know, this is waste of time. He definitely has added kind of state of mind. And he find in other words, the perfect environment here. My only thing that I really would like to see him doing is to progress to take an MD, I mean, a PhD or a master to move on because I believe that, you know, he has that capability. But, you know, again, as we mentioned before, you need to be inspired. And he has this extremely luck, you know, contingency to have a very, very good mentorship team. So he should take full advantage of a debt. Right. He would be great in the PhD program. I can agree more. So yeah, absolutely. We love having him here. And I'm glad he's found a scientific home that he can grow in. This has been great fun, Alicio. I have one last question for you. Will there be another book? And if so, what will it be about? You know, I don't like to do this kind of stuff. But if I could do it, I would like to write a book for a microbiome for kids. Something at that level, because the next generation, really, the sooner they got on board of respecting your own microbiome, the sooner we will start the reverse of this trend. So, and it looks straight in book for kids. Wow. To explain the microbiome, if I got to, if I'm obligated to write another book, that will, that will be my, my choice. That'd be pretty cool. Yeah. Look at that. That'd be very cool and much shorter. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's got always the span of attention of kids. It's very sure. A kid goal for 600 pages of book. That's definitely not. Well, it's been great fun. And thank you for joining us on Stem Talk. I appreciate the invitation. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. When Alicio first appeared on Stem Talk back in 2016, gluten-free pizzas and other gluten-free options were not common on restaurant menus. But now restaurants and consumers are much more aware of celiac disease and gluten sensitivity. And that's partly due to Alicio's role in identifying gluten sensitivity as a serious issue affecting more than 20 million Americans. Something else that wasn't widely discussed back in 2016 was the microbiome and its critical role in human health. Thanks to researchers like Goli Sio, we are in the early stages of unraveling one of the myriad mysteries of human biology. Recent developments in microbiome research are paving the way for personalized and precision medicine that may one day become standard and provide us with novel treatments and therapies. Well, this is Marcus Baume signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stem Talk. Thank you for listening to Stem Talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others, so please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website, StemTalk.us. There you can also find more information about the guests we interview.