Welcome to Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Welcome to Stem Talk, where we introduce you to fascinating people who passionately inhabit the scientific and technical frontiers of our society. Hi, I'm your host Don Conegas and joining me to introduce today's podcast as a man behind the curtain. Dr. Ken Ford, IHMC's director and chairman of the Double Secret Slection Committee that looks all the guests who appear on Stem Talk. Hello, Don. Great to be here today. So our guests today are doctors, arena and Michael Coneboy, of the department of bioengineering at the University of California Berkeley. In their lab at Berkeley, the Coneboys investigate the process of tissue repair in the body in an effort to determine why damaged tissues do not Productively repair as the body ages. So in today's interview, you will hear the Coneboys talk about their early research and a fascinating technique They pioneered called heterocronic parabiosis where the couple took a young mouse and an older mouse and joined them together surgically. So the Coneboys found that the older mouse benefited from this fusion and its age stem cells became rejuvenated and its muscle tissues became functionally stronger. Since then, the Coneboys follow-up research has provided fascinating insights into stem cell niche engineering, tissue repair, and stem cell aging and rejuvenation. And this remarkable research coming out of the Coneboy lab has profound implications in terms of postponing the onset of age-related diseases, as well as the prevention of degenerative conditions such as Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, osteoporosis, and even sarcopenia. But before we get to today's interview with Irina and Michael, we have some housekeeping to take care of. First, we really appreciate all of you who have subscribed to Stem Talk and we are especially appreciative of all the wonderful five-star reviews. As always, the double secret selection committee has been continually and carefully reviewing iTunes, Google, Stitcher, and other podcast apps for the widest and most lavishly praise-filled reviews to read on Stem Talk. As always, if you hear your review read on Stem Talk, just contact us at StemTalk at ihmc.us to claim your official Stem Talk t-shirt. Today, our winning review was posted by someone who goes by the moniker, Kemaldo. The review is titled, How Much Do I Love These Stem Talk? It reads, How Much Do I Love The Let Me Count the Ways? I know the on-the-drive to work and sometimes on coffee breaks. My mind boggles when listening to the guests' scientific flights. I use the to aspire towards a graduate degree program. I delight in smile freely, staying up to date on current research and listening to Ken and Dawn ask great questions. If only a Stem Talk t-shirt will come my way, I can then ignite the name of Stem Talk to my friends. Well, thank you, Kemaldo, and thank you to all of our other Stem Talk listeners who've helped Stem Talk become such a great success. Okay, and now on to today's interview with doctors, Irina and Michael Conboy. Hi, welcome to Stem Talk. I'm your host, Don Conegas, and joining us today is Irina and Michael Conboy. Irina and Michael, welcome to Stem Talk. Good morning. Good morning. Yeah, thanks for hiding us. Yeah, and also joining us is Ken Ford. Hello, Dawn and hello, Conboys. Look in. So let's start with Irina. You grew up in what used to be called the Soviet Union. I understand that you were a fairly passionate gymnast back then, is that right? Well, you cannot really tell that it's a passionate gymnast, but I was gymnast and it was high-impact gymnastics. So I was very serious about that. I started when I was six, when I was picked in my elementary school, and I continued doing gymnastics until I broke both of my arms and my parents told me to focus on my academics instead. Well, that sounds like a good plan. So what point did you become interested in science and what inspired you to study biology specifically? Well, long time ago, again, when I was five or six, I noticed that I'm getting physically bigger, and I tried to project what is going to happen next. So like when you cannot fit under the table anymore, what then happens next? And I realized that I will grow old, and will be like my grandma. And I noticed how my grandma's skin looked so much different from mine, and I felt pity and I wanted to help you to basically live longer. And that's what precipitated my interest in biology and specifically in biology of aging. So Michael, I understand that growing up, you were a pretty nerdy kid who spent a lot of time outdoors studying bugs, is that right? That's a pretty accurate assessment. I used to like to... I mean, I wasn't really all that. I had friends, but I wasn't super social. I usually preferred to just sit out in the backyard and look at bugs. My family lived outside of Chicago for a couple of years. And one of those years was one of the 17-year locust years, 17-year cicadas. I remember the grubs just crawling out of the ground everywhere and pupating on the trees and the house and any place they could find. And then it was just swarming with cicadas. There were so many cicadas that I could find what in biology is very, very unique events, the albinos. And I used to collect jars and jars of just the bleachy white bugs. Michael, you grew up in Massachusetts and attended Harvard. What were your plans when you started school? Where did you see yourself going? Well, I entered as a pre-med and majored in biochemistry, which was sort of the shortest path to get all of my pre-med requirements out of the way as part of the major requirements. Yeah, it was going to be a brain surgeon and I realized that you could say neurosurgeon and it sounded smarter. Smatted. Was there something about the lab work or the environment that persuaded you to abandon medical school and focus more on research? What precipitated that change? As part of the program, we had opportunities to go intern in labs and work in a lab to learn some basic research. All of a sudden, I realized that that was the place for me. I could go in the lab and then there might be 10 other people in the lab there. And nobody would talk to you for an hour or two. You just focus on your bench and do your science. And at about that time, I realized that that's probably where I'd be happier. Medicine is a noble profession. But you've got to kind of like people and you've got to put them at ease and have some good bedside manners. I'm not so sure if I could fad the patients around people to cultivate good bedside manners. But in the lab, I could spend hours in lab and I did spend hours in the lab. And, Erena, I understand that you have an interesting story about your first visit to Boston and how a female friend of yours has set you up with a lot of dates before you even set foot in the US. Can you tell us a little bit about that? Yeah, so that is the famous story of how our family started really. I had this friend from high school when we were back in the Soviet Union. And he or family immigrated to the United States in our very early 80s or late 70s. I don't really remember. So then the time came when for the first time, Soviet Union citizens were really allowed to visit abroad. And she invited me to visit for a couple of weeks and she was at the time in Harvard, where was my husband of over 25 years also. Mike, so she asked me to send my photograph to her and I did. And then she apparently brought this photo to her lab because she was very busy as being first year student there. She was extremely busy so she wanted to make my visit, my short visit as interesting as possible. So she asked every single guy and a laboratory to take me out. She said, this is my beautiful friend, Arina. Can you take her out? And then so they like basically said, okay, and she scribbles, scribbles, scribbles, and her notebook saying, okay, you will be Monday and you will go to the movies and you will be Tuesday and you go to the zoo. And then Mike was Thursday. So Mike was Thursday and he took me out discodancing. But the best part of the story is that she did not tell me that it was all arranged. So here I come to Harvard and all of these single, strappy young lads are lining up to ask me out. And I'm like, what's going on? Maybe the way I look or I don't even speak English well enough, I spoke a little bit. And so they cannot really tell what a great person I am but they're already asking me out. And so maybe the way that I look is like perfect for Harvard and that's what is in style. So that's how Mike and I met pretty much and it was over 30 years ago. Wow, that's a great story. That's a great story. So Michael, can you tell the story about how you found yourself in Moscow asking Arina if she wanted to hang out? Yeah, so that was, I mean, it was just coincidence. The Soviet Union was changing, right? They had a Gorbachev and Perestroika and Glaznoz and all that stuff. So my dad had seen changes in Japan. So he was in the Korean conflict for a few years and had seen the changes in Japan after the Second World War, basically that period of time. And he predicted he was passionate about going to the Soviet Union and seeing it before it changed and broke up and did whatever it was going to be. So he had arranged a trip for Moscow Kiev in Leningrad as one of those packaged, packaged deals and asked me if I wanted to go. And I said, yeah, and we had arranged this like months before. I couldn't get into a Russian language class but I could take a night class on reading Russian. So I learned all the letters. And then coincidentally, then I'm in the lab working one day and Arina's friend comes by with the note pad in the picture and I'm Thursday. And then a couple months later, I was in Moscow and I had gotten Arina's number. I had told her that I might be visiting and I could get your number. So for when I'm in Moscow, I was like, gave her a call. And so we met up. She took us around and showed us some of the sights in Moscow. And then we sort of had this sort of like long, long distance relationship. I was like, we'd write each other letters and send the pictures. Right? Sending cassette tapes of our favorite songs. I was like, I think we had to go back to the head. We had cassette tapes. Stuff like that. For some reason, I would always visit in winter and Arina would visit here in the summer. But you got that bad end to that deal, Michael. Well, I like the winter. It's okay. So Michael, after you graduated from Harvard, you got a job as a lab technician at Harvard and then eventually joined a friend of yours from Harvard who was heading off to Philadelphia to start his own life. So can you tell us about how you and Arina found yourselves as professional lab rats in Philadelphia? Sure. So we started this lab in Thomas Jefferson University, the assistant professor at Brian. He brought me along. I was happy to go along because it was kind of interesting. Instead of doing one task or whatever, or two-couple tasks in the lab, it was basically Brian and me. So I had to do pretty much everything. Ordering supplies, setting up microscopes, figuring out how to accomplish our research goals when we might not even have all the equipment. Things like that. And we wanted to get a technician. And it took very long time to get the paperwork and get through the bureaucracy. So I think it was like the day before Arina was going to come to visit one of her trips in the summer. And the professor asked me, does Arina know science? She studied science and does she know molecular biology and things like that? And I said, yeah, I think so. So he said, tell her to bring her diploma. So I get on the phone and I call Arina. I was back then. You had to touch tone phones and have a die like 10 times to get the call to go through. And I said, Arina, bring your diploma. And she's like, what? Why do I need that? Just bring your diploma. So she brought it and- And that was hard. It took her time. And you're right. It was a technician. Yeah. Yeah. So he was there. Yeah. It was cool. Yeah. So he, I don't know, there's two matchmakers in this story. There's one Arina's friend, Jennia, who set me up as Thursday. And then there's Brian who- Who hired me. Who hired me to work in a lab. Exactly. But I want to add that even though we were like what you call lab rats, it was great first job for me because I did not do some boring things. We actually had an interesting project and I felt that this is amazing. So many opportunities that I have here, even if I am like a simple technician. So that got me completely enthused with American science. It's very first work as a very low position like a technician, laboratory technician. Yeah. We're helping to figure out- You're on a paper helping to figure out how jeans get turned on. Yeah, that was amazing. We actually started those little fruit flies. They're called fruit flies because they're tiny, tiny bugs that fly around fruit usually. Everybody knows it fruit fly. Everybody knows, right? So we started their development and how jeans are turned on. And at the particular time and the particular place. So that was amazing. That really got me completely involved in just science. And I wanted to go to the graduate school. I really was working as a technician, but I started looking at the GRIT tests. What can I do to actually advance now and to have PhD degree? So that was from that first job that I had. Michael, I understand that you would probably still be a professional lab technician. If it weren't for Irene as we were just hearing, Irene wanted to study aging. Can you talk about how that led to your decision to pursue a doctorate and then head off to the West Coast to Stanford? Yeah, sure. I mean, what I really enjoy about science is doing the science in the lab. And sometimes as you progress through the ranks into professor, you end up spending a lot more time in your office and writing papers in front of the computer and the company. But people that have been telling me for years, you know, oh, you should apply to graduate school. You should go off and be a scientist. You should go to graduate school, love us. But when Irene came, she had a concrete goal and idea. She wanted to study aging. She wanted to cure aging. She wanted to fight aging. So he said, okay, well, how do we do that? Well, we didn't really know how to do that. But we realized that getting a PhD would give us the training to be able to answer that question, be able to figure that problem out. My English was better, so I applied first. And I applied to a bunch of schools out in California and got into Stanford among a couple and visited Stanford. And what impressed me about Stanford was that nobody paid me any attention because they were all busy doing their science. And that seemed like the perfect place for me. Right? So that's how we moved out to the West Coast and entered graduate school. And Irene could probably tell her side of the story about that later how then she applied to graduate school and got in and so on and so forth. Yeah. And Irene, you eventually also perceived a PhD at Stanford and studied auto-immunity in the laboratory Patricia Jones. So how did that come about? So Mike was already accepted to graduate school and I really, really wanted to be in a graduate school. So I tag along because we already married to his interviews to Stanford. He said, he basically was only shortly as for most prestigious graduate programs. And so when I was sitting there and listening to him discussing things with the professor, it was actually kind of very upsetting to me because I was nowhere near the PhD program. So very often when we go home, I even cried and said, oh, me, she, me, she, is the Russian info Mike, you are going to have such an interesting life and I don't. So I started as hard as I could. And when Mike was at Stanford Graduate School, I again worked as a technician in a laboratory that studied brain development in a very famous, very good laboratory. So then the laboratory professor advised me to ask other Stanford professors if I could take their classes, even though I am not a official student, if I could just audit and then get their letter of recommendation. And that was excellent advice. So I was basically a hard feeling that I'm already at Stanford and I studied very hard, particularly in the Luberts dryer class. And if you don't know, if you're not a biochemist and you don't know Luberts dryer, there's a biochemistry Bible, you know, he wrote one of the books. So I asked him, I said, a basically said Luberts and I spoke still, you know, I spoke much better English because it was already year and a half, but still, you know, I said, Luberts, can I take your class just as a yard stick to measure my Russian grades from Soviet Union and see how do I do an American school. And he said, yes, you can audit my class and you can come to my office hours, even though I was just a technician, which again was just amazing notion for me coming from Soviet Union. So then I took his class, I audited it and I even took exam and he even graded it. And of course, it was nowhere on my transcript because I was not a graduate student. He then was able to write me a very good letter of recommendation saying that dear colleagues, please accept arena to your program without any hesitation and feel free to get in touch with me if you need amplification of the above. And of course, the laboratory where I worked as a technician also provided me a good letter. And so to make this story short, only later I found out that usually American students supplied to 10 or more schools to get into any graded program. But my husband was already at Stanford and so I applied only to Stanford to do my PhD. And I was accepted to two out of three programs, which was a good deal. So for the low price of, I forgot how much it was like $70, you can submit three applications to different three programs at Stanford, which was a big consideration back then for us. And so that's how I got into Stanford biological science department. And after doing a rotation, one in the fruit fly lab and one in the immunology lab, I decided to join Pat Jones's laboratory, which was great, great decision. So it was one of the best decisions of my scientific life was to do my PhD in for lab was outstanding support laboratory. Fantastic. And while doing your postdoc work with Tom Rando at Stanford, you wanted to understand what caused muscle stem cells or satellite cells to age and lose their capacity for repair and generation of muscle tissues. In your 2003 paper in Science magazine, you reported that old stem cells could be reactivated and actually made to behave like young ones if they're appropriately stimulated. So can you talk a little bit about your discovery that notch signaling had the potential to regenerate age muscle and maybe take a step back first and also briefly explain notch signaling for our listeners. So that actually takes me one step back to my Stanford education because when I was studying at Stanford, I realized that embryonic development of various organs, muscle, pies, brain, liver is all controlled by pretty much the same canonical biochemical signals. And we call it signal transduction pathways. So very interestingly regardless of what specific part of your body are building, it will be interplay between very similar signal transduction pathways. And when I started my postdoc in Tom's lab, I had this hypothesis or idea that the same thing happens when our organs are being repaired. So whatever molecules build our organs, we'll begin at play when we damage our organs and they have to regenerate. So that was my idea. And notch pathway is one of those key evolutionarily conserved molecules. So it operates during embryonic development when we have to construct our bodies. And then what we discovered a year before that 2003 paper is that notch pathway also works when our muscle is damaged and is being regenerated, which happens throughout our life, for example if you go to gym. And of course after that the next logical question was what happens when we grow old because we know that when you grow old there is lots of pain and still no gain, right? As compared to when you are young there is no pain no gain. So then when we looked in more detail we realized that this notch pathway is perhaps the culprit because it is now not activated. When mice are getting old they damage their muscle which we can do experimentally but the activation of this key pathway by which cells signal to each other is lacking. And so then the next logical step was to see can we regenerate the muscle if we experimentally trigger notch pathway. And then suppose yes, then the old muscle repaired just fine. And so that had many implications, one it implicated key biochemical signaling in repair of the skeletal muscle and also in aging of the skeletal muscle. And secondly it showed that with very small and rapid changes which are would be done experimentally or perhaps medical. You can make all tissue young in a very short time frame. Irene you finished your post-doc work before Michael did and found a position at Berkeley. This was a great move for you but the move ended up putting I imagine a little tension between the two of you because you are working now in sort of competing labs. Can you talk a little bit about that? So that probably is common not just to us but to many postdocs because when you are doing postdocs is when you are wearable trained you already have your advanced degree. You are discovering something which is at the cutting edge of science. And so then official expectation is that you take that what you discovered and you start your own laboratory. So it's almost like if you have a B hive then you have the warming bees with the new queen which flies away and sets up another B hive. So that is the matter for. But unfortunately if you discovered something great as Mike and I did with Tom Randall when we were all postdocs in his lab then there is also expectation that his laboratory your original B hive will continue to work on the same science. And so it is really a nobody's fault it's just the nature of things is that then there is a competition between your lab where you were working as a postdoc and the new lab that you are starting and spinning off that. But because Mike was still with Tom then it became really really tough for us because we didn't know like we love discussing science and now we didn't know is it a conflict of interest or what can we discuss who had this particular idea does it belong to Campbell laboratory or does it belong to Randall laboratory. And so the sudden we started arguing almost daily and maybe Michelle will get up on that. If you read stories, historical accounts or whatever of let's say Watson and Crick right discovery of DNA and science that as it you know went on in the last century you get the feeling of a strong connection between the professors and then the PhD students or the postdocs would then go on to do their own science and their own lab often that connection and collaboration is maintained. It's unfortunate that the perception seems to have changed and my guess is that it probably has to do with the levels of funding that our professors are writing grants and getting maybe only 10% of their grants funded. That puts a lot more competition between everybody including professors in their and their postdocs. So that's kind of a kind of a side story. Since we've worked together at Berkeley and have our have our own lab we've got we've now are not competing with Tom Randall's lab and the interaction is a lot more maybe cooperative and collegial. What was the way it should be? Exactly it was always collegial. Tom comes great scientist. He had a great has a great lab there and is a great great mentor. Absolutely. I totally agree and it was always collegial interactions but it became very very tricky. Three key scientific waters to navigate when we were just developing our scientific direction and Mike was still in Tom's lab. I can't imagine. So I mean you had the insight that if it was possible to boost the regenerative capacity of stem cells that it could maybe delay or even reverse onset of aging. A lot of good science begins this way with an idea or an observation that leads to a question or a really good question. But for you arena I understand it was more about trying to understand the pieces of a puzzle that led you to look into reactivating old stem cells. Can you talk about this process? Yes so basically it takes me back to the science paper and then we are going probably to discuss later on our nature paper which people I think misinterpreted as aging could be easily reversed and all we need to do is one specific silver bullet. For example we need to add more kill acts to old people or we need to kill their senescent cells. In my opinion any one specific thing is not going to do it because aging is really a multi-genetic and multifactorial and if it was one thing then certainly there would be organisms where this one thing would be just naturally mutated and there would be plenty for immortal organisms but those do not exist. However if there is a puzzle and there are many pieces and you need simultaneously change numerous things then it's very difficult to evolve out of aging naturally. However experimentally you can understand what are those pieces and put them together and that would be the way to attenuate and prevent aging process not forever of course but for a few how the decades that you add to people's quality of life. Michael I understand that you were the one who came up with the idea of the parabiosis experiment in which the skins of two mice one young and one old were essentially sutured together. How ever did you come up with that? The heterocratic parabiosis experiment. That idea took a long time in generating. Areen and I had discussed for years about aging and asking the question why is it that when we age all of our tissues seem to grow old together. There's different theories of aging there's some that say it's a program and there's some that say well it's oxidative damage or it might be UV rays or whatever right but all your tissues and all your cells seem to grow old together. It doesn't matter whether the skins on the outside and getting UV rays or the guts on the inside and getting junk food or something whether your muscle exercise or whether it doesn't exercise it all seems to be some sort of coordination or some sort of systemic problem. The idea we had was well what's in common to all the tissues? Well there's the nervous system nerves ending to extend almost everywhere and then there's the blood that circulates throughout the all the tissues and of course in the vasculotrious system that carries the blood and then the lymph. The experiment that we had dreamed of was what if we could do a blood transfusion between a young mouse and an old mouse but at the time we didn't think that was particularly possible because the blood vessels are so small and it turns out later we found out that yes you can do that but at the time we didn't know that and so we said okay well that's that's a good good experiment a good idea but we can't do it yet so just kind of forget about it for now. So I forgot about it then Arina was giving a journal club presentation to the Randall lab, Tom Randall's lab at Stanford and she was discussing a paper from Irv Weissman's lab so Irv Weissman is the we call him the godfather of stem cell research and Amy Wager is one of the postdoxanins lab who's now at Harvard famous had done these experiments looking at bone marrow so blood generating stem cells asking the question do those cells ever traverse throughout the body and end up contributing to other tissues besides blood right and at the time that was an important scientific question and so the the experiment she did was she took mice that were transgenic for green fluorescent protein so all their cells fluoresce green and she stitched them by parabiosis which is kind of like a cyme's twinning to a partner mouse where that was not transgenic so the all its cells are not green and then asked do the bone marrow cells end up in the other mouse which they do and then when they do that they go through the circulation do they end up in in other tissues like the brain or the muscle or wherever and it turns out that they they didn't really appreciably appreciably. So arenas presenting this journal club paper to our to our lab and you know it's a big big long table and there's usually bring like potato chips and dip and you know maybe some coffee to drink whatever and I don't know why it's like you know every time there's if I'm presenting a journal club I can stay awake but if it's if I'm listening to another journal club or I'm at a seminar or whatever I just I get to about the first 15 minutes and that that food hits or the coffee wears off whatever and I just fall asleep so the beginning I was like I was like oh wow this is really interesting they they they they stitched mice together and then the skin grows back together and and the blood vessels form in it and it they can transfer blood from one animal to the other to the other you know isn't that something something amazing isn't that thing and then I you know kind of nod off and then I came back to awake realizing that that that was effectively a blood transfusion between two animals and we could use that technique and we had someone on campus who was an expert on that to answer the question of whether there was something in the blood that coordinated aging so that was the genesis of the of that idea to do the yeah so then my my basically said that the journal club we need to do the same with young and old mice and then I want to see Earth who was my thesis committee member so he knew me and even though he is very famous he took the meeting and as soon as I said Earth was presented your parabiosis paper what different state of two young mice we connect the young mouse and old mouse and I didn't even finish my sentence and he already immediately noted and said great go get discussions with Amy and she will teach you how to do this technique so that's how this project started which led to the 2005 nature paper yeah that's very interesting so how did the experiment turn out what was the most important set of findings in your view so from our point of view the most important set of findings were that you can very rapidly in just a couple of weeks for five weeks regenerate all major organs in old mouse and before that of course the prevalent theory was that aging is simple weren't there and the cells become old and you need new cells if you would like to regenerate but these were old cells they were very very old however what we showed as one I think the most important findings that they had for all practical purposes the capacity to repair tissue almost or for some tissues just as well as young cells so that was one key finding the second finding which was lurking in the background was that there must be something bad in old blood because the young partners of old mice experienced noticeable decline and their ability to regenerate liver and brain maintain brain and regenerate liver and I think the third finding was linked to our science paper that showed that all of those biochemical signaling which are typically important for stem cells to work in the first place they are rejuvenated as well so that gave us an idea of the mechanism how does blood control our age it doesn't control it somehow mysteriously it most likely controls it by rescuing kibai chemistry to younger states and that kibai chemistry then tells the old stem cells to behave as they've done so that I think those were the three key findings yes that 2005 paper and nature that reported the results that we're discussing now it generated an amazing amount of media attention and sparked a whole string of stories about things like vampires and how young people had better watch out for baby boomers you know how young blood holds the key to health in youth and other similar themes arena I understand that you were frustrated and kind of surprised by the rather simplistic interpretations of your findings absolutely yes so in fact at the time we were giving a bunch of talks on the topic and my cousin suggested to borrow somebody a little kid and put him or her in the backpack and then wear the backpack in my back during the presentation is if my blood is being transfused to the young blood I like that just give him you know exactly we never did it really you know give them like laser pointer to play with and then just go through your talk so we never did it but really what I mentioned earlier was really frustrating to me it was really like a caricature on our discoveries is that the really the origin of the discovery or the key point of the discovery was to see that the aging of plastic that could be reversed and see how it can be reversed mechanistically it was not to jump to the simplistic conclusion that young blood itself as a medicine which I was always argued against since our paper so although the old mouth seemed to become younger in many aspects it was unclear exactly what the mechanism was behind this transformation and as a result a lot of different people focus on the idea that young blood infused into an older animal might reverse aging but you two went a different direction and instead of looking for a magic pro youthful component to be found in young blood you reason that it would make more sense to look for something in the old blood that suppress growth that is the young mouse might be filtering some inhibitory compound from the blood of the old mouse so Michael can you elaborate on this and tell us about the search that identified the inhibitory compound which turned out to be transforming growth factor beta one or tgf beta one sure so so tgf beta one is is an inhibitory compound and there are probably others there certainly others that we know that are also inhibitory so the search from that came from some experiments that we did one experiment I'm looking around for I'm not so sure that we actually ever published this but it's a pretty simple experiment to do so most any scientists could do it if you take your favorite cells and you know they're growing in culture favorite stemper genitor cells they usually need to grow in in some sort of cell culture medium you know salts and vitamins and sugar and amino acids and stuff and they need serum it's the liquid fraction of clot it but if you grow them in serum from from a young animal they grow very well if you grow them in serum from an old animal they usually grow much much worse so that's sort of like an in vitro or you know in the tissue culture dish model for for aging right it's it's the signaling pathways that these cells you're using are the same ones that we find in in tissues in in vivo and so if I if I did the when I did the experiment I grew cells in young serum and grew cells in old serum and then mixed the two serum together and asked which one would win and it looked like the old serum was was winning so the cells grew poorly even though they had young serum in their culture but they also had the old serum which seemed to be suppressing the growth of anything good in the in the young serum growth of the cells and they think good in the young serum so that got us on the search for what is it in the in the old serum so I arena arena has a great mind for this so she she knows all these signaling pathways and she knows all the players in the signaling pathways feel like her friends right there's different ways of figuring out something so you can get on a computer and you can cut computer and do something in silico arena's approach was what I call in biblios so she sat in front of the on the computer and got on to pub med and queried made a short list of compounds that that circulate in the blood that probably increase with age that are probably part of a family so that there's not just one signaling molecule if it's only one signaling molecule that's encoded by 1g and then you'd probably have a mutant someplace that had a mutation in that one signal and then you'd know that those mutants would either live longer or live shorter or you know a better regeneration or not right so it probably was something that had many family members right so that that one mutation one really wouldn't affect anything you want something that suppresses proliferation right this inflammation and fibrosis right increase inflammation fibrosis I think of it as sort of is being pro differentiation and less less for growth so she made a short list of you know I don't know maybe 12 things and we systematically tested it in the lab just started to ask how you can get these these biochemicals from the biochemical catalog and they come fresh on ice and you can take a few micrometers and put it in your cell culture and see does it inhibit the growth of your favorite favorite stem cells and so we did that on a number with a number of signaling molecules and it and TGF beta family came up as being potent so then the next question so of course is it is it really elevated in the blood and is it is the TGF beta signaling more as we get old and can you through the circulation through the blood modulate TGF beta signaling so that was the the start of a whole series of papers and and a couple of years of investigation and in I mean his lab here at at Cal at Berkeley. Stem Talk is an educational service of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, a not-for-profit research lab pioneering groundbreaking technologies aimed at leveraging and extending human cognition, perception, locomotion and resilience. In 2016 YouTube published a really interesting paper in Nature Communications in which you described a new more definitive experiment than the parabiosis experiment earlier and distinguishing between whether it is in fact the young blood that is having the beneficial effects on the old mice or whether the positive effects are caused by the removal of inhibitors as we were just discussing in the old blood. In comparison to the early work this new experiment was much more complex to conduct I imagine as it was really a blood exchange experiment in which only the blood is a change between the two animals. I mean can you describe this experiment and what were the primary outcomes? Of course for a while it was also bothering me that people interpret results of parabiosis which is a skin suturing when animals run around together for several weeks as blood transfusion and in parabiosis of course many things will be changed and the most important one is organ sharing. For example old mice now have young sets of kidneys, young liver, young heart and lungs and so many simple things like blood oxygenation or simple metabolism conducted by liver will be also improved so it doesn't have to work through blood. Additionally old mice have environmental enrichment because they are connected to young partners so they are running around the cage and they regularly go to drink and eat and if they are not connected they just sit in a corner of the cage and shower right so many things in their environment and simple diet and exercise also change. So it really bugled my mind as to why people would just say that all of these different and viable facts are just through the secret sauce and blood. So to overcome this ambiguity in experimental system what we did we developed the blood transfusion which was developed with the big help respect to support from SENS foundation and they also gave us advice on the people who could help us with that. For example it was very talented MD was dog Justin Rebo who now is the chief scientific officer of the ABIAH startup so he was an our laboratory and he got it going. So what he did he showed us that we can can relate this tiny tiny mouse veins and we can have the computer operated device which will exchange known amounts of blood and blood only between young and old animals and after that they are not connected to each other they basically wake up from this very humanly done surgery under journal anesthesia which is also much less invasive than parabioses and they go their separate ways in their separate cages and they are just being the young and old mice. So that was much better controlled system which allowed us to critically answer the question what is dominant is that the young blood and can it work as a medicine or is the old blood with its inhibitors dominant and we need to remove it. And very interestingly for all of the organs that we tested and particularly for the brain it was the old blood that dominantly blocked neurogenesis and in fact prevented some cognitive and agility skills in young mice. So even though young mice had 50 percent of their own young blood still but having 50 percent of old blood immediately aged them with respect to the brain and very interestingly we had exactly the same conclusion from our early parabioses studies even though the brain work was not published in 2005 paper with liver and muscle but it was identical. We had these findings which were reviewed by nature but never made it into the final paper that in the young animal that is parabios to the old animal ability to form new neurons or new brain cells is declined by 50 percent. So if you share these studies the findings before they were published with Professor Tonya Viscore and then his laboratory went on to reproduce them and publish them in 2011 nature and then they decided to pursue more behavioral aspects of the brain aging and regillination which is all over in it's great for the field to have numerous laboratories to work on this issue. That's fascinating experiment and it certainly seems that it relatively decisively pins down that the negative effect of old blood is indeed much greater than the beneficial effects of young blood even if young blood does have some benefit it would seem overwhelmed in this case by the negative effects of old blood. Exactly that's yeah that's exactly our conclusion is that of course there are good molecules in young blood the question is what is the concentration how much of this you need to have to offset this really bad dominant effect of the old blood. Those experiments came at a time when our lab had trouble getting funding right and it's for a bunch of a bunch of reasons one of which is just sort of random chance we had published some good papers on the TGF beta but you know whatever funding was just drying up then and we were discussing with Aubrey DeGrey who runs the SENS foundation so SEMS strategies for engineering negligible senescence and if you've ever seen Aubrey DeGrey he's a he's a character he's a he's kind of like Gandalf if when Gandalf would younger kind of kind of looking guy brilliant guy and professor Dumbledore whatever right if Dumbledore was thinner a lot younger anyway so we were discussing sort of like how I mean and I were originally discussing the idea of is there something that circulation that controls aging we were discussing in the parabiosis experiment just the questions you brought up is is it because of the blood circulation or is it because of the sharing of the organs and systems that you get when you're connected constantly sharing blood constantly with a partner and so we discussed the idea of doing transfusions and and our lament that we didn't have the technicolics purchased to to do vascular surgery on something as tiny as a mouse blood vessel and he knew someone who could do the vascular surgery on the on the mouse blood vessel so so I really have to thank Aubrey and the SENS foundation for helping us do that work for finding Justin Rebo and and getting and getting us in contact together and for funding that work especially at a time when when we didn't have other funds to to do that that that's experiments and also before moving on I would like to interject then to clarify that one of the reasons that the funding dried up was that our personal struggles that I am breast cancer survivor and at the time I did have all of the you know the horrible things which happen to happen to a person when they have breast cancer including very tough chemotherapy mastectomy and radiation and of course after that I was not really in the same level of energy or mood to keep writing grant proposals all the time so Aubrey and other people we feel new about it and they they responded in a possible way they basically brainstormed scientific ideas that they felt they could fund and that eventually a few years down the road when no convood I'm now cancer free for over eight years not only helped us to get healthy in our brain but also materialized into this interesting paper hmm great story and a little fortunate meeting when you two met Aubrey de Grey so I'm broja which is a startup company that's here in Florida claims that it can combat aging by infusing blood plasma from young people into its customers the company is selling this young blood for eight thousand dollars a liter I've read some articles where you've been quite critical of emberja can you talk about your concerns yeah so so we we heard about emberja the story was that they were they were in the bay area maybe in Monterey and then maybe in the peninsula area that someone was was setting up a a company or service to infuse people with blood plasma from young donors and they were selling it for again eight thousand dollars an infusion I forget with the volume is there it's like a liter a couple liters and that that was that was surprising at the time again because we had always thought of the of the parabiosis papers and other people who had published parabiosis and and heterocratic parabiosis work since that time that it was not clear that there was something particular in the in the young blood that was rejuvenated that it was could also be and in our data show that was probably more likely something that was in the old blood that was that was impressive so there was a few things about that about that story that troubled me one was that it was a fee for service kind of thing on something that was untested blood is kind of unregulated by is I was my understanding by the FDA although I understand recently they they came out with a statement about that kind of that kind of therapy so it seemed like an easy way for someone to provide something and get rich off of a service without actually having it show that it it actually does anything good and I wasn't wasn't convinced from the early stories that they were actually going to do any kind of clinical trial and document or investigate whether the treatment was actually doing anything good or not since then I haven't seen any data that was published on the effects of giving a leader or so of of young plasma to people so so so scientifically it was questionable yeah I read somewhere that they were planning to do some sort of a trial I think funded by these initial set of recipients but this whole discussion raises an interesting question of whether young people should store blood during their youth and preserve it for infusing later given given what we've just been discussing has anyone ever taken the blood for example of youthful mice allowed the mice to age and then re-infused this blood into the same mice to determine if the animals blood couldn't induce a youthful phenotype in some way or to some extent is anyone ever looked at that this is not necessary because in mice we have in bread mouth strains so it is easy if you always have your youthful youthful twin identical twin so imagine that you are now 70 years old but there are also plenty of you who are only 20 years old so if you don't need to store the blood we could just take very fresh young blood of young mouse and put it in old mouse which we did and even if you do it 50 percent right then there is no improvement really there is kind of in fact no there is some improvement for muscle and liver there is no improvement for the brain and this is fresh blood and we're removing half the old blood and very moving half of the blood a lot of blood that is also important so if you think about the moving forward there are so much more elegant and effective ways then store your own blood not knowing what is going to happen to it over the next 50 years and then sit in infusion chair and have this procedure done to your potential dangers of that blood got contaminated or infected or is no longer functional so I wanted to add down for the umbrosia part is that it was never appeared to me what exactly they are putting into people where do they get blood is it blood or plasma does it come from homeless people who donate blood that is unfortunate maybe if you know the name of our society is it partogen free and if it is partogen free one conventional way to make it partogen free would also kill all of the youthful proteins and blood so is it then effective so without all of these details which would come out in the peer review publication it's very difficult for me to say that there is anything beneficial in the fluids that people are paying a lot to be put in them I know they had they had filed on the FDA site that they were going to do a clinical trial but if you're going to do a clinical trial you would do a pilot let's say in the California in the Bay Area you get the data that from that and you would publish it and then say well it's safe and or maybe effective before you opened up clinics all around the country and I understand that they they went and opened up clinics in New York or in in Florida that to me seems more like a business model not a not a scientific clinical trial and also there are there are a bunch of reviews or it interrupt a bunch of review papers from people who do blood transfusions for really life-saving reasons for example somebody lost a lot of blood and they need blood transfusion and those reviews mention numerous horrible side effects of blood transfusion so of course infection with viruses or other pathogens and blood is only one of them but the worst one is activating your immune system so you pretty much have graft versus host or host versus graft or transfused blood effectively attacks your own body and that can cause you know not just allergies but anaphylactic shock and lung collapse and we have heard some rumors that that in fact could happen from this regenerative disease or months later right yeah and then once or even years later you can develop in curable multiple sclerosis or other autoimmune diseases because you're inappropriately triggered your immune system by this procedure as I mentioned in laboratory we have mice that are genetically identical to each other some are young and some are old for people that is not the case right so you just get somebody else's body fluids which are different from yours in a composition of many proteins and you basically injecting them I think basically my summary is that the study should be more regulated or this whole approach should be more regulated to know that they do not we do no harm so if it's the age of a stem cells environment that is the key do you think your research and findings are going to discourage the use of cell based therapies to treat disorders that are related to aging that is one thing that we used to say in our scientific presentations and review papers is that we cannot assume that if you make brand new cells be the cells neuron or retinal cells or muscle cells and put them in an old individual people will get better because the cells which you are putting in now will find themselves in the environment of chronic inflammation fibrosis and by chemical deregulation dysregulation so they in my opinion might quickly perish just like the original cells did unless we provide them with the protective layer of biomaterial which will allow them to survive in this horrible old body environment so it is not that we should stop cell transplantation we should just be more clever about how we conducted yeah so can you share with us how you and your colleagues in the bioengineering department at Southern Cal are developing youthful micro niches for cell and tissue transplantation so our colleagues are not really at Southern Cal they are at Keck Graduate Institute and this is a brilliant formal postdoc who now started in her own laboratory an engineer dr. Keanuara so we have numerous numerous ideas I cannot really share with you know simply because it's a secret it is not really a secret at this point it's just simply in the very early stages of development but we are not focusing per se on cell transplantation what we are working on is developing the new blood transfusion devices and exchange fluids where you don't have to get anybody else's body body fluids when what happens if you have your own blood and it goes through the clever device where we remove all of the age elevated bad molecules normalizing their levels to those of the young circulation and the add whatever is missing and then you get back your own blood but now it is molecularly rejuvenated and so we believe that that will be much safer and because the procedure itself is already FDA approved for other diseases we could then test our devices in mice and then scale them up and perhaps allow for their use in people so that is kind of one of the ideas that is a little bit more developed it's interesting in 2014 your group published a paper in nature communications showing that in mice oxytocin is necessary for muscle maintenance and regeneration and that the lack of oxytocin leads to premature sarcopenia old mice that were given subcutaneous injections of oxytocin improved muscle regeneration to an amazing degree in the images looked almost like young muscle further as noted by one of your co-authors Wendy Cousins this is a quote extra oxytocin boosts aged tissue stem cells without making muscle stem cells divide uncontrollably Irene can you talk about this fascinating study and its possible implications in humans say again we are not saying that there is nothing good in the young mouse or young human that we lose with age they definitely are numerous molecules and so oxytocin is this juvenile hormone is one of them so oxytocin is known as a love and trust hormone and it also what makes us think that little kitties and dogies are so cute they're so cute and they're so cute is because when we look at them we start producing oxytocin and that makes us love them so that's how oxytocin was described before it is a molecule which has been known for at least 90 years but it was mostly known with respect to giving birth and then lactation and born between mother and child so then what we discovered is that oxytocin that does not just have effects on the brain and how we perceive each other but it also critically important for us being healthy for having healthy muscle and healthy born and even healthy metabolism and with age oxytocin declines so if you add it back you then increase muscle maintenance and repair so it becomes younger so that's what the discovery which would which we made in that paper and also understanding of human aging is that it has been known for a while that if old people live in a living family or they have friends they are in the butter health as compared to lonely old people and so oxytocin will increase every time that somebody tells you that oh you are such a good person or gives you hug and so perhaps a lot of these what we noticed about society and how people are healthier when they live together in the old age some of that maybe it relates to oxytocin levels so in the media piece associated with the article Wendy Cousins noted that oxytocin could become a viable alternative to hormone replacement therapy as a way to combat the symptoms of both female and male aging and also for long term health could you elaborate a little bit on that possibility well um you know oxytocin is downstream of estrogen and estrogen could be used as the hormone replacement therapy but perhaps there are some side effects and so being downstream of estrogen oxytocin is more specific to maintenance of muscle and bone and perhaps it can offset than osteoporosis and muscle wasting and by the way it is also if they are approved right so I would suggest that it is better much safer alternative to go through maybe pilot clinical trials and then look into off label use of oxytocin as compared to somebody else's undefined bodily fluid that amperage is that work on oxytocin was published that Wendy Cousin is a first author on that paper her husband Christian allowed is also co-first author on that paper and Wendy and Christian they've been working together since postdoc uh kind of like us and now the first conboilab baby right and uh now they're they're back in the Bay Area as I understand it they're working for a startup anti-aging startup called spring so you're talking about the off label use for intranasal oxytocin is now widely used off label for a wide range of ailments no though there have been some human trials of oxytocin associated with mental disorders such as autism schizophrenia and dementia it would seem appropriate to have human trials aimed at the potential for oxytocin to prevent slow or ameliorate some of the undesirable consequences of aging as we've been talking about do you know any studies that are underway looking at oxytocin explicitly in the context of aging in humans? now we don't and in this in this regard I would like to plug in our recently issued US patent so it was issued a couple of weeks ago and it is specifically on the combination of oxytocin with inhibitor of tg of beta one called alkyl 5 inhibitor again as we mentioned a couple of times we don't think that one single molecule will be effective enough if you tried to use it long term to really offset various phenotypes of aging however we now believe that if you combine both of our discovery tracks such as oxytocin and tg of beta attenation you might be successful so we are fully committed to testing it in clinical trials if there are any dedicated funding I think that will be really good to do because both of them oxytocin and alkyl 5 inhibitors are FDA approved for various illnesses so we know that they are safe in a particular range of concentrations and there are other numerous parameters that have been already tested and took found to be safe so absolutely we are in fact looking into performing this clinical studies in your muscle paper dealing with oxytocin it was injected in subcutaneous fat and the off label uses that one sees now pretty widespread are using intranasal oxytocin typically in your view would one expect to see any muscle effects from intranasal oxytocin or with the level not be high enough at the muscle itself i'm not such an expert on the administration of oxytocin probably an empty person would know no more about that but it's my general understanding that it doesn't really matter how you get the oxytocin in your body as far as how much of it ends up in the blood i understand that if you administer oxytocin intranasally there might be a better chance of getting some to the to the brain and that's and that's why people administer that way whereas something let's say you're like orally eating oxytocin maybe gives you the least amount that ends up in your brain but yeah i would imagine even intranasal oxytocin if it gets in the blood then gets to the muscle and then if your if your muscle is trying to regenerate itself that will give a boost to the stem cells yeah it seems interesting if you know people have looked at the blood levels that you get with intranasal oxytocin but i don't know what blood level would be necessary to see the effect that you described well that's part of part of the studies that we're doing now and part of this this patent that i mentioned was by combining a positive signal or multiple positive signals with inhibiting a negative signal or several negative signals and negative meaning something that's that's pro-aging right so so so negative for regeneration by inhibiting that and adding something positive you can use a lot lower dose and look shorter and and shorter administration of any of these compounds because the drugs are acting in a synergistic way right on the on the on the local stem cells and and i just want to add that is very very important because we test for example oxytocin and mice in a very short time frame just less than two weeks and if you think about human applications you want it to be a routine and you want it to be repetitive and you cannot really i think work on one angle or use only one molecule to offset all of the deleterias effects of aging and not to skew this important biochemical signal so now instead of positive effect you have disease because we cannot just keep adding the same drug over and over again you will hyperactivate mob kind of signaling and that will induce more problems than benefits however if you now use several angles then or several different molecules some are activating another inhibiting then each one is really mild suggestion to biochemistry instead of overpowering biochemistry and this way we believe that you can offset aging long term. Interestingly you found that administration of oxytocin promoted stem cell activation and proliferation and muscle regeneration and age advice by activating the MAPK ERK signaling pathway and this is the same signaling pathway that one sees activated by the fasting metabolite acetoacetate in skeletal muscle and folks have reported that it was sufficient to induce myogenesis. Michael perhaps there is more than one way as Zerino was just saying sort of a multifaceted approach to skinning the aging cat. Any thoughts on that? Well certainly I think there's multiple ways of approaching aging and there's probably a lot of reason to think that combinatorial approaches would be the best. Specifically on acetoacetate right so acetoacet had to look this up it's one of the two main key tones that you get from burning fatty acids right so you get a long chain fatty acid and then you break it down metabolically into just two carbon acetate and that acetate feeds into the crebs cycle or the TCA cycle or the oxidative phosphorylation cycle that our cells use to generate potentially most of their most of their energy sort of aerobic respiration. So I looked up this paper it's so far it's just one paper that seems to show that this acetoacetate will induce the MAPKK kind of signaling and induce myogenesis published in the in JBC journal biological chemistry and excellent journal it seems like a good paper. It's definitely suggestive that there might be something something more than just metabolism going on with this small molecule so that's interesting. I don't know if I want to go into the details of the paper but the model they were using to show that it was activating the myogenetic cells was that they would starve these myogenetic stem-pergenitor cells from their serum for half a day before adding the acetate just technically as I'm reading that I'm wondering are the cells cells would normally respond to serum starvation by stopping their division by stopping their cell cycles and by attempting to differentiate and these muscle cells what they do is they fuse and they form little muscle tubes with muscle fibers in the petri dish. So I have to ask in this model if the cells are being starved and being pushed to differentiate and you add this acetoacetate and it activates MAPKKinas and it causes the cells to continue to proliferate. Is it activating the MAPKKinas and causing the proliferate or is it inhibiting them from their response to the serum withdrawal and stopping them from differentiating in which case you just end up with having more cells that proliferating in the culture. Anyway super interesting I hope to read more papers on that in the future. Maybe the bigger discussion is on the idea of fasting and aging and ketogenic diets and aging and metabolism and aging which is there's a lot of publications in that. Yeah a lot more accepted in the aging field that there's definitely something to having cells used their biochemistry and to cycle into not burning sugars and to burn fats periodically whether it's from fasting or whether it's a particular diet or dietary compound. Right. In recent years the most of the research excitement around both acetoacetate and beta hydroxybutyrate have focused not so much on their metabolic effects which are pretty well understood but on their signaling effects and it's like monthly people are publishing papers on signaling effects both as an H-dacking inhibitor as well as the kind of effect that we're discussing here and I think that's pretty interesting in sort of still early days. Right right they're they would signal not in the same way that arena was talking about signal transduction molecules would have a signal in a receptor. These would be signaling sort of like in the inner workings of the battery of this that drives all the cells right. Well more broadly than in the biochemical pathways. Yeah. A group working at MIT in Susan Erdman's lab has reported lots of benefits in mice fed lactobacillus retary which has been found to upregulate oxytocin significantly. Jermaine to our discussion they reported the L-retary counteracts age associated sarcopenia. Have you seen their work and have you tracked that and can you talk about that if so? Sure so we followed that work a little that's very interesting and we've read that other groups have reproduced many of the findings which is always a good thing to to see in science. It kind of reminds me of that I don't know if you're around in the 70s and 80s. These have these old danon commercials that featured some Georgians eating yogurt and and living to a long time and Georgians meaning not not state of Georgia but the old Soviet Georgia right so the country in the Caucasus is someplace where people live in high altitudes and farm sheep or something like that. And I wonder about the microbes is it is it any gut microbe or if it's something specific with lactobacillus although I just read that they did a study where they had bacterial lysate so they weren't live bacillus they just you know made an extract out of it and there's there's something that floats around in the that the that the lactobacillus produces that stimulates the oxytocin production in animals and in people which I guess it maybe isn't super surprising if you imagine that you're you're lactobacillus and you can you're swimming or you're tumbling and pretty much all you really want to do as a bacteria is find food so oxytocin stimulates lactation so if you're if you're a bacteria I mean you can you live off of milk lactobacillus and you can get your mammal host to lactate then you basically provide yourself with more more food environment. So I thought that was kind of an interesting possibility right yeah that goes to this idea that really we are controlled in our behavior by small things like bacteria that makes us to grow yeast and make beer and uh yeah and or lactate and make them substrates and whatever is in our gut really controls what we do in our mind so that is kind of this off of drug theory yeah they were particularly focused on lactobacillus roteri and I think they were using a product from Sweden if I remember in yeah so that will be good paper to maybe discuss an art journal club in the future and recommend it's also it's very flattering for us when what we discover is not simply confirmed by our labs but is taking forward is extrapolated in the wrong experimental systems so if you show that oxytocin combat syracopenia and they show that lactobacillus combat syracopenia through oxytocin that's great that's very good news yeah I think so too so the two of you and a team of colleagues mostly at UC Berkeley including Near and Murphy in the bioengineering department published a 2017 study in nature biomedical engineering which demonstrated a novel approach called CRISPR gold that corrected the Duchenne muscular dystrophy mutation in mice without the use of viruses arena can you talk about this exciting work and also its implications yeah so um so that is indeed exciting work because CRISPR by itself did not really evolve to be therapeutic it evolved to cut DNA double-cynded DNA and make double-cynded DNA breaks which actually is not good if you think about it as horrible is the worst type of denen mutation so the tricks of making CRISPR three diseases is not just by using the senzheim but by deciding on how you are going to use it intelligently and so if you are using viruses and you introduce gene encoding the senzheim into patient cells then you will have accumulation of DNA damage with time and that is horrible because such cells which accumulated DNA damage will either die or they can turn into cancers so therefore with the unrennored is laboratory we designed delivery vehicle for CRISPR cast 9 that will work only transently repair DNA and correct mutations and then it will disappear so there is no danger of DNA damage accumulation and so they specifically they designed the nanoparticles with the gold core and then my cowboy then coins this storm CRISPR gold like the best CRISPR ever but literally my only contribution is the work and then then CRISPR cast 9 is presented as a protein not as the DNA encoded in the virus and there is also a guided RNA part and donor DNA template part so it's like a working machinery or the factory which has all of the parts that you need so it has the enzyme it has the template how the template from which to repair your DNA and it has a guiding guide RNA so then they all put on to the nanoparticle and nanoparticle syringes into muscle the work not just to turn the senzheimouscal distribution into milder mutation as previously published but actually correct the senzheimouscal distribution disease into the wild type genetic sequence so now you have cure and so that was the big guiding come big impact of this paper is that it is safer it is more effective and it is actually is not turning one disease into milder disease it produces potential cure yeah it's a very exciting paper yeah if you both were given unlimited resources to answer any scientific question what question would you attempt to answer and how would you proceed if funding wasn't an issue and it almost always is well I mean still some of the outstanding questions that we have from the work that we've done so far and others have done is I would want to know if the mice that we rejuvenate do they do they live longer and healthier longer a lot of the studies that we've done look at a fairly short term rejuvenation of whatever tissue muscle liver brain from some sort of intervention but we don't know yet if that how long that lasts and does that translate into a into a longer health span for the mice and something that we could translate then into humans so that's definitely high on the list yeah so so the project that I'm trying to fund and if I had unlimited funding I would do is that it relates to this idea that not idea in fact that we do not age identically to each other even though there might be some common elements of aging in all of us but in my opinion it is difficult to offset aging if you have the same drug for everybody so understanding the person's specific features of aging through a bunch of omics which we started in a laboratory and then finding if they approved ways to make that person younger so kind of personalized precision rejuvenation is something that I would do and in you know in unrelated topic we have a few developments in laboratory that are ready for the off label clinical trials or studies so that is the nothing that we would do because there are numerous devastating diseases of aging for example Alzheimer's disease or Parkinson's disease, dementia and we believe that we have rational strategies of improving the situation for people but to do that we really need to do clinical studies for us and to be very careful and that's what I would do fantastic arena I hear you have a bumper sticker on your office that says don't believe everything you think actually I would like to get one of those bumper stickers but I'm curious what do you tell the students when they ask you about that bumper sticker so it's kind of the bumper sticker that speaks for itself and that's why it is on my office because when students come to have scientific meetings with Mike and me I want them to see that they do not really ask much about it because it's self-explanatory is that we might have particular ideas we have many of them but if you start pushing our data towards confirming the idea we are in trouble so that is the point do not believe everything you think you might think that this is how it works but it's a good detective you need to collect the data first and then follow what the data leads you so that is the point of the sticker and then Mike had some advice for you where to find bumper stickers. Right so the telegraph av in Berkeley is where you find the sidewalk vendors that have their tables and all sorts of bumper stickers or concerns although that particular sticker it says and find print it's from northern sun merchandising out of out of Minnesota so you can go on the northern sun merchandising website and get a whole bunch of stickers if you want. I was going to ask I'm glad you guys clarified that. So the two of you have been married for more than 25 years and you don't have any children but I understand if someone were to drop by your house during the day quite likely would hear sesame street playing so why do you have a fondness for sesame street. So the parrots we had two parrots yellow and ape so I'm going to a green parrot and then a big blue and gold macaque kind of looks like the parrot blue on that that cartoon Rio but we've sense gotten rid of the parrots I should say we re-homed the parrots because they just really weren't getting enough attention we were spending too much time in lab and not enough time. At home and they're very social and they need they need to be constantly part of a flock and and be carrying on and causing trouble as a group socially all day long. So the sesame street was during the day we would leave them in their in their parrot room and they would just get super bored so I found a little TV and was able to plug it in for them and watch some sort of over the air shows and Sesame Street was the show that they would screech the least at. So I guess it's because they have all the muppets in there and then some of the muppets some of those characters look kind of like it was big bird right it looks like a bird and it's simple things that a parrot can relate to like you know food simple counting good and bad that kind of thing right so they just love that show. Oh that's great. That's great. That's great. So we don't have any we don't have any parrots but I've been we have chickens now and I've been trying to teach there's something there's a pair of ravens that we want to hold behind our house and I've been trying to train the ravens to babysit the chickens when we're gone during the day. You'd have to and you have to incentivize them. Yeah so I've convinced them that the eggs are the chickens are laying eggs and then I give them in a daily cardboard egg so they now they have interest interest in keeping those chickens alive. Yeah. Now they'll come eat all the eggs. It is. Yeah. Ravens are phenomenally smart. Yes. So Michael and I rena this has been fantastic having you all in Stem Talk. Thank you so much for joining us. Thank you so much for the interest to our science. Yeah that's good. It's very important for us. Thank you. Yeah it's super interesting the work you folks do. Absolutely. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. Stem Talk. So I have to say I don't even know where to begin. Arena and Michael have such a fascinating story. I love first of all how they came together and then how they ended up working together and obviously their research that they're doing does indeed have profound implications for the future of aging. Absolutely and and not just aging but all the associated chronic and degenerative diseases that want associates with aging including Parkinson's and osteoporosis, sarcopenia. Their work is of potential broad importance and they gave us some pretty rich insights into potential biomedical solutions that may one day help with degenerative and metabolic diseases of aging. If you enjoy this interview as much as Ken and I did we invite you to visit the Stem Talk webpage where you can find the show notes for this and other episodes Stem Talk.us. This is Don Carnegie signing off for now. And this is Ken Ford saying goodbye until we meet again on Stem Talk. Thank you for listening to Stem Talk. We want this podcast to be discovered by others. So please take a minute to go to iTunes to rate the podcast and perhaps even write a review. More information about this and other episodes can be found at our website StemTalk.us. There you can also find more information about the guests we interview.
