Hello! Right, so here's a second episode of 2021! That's exciting, isn't it? I know. Thank God 2020's finished! That sucked! Yeah, don't get too excited. We thought 2016 was bad. Yeah, I mean, well... There's no guarantee that the only way is up. But there is, because we are looking into the future today... Well, indeed we are, because we thought that as hosts of one of the BBC's flagship radio science programmes, we would start the new year as we mean to go on with an episode of our pseudo science. Yeah, we're going to do astrology today. Enjoy! I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science! Science! I like it. Now, I think some people might already know what today's curious case is about. Do you? Yes. All the soothsayers, the whispers of the zodiac, the diviners, the Haruspik, Haruspiket, the Druids... They've all surely seen this episode coming. Sorry Adam, what on earth are you talking about? Well, they should have foreseen that we would get an email from Dan in Australia into curious cases at BBC.co.uk because it was written in the stars. Dan says, astrology has been around for thousands of years and across many cultures in some form, so could there be something in it? Okay, well, you know what, using my second-site powers, I think I'm sensing a hint of sarcasm in your voice here. Get the behind me, which, look, astrology is not science, and it is, a load of old coblas, there is no way, and more importantly, no evidence that the positions of stars, billions of miles away have the slightest impact on the fleeting lives of some bipedal shaved monkeys such as ourselves. Yes, okay, well, you're right, of course, because I do not believe in this either. But you know, I'm not completely close off to the idea that we are somehow connected to the cosmos because there are creatures on earth whose behaviour is linked to the movement of celestial objects after all. Well, that is definitely true. I mean, there's the dung beetles that navigate by the Milky Way. But the point is that how can it be meaningful to draw lines in space between these pinpricks of light and the night sky, which are actually light years apart from each other and have no connection to each other, apart from the fact that to the ancients, they looked, well, honestly, they looked nothing like goats or crabs or fish, those stars in those constellations are literally cotillions of miles away from each other. Yeah, all right. What's your star sign, Adam? Well, I'm Capricorn. The Noodle Goat. What a surprise. And you say that one-twelfth of people are born in January. Are you saying that we are all Noodle Goats? Yes, yes I am. What are you then? I'm Pisces, which, by the way, I should tell you, is the same as our question of Dan. So that means you can't be rude about us. Mmm, fishy? Okay, clearly you're going to be know-how-what is it ever today, Adam? So, I tell you what, I'm going to call in the big guns, by which I mean Richard Weisman, Virgo, and Professor in the public understanding of psychology at the University of Hockshire. And he knows more than most just how popular astrology is. So, astonishing. Most people, I think, used to read their horoscopes and the newspapers, I'm sure people still look online for that sort of thing. But in some surveys, you've got to 100 million Americans saying they actually read their horoscope on a daily basis and about six million saying they've actually paid a professional astrologer to analyse their personality. So, although we may think, oh, this is just a small fry, actually, it kind of isn't. See, there you go, Adam. This is a big deal regardless of whether you like it or not. An astrology is definitely having its moment. You know, this kind of alternative spirituality has not been this popular since the 1970s. Right, so what do we know about the numbers of people who are actually signing up? Well, okay, so there's different levels of belief, so it's a bit difficult to say exactly. But a 2015 UGAR survey found that 8% of people in Britain and 14% of people in the United States believed in the predictive power of astrology. 8%, that is nearly... one in 12? Did you just have to work that out on your hands? Yes, I did. It's impressive. Tell you what, though, membership of the Association for Young Astrologers, that also doubled between 2018 and 2019. Dumbledore, how many members they have in the first place? Because it wouldn't be that surprising if they had one. Thank you, Adam, I think I'll do the mass jokes for an hour and cheers. But you know what, though, 4% of Britain say that they have acted on information in your horoscope. Wow, we're really 4%, who are they? And what actions are they taking? Well, you know what, funny you should ask. There's lots of people that really buy into this stuff, including politicians. Oh, really? So, yes, the Reagan's famously an interestrology, and they used astrological readings to assign the other timings of summits, and announcements, and flights, and on Air Force One, and so on. So, for some people, it's serious whole business. Goodness me. Did they ever use it for anything more serious? Like, I've decided to go to war because of the position of Venus in the sky. Well, I don't know. I hope not. I hope that sort of thing was done on a little bit more rational basis. Look at the things, I mean, who knows, because you probably had a little bit unlikely. To go up from the media and go, you know, Venus is rising now. It's the time for suddenly going to war. So, yeah, who knows? I'm sorry. What? Yeah, you know what? Apparently, Reagan's not the only one here. So, the Indian Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, Vladimir Putin, Hitler, and actual JP Morgan, the founder of JP Morgan, are all supposed to have been very big astronomy fans. Okay, I'm not sure you're making a great, okay? I mean, that is not the greatest list of humanity's heroes. Is it? Look, we should start at the beginning with all this, because Dan, our questioner, he did actually say this absolute bunch of codswollop must have come from somewhere. Did he actually say that? Or are you really rewriting his question for me? Little bit. So, I asked Joe Marchant, Leo, and fascinated non-believer, because she's written all about our connection to the stars in her most recent book. That's the human cosmos, a secret history to the stars. And back when our learned ancestors studied the cosmos, astrology, and astronomy were one and the same. For most of human history, people really wouldn't have seen them as different things at all. There's always been a belief that the earth and the sky are connected, that events that are going on, sort of down here, and up there are entwined. And that really made a lot of sense in early human history. The rising and settings of star constellations and their visibility through the year, correlated with different seasonal events, for example, among Native American people like the Blackfoot, they correlated the rising and settings of the Pleiades star cluster, for example, with the life cycle of the bison which they hunted. So, it was absolutely sort of seeing these seasonal changes in the stars and seeing that correlate with changes down on the ground. You see that in ancient civilizations as well, for the ancient Egyptians, the star Sirius, heralded the flooding of the Nile, which was a hugely important event in their calendar, that agriculture depended on it, for the Mayans, it was the planet Venus, that heralded the coming of the rainy season. So, this idea that the sky and the earth were entwined was really important to people in our early history and really did make a lot of sense. It does make sense, doesn't it? The night sky was the calendar for our ancestors. So, for example, when Sirius, which is the brightest star in the night sky, starts rising above the horizon in the Northern Hemisphere in August, it's time to move off the flood plains of the Nile, but that's the calendar. It says that August is when the Nile floods. It doesn't say that Sirius has anything to do with the Nile flooding. No, and correlation is not causation after all. But they didn't know that at the time did they? And if you think about it, you know, the night sky must have been much more prominent in ancient times before we had curtains, before we had light pollution, before we had TV box sets to distract us. You know, when did you last look up and properly see the stars? The night sky must have been hugely important in people's lives. We forget now, or how spectacular it was. For most of us, a truly dark sky is perhaps something that we just see a couple of times in our lives and it's mind blowing. And this would have been absolutely central to their existence. Not just the spectacular sight of it with the circling constellations, you've got the dance of the sun and the moon, the wandering planet, it's this glittering river of the Milky Way. So that would have just been awe-inspiring, huge for people. But also from a practical point of view, it was absolutely entwined with their timekeeping, their navigation, their agriculture. So everything that was going on in the earth was completely entwined. You had to know what was going on in the sky. And I suppose when something is so important, that is where more fantastical meanings and invented correlations start creeping in. It's really with the ancient Babylonians, where we have the first written records of people's beliefs about the sky. And they really started to formalise the idea of omens and predictions in the sky about what was going to happen on earth. And they just took this absolutely too extreme. We have ancient clay tablets, compendiums of thousands of omens. So anything from changing in direction of a planet to a lunar eclipse, all these events were warnings from the gods, essentially, about what was going to happen on earth. And so this is where the beliefs kind of depart from what we might think of as kind of true or scientific beliefs today. So because this was so important to them, they needed to know about these warnings, so they could carry out the appropriate rituals. They had priests, kind of astronomer priests, who would be watching the sky every night and recording what they saw in these astronomical diaries. And they did that for centuries. Okay, so picture this. I'm an astronomer priest and I have the kings here because I can translate the night skies. And I want a new church or more land or whatever. So it would be pretty easy for me to say the stars are instructing the peasants to build me a new church or give me their land. I mean, this just sounds like a very handy way for elites to manipulate the rest of the population. You're so cynical, I do. Well, it's just what I do. And it did happen as Joe Marchen explains our understanding of the cosmos eventually led to revolution and democracy. This was absolutely bound up in power and political structures, but actually as beliefs about the cosmos have changed, that has fed through into our political structures today. If you look at Isaac Newton, for example, and how he revolutionized physics with his mathematical laws of emotion and gravitation, this idea that everything in the cosmos obeys the same mathematical laws from particles to planets, that meant that celestial bodies are no longer these divine beings that can sort of do whatever they want. They have to obey the same laws as everything else in the universe. And during the enlightenment, that really fed through people thinking, oh, well, if that's true for the universe, that also be true for people. Shouldn't everyone from commoners to kings have to obey the same laws? And that was very influential at the time, particularly among the revolutionaries in France and in America. So these Newtonian ideas were absolutely used. People used a lot of astronomical and mechanical imagery to argue for revolution. And after the American revolution, for example, America was no longer seen as sort of planet orbiting the sun of England. They needed a new astronomical metaphor. They came up with the idea of an equal constellation of stars. So when they came up with their new flag, the only way that they could represent the states of the new United States was as stars on a blue background. And that's where that imagery comes from. So those astronomical ideas about how the universe works are really still at the heart of the democracies that we live in today. You know, for a person who's trying to persuade me that astrology is that important, you're not, I wouldn't say you're doing the best job. Well, just because an idea is tenacious doesn't mean that it's worthy. All right. Okay. Fine. Well, let's talk some proper science now because there have been lots of real studies to see whether or not there is anything valid to say about astrology. Professor Richard Weisman told me about the main ones. A very bad way to test it would be to say to somebody, or what's your star sign? And then you go to a daily newspaper and you read out their star sign. And you say, what do you think? Does that sound like you? Because most people go, my goodness, that's amazing. Yes, how uncanny. And the reason for that is they're reading meaning into it while they've just heard. A much better way of testing that is to carry out what's called a matching experiment. And there's been many of these over the years. And in fact, listeners can do this themselves. Is you find out someone's star sign? You then read out their horoscope and two others. And so you've got one which is meant for them as it were and two which are decoys. You don't tell them which is which. And you say, can you choose your horoscope? By chance, if you've got three of them, you'd expect them to choose the correct one a third of the time. So if they're consistently able to choose their horoscope, it suggests something rather uncanny is going on. And those experiments have been conducted many times when many hundreds of astrologers and what you see is that people can't identify the horoscope which is meant for them. The results normally come out dead on chance. And so those called matching experiments it shows you the importance of essentially blind procedures. Okay, come on, let's do it. You want to try this? What is a game? Sure. Yeah. Okay, go on. Okay, so I have got four different horoscopes from from different sources. And they are reflective of the birthdays of the four people involved in making this show. So you and me and our two producers, Fee and Jen. If I read one of them out, you've got to try and work out who it's in reference to. Do you know the answer? Nope, it's double blind. It's double blind. The blind leading the blind on curious case. The first time that has ever happened. Go on then. Okay, so, A, is it better to go through life in a blissfully ignorant state or to struggle seeking difficult truths? It might be more comforting to push a challenging fact back to the back of your mind. That sounds like you. To grab your attention. You never can front anything. This is you. Have you left to start? I'm in finish yet. Have you left a stone unturned? Is there an avenue of opportunity you haven't explored? If you're diligent today, you'll be pleased with what you find. So you think as me? Well, just because you pushed up to the back of your mind all the time. I've just got other things to think about. All right, you do the next one then. Okay, in your hustle to the finish line, don't be too quick to skip any vital steps. This is me again, though. They're basically all me. Today, the creative Libra Moon in your professional zone is drawing the spotlight your way, but a hard angle from your ruler, conservative Saturn. Remind you that slow as steady is what wins the race, not a sprint to the goal. While there is still time to get this picture perfect, slow your role and attend to all the details. For star sign searchers, there is no such thing as being too professional. Well, that could be Jen Orphy. Do you think so? Yeah, definitely. Definitely. It's Fee, though. You think it is? No, Fee's like meticulous that woman. Oh, this is going to cool. I don't know. I don't know. I mean, there's two more. I'm going to skip through these. So you're ready to face the day with a solid sense of self-confident. You can overcome any roadblocks that stand in your way. You utilize your emotional courage. You'd be able to stay blah blah blah. I mean, it's just waffle. This is you. Do you think so? It could be anyone, though. I think that one's me. I think that one's me. I think that's one. Okay. Is something bad being dressed up as something good in your world? Is it possible that an unsuitable solution is being viewed as satisfactory just because it suits someone else's needs? Who's making this case? What vested interests do they have? Are you part of the process by which a controversial issue is being swept under the carpet? Or are you questioning the received wisdom? It's vital that you're clear and honest about what's really going on today. Good things will result. I think that's Jen. I think that's cobblers. I mean, that's not even describing a personality. That's just like, that's like really, really cheap psychotherapy. All right. Let's see how we did then. So we reckon it goes, Adam, followed by Fee, followed by me, followed by Jen. Hang on. Let's see how we did. What? Oh, and Fee's put the answers in. So, oh, that first one, blissfully ignorant state is you. Pushing things to the back of my mind is me. There's no such thing as being too professional as Capricorn, which is me. That's, I mean, even I really have to stress that too professional words that have never been put together next to describing me. Libra, that's Fee, powerful day when you can honestly commit to expressing the intense to what you're feeling and Jen is good things will result from questioning received wisdom. I mean, one in four, which is less than chance. I mean, that pice is one. Is so far, I mean, there's one thing, Adam, that you know about me is I don't shine away from self. True. I know. True. And if there's one thing you know about me, it's being too professional is not something that is problematic. Okay, I think we might have just debunked the entire field of astrologers there. You know what, there are more ways that you can test astrology with science days. So, for instance, you can look to see whether or not people who are born on the same day really do share the same characteristics. This is the challenge. A lot of professional astrologers would go all that newspaper stuff. You know, of course, these things aren't true of it. You're absolutely right. You've got to dig in and find out their exact moment of birth and then you can get some accuracy. And a colleague of mine, Jeffrey Dean in Australia, another skeptic, did a fantastic study looking at that using what he's called time twins. And so, these are people who are born very close together in time. So, he found a group of people where their birth time had been measured very carefully in 1958. And then they'd been followed throughout their entire life in terms of their career and relationships and psychology and so on. And his prediction, based on the astrological idea, was if you'd line them up in terms of how close they're born to one another, the people that are very close in time should share more in terms of personality and career and so on than those born, you know, five, ten minutes apart. And he looked at the database and again, no evidence that the people that are born exactly the same time or very close to one another are actually any more similar or any more different than those born, you know, a long way apart on that list. What about the jobs that people end up having now? So, my bet is in February, is there anything about, I don't know, people born on the certain date, though, more likely to be leaders or what other extremely flattering job that I can come up with as a student, that should be, you know, great thinkers. Surely, come on, Rick. Well, so this is some of this work is Michelle Goughlin, a French researcher. And there's this notion of astrology that when a particular planet is a high in the sky, that's a good omen and that means you're destined for greatness. So he goes through, yeah, well, yes, indeed, all of us, but you in particular, that's how it works. So he goes through a biographical dictionary of famous people in France and he looks to see whether or not certain planets were high in the sky when they were born and he comes across what he refers to as the Mars effect, which is it's absolutely true that great leaders were born when Mars was high in the sky. Really? And so, you know, he was originally quite skeptical and he was my goodness, here it is. And it really puzzled skeptics for a very long time. And then Geoffrey Dean, I mentioned before with the time twins, did a great bit of detective work. And he was saying this database goes back to the 19th century, when people had almanacs around, they were much more aware that we are today of where the planets are. They knew that if certain planets were at certain points, that was a good omen for their child. And they were also reporting exactly when their child was born. And so basically, whenever you got anywhere near midnight, they were fudging the data. They were pushing the birth over into the next day or holding it in the other direction in order to actually create this effect in order to have a child where you could say, well, when you were born, Mars was high in the sky. That's a really good omen. And Geoffrey could see that in the data. So again, it's a great bit of detective work. And it's why I love working to the paranormal astrology, it allows you to go, my goodness, science is doing its job. So, if you did this now when hospitals record the exact time of birth and you can't really fudge that data, the Mars effect just vanishes. So, you know, and I'm sorry Dan and Hannah, there is just no evidence that being born in February is going to somehow imbue you with leadership qualities. I refuse to believe it, categorically untrue. You know what though, we're not done with the scientific testing of astrology here because one of the, let's say, slightly more bonkers experiments that Richard told me about was one that he did to test out something called financial astrology. I'm sorry, what? Financial astrology? Isn't playing the stock market just astrology anyway? Yes, stock market astrology for men. No, no, no, actually something else altogether. So instead of a person's date of birth and time, financial astrologers actually use the birth date in adverticovers of a company to predict how well it will do. Right. So that is so much stupider than what I was thinking of. It certainly is. The few years ago I contacted a rather strange experiment into financial astrology, where we had a financial astrologer, we had an expert in stock market and we had a four-year-old child and we gave them all the notion of 5,000 pounds and asked them to bet on various companies in the FTSE 100. And the financial astrologer looked at the birth charts as it were, the companies, the investor looked at the track record and the source of information and for the kids, what we did was to write the names of each of the companies on pieces of paper through them up in the air and a kid grabbed a few of them as they came down. So not the most rigorous of... Wow, this is good away to pick stock. It's not bad. It's not bad. It was fun as well, so that was good. And it turned out to be a rough week for the stock market, so it was a big dip and everyone lost money, but the degree to which they lost money was fascinating. So the financial astrologer came in last with a 10% loss. The expert investor came second with a 7% loss, but actually leading the pack and winning the experiment was the four-year-old with a loss of just around 4.5%. So it turned out that actually just picking shares randomly was a pretty effective strategy. And then we thought, hold on a second, maybe it's not fair because it's only a week. Let's give it a year. The investor, the expert investor, had a huge drop of around about 46%. Financial astrologer came in second, a 6% loss, and the only person to pull off a profit was the four-year-old with around about a 6% profit. So it was kind of astonishing. But again, you put these things to the test and you find out whether or not they're true. And in this instance, it wasn't. I've just come up with a brand new investment strategy. I'm going to use my daughter's for. This is amazing. What was their reaction when they were outperformed by a child picking bits of paper? I think one of the reactions was that they found out the kid's birth date and that made the kid, I think it was Pisces, and that meant that they said, I wouldn't have gone against you because Pisces and the touristy lucky. So there's an explanation for everything. Of course. Double down. When back to the tour corner, I just double down. In summary then, any time that rigorous scientific testing has been applied, it's come up with essentially the same answer that astrology has no real basis in science. Absolutely. So there's the matching experiments or whether it's the time twins or whether it's the financial astrology and there's been lots of others, the Mars effects and so on. Yeah, under rigorous conditions, I would argue there's no compelling evidence there. All right. So this is a science program where we two scientists declare that we embrace the power of science and today we're doing astrology. Yes, but Mr. Skepticky Pants, we have debunked whether astrology can tell us anything about our futures. We've noted that it was hijacked by the ruling classes historically to keep their workers in order and we've determined that it's totally useless for playing the stock market like most other strategies. We're not exactly cheerleading astrology. Yeah, fair enough, but I want to go back to the personalities of star science because, you know, I'm a Capricorn, the goat, which means that I bleat and chew on everything and sometimes rear up in my hind legs sedanically. Your Pisces, a fish, one of the fish people supposed to be like. Okay, well, here's what it says about Pisces since the zodiac fish is ruled by the planet Neptune and is like the magician of the solar system. I feel very flaccid. They agree with this. Apparently, we represent illusion, imagination, creativity and bewitchment. Be bewitchment, I can see that. I can't wait for it though because Neptune holds a sway over a mixed bag of human activity. For example, drama, nope, dance, nope, poetry, nope, hypnosis. I mean, we've done an entire programme on that before. A very big nope. Apparently, we are the most impressionable star-saintoon. We are idealistic and in practical. We are loyal, family-oriented, and very generous. But, you know, I'm a mathematician, right? I didn't notice anything in there about being logical, about being pragmatic, or about being good with numbers. So, I'd say maybe a third of that that shines in me and then maybe a third that's just straight up flattering. And then the third that is just hilariously wrong, unless you're planning to drop some sweet dance moves on me now with some beat poetry. Probably not. No, I don't think so. You know what they, that flattery angle, though? That's the hook. Of course, you want to believe nice things about yourself. Right. So, this is confirmation bias. It's like the idea that we hang onto the things that we think ring true for ourselves and we forget the rest and we say, oh, yes, that's definitely me. And so, it's like, if you're a kid and people say, well, you're a Libra, so you're good at art and then you think, well, I'm doing some art and I've done it quite well. And that's because I'm a Libra, not because I'm good at art. So, there, and you practice more art because you start believing you're good at it and eventually you become good at art. I mean, that's like, that's one step on from confirmation bias, isn't it? That's like a self-fulfilling prophecy. You see that in mathematicians all the time? Yeah. That thing about you forgetting about the traits that aren't appropriate to you, you just focus on the good stuff because, you know, they're incredibly general. So, when you read things like, oh, you've got a lot of untapped creative potential and we'll go, well, that's completely true, isn't it? No one has ever said, I'm a really deeply uncreative person and I'm totally fulfilled creatively. Yeah, this is psychology, though, isn't it? This is psychology not astrology. But as Richard Weisman says, sometimes people crave and need the support that these kind of statements offer. Well, I think part of it is it makes us feel rather special and we all like to feel special in some way or another. But also, I think uncertainty, not surprisingly, where is people? And so, when you look towards superstition, you know, when the people touch wood, cross their fingers, whatever, it's when they're facing some kind of uncertainty and they like the idea of sort of courting chance and getting it onto their side. And I think the same is true of astrology. This notion that somehow your life is mapped out that you can know when the tough times are coming and prepare for them or the good times are ahead or whatever, it removes a lot of the uncertainty. And so, you do see increase in paranormal beliefs at time of economic uncertainty, they may be going up at the moment. That's certainly true of Germany in the 1930s when they were facing extreme economic hardship. You saw belief in astrology and other cult forces going up. So, it speaks to this very human need to control and feel in control in a very uncertain universe. And I can totally accept that because people believe loads of stuff which doesn't have a scientific base for it or doesn't have any evidence for it and much of it is much worse than astrology. But we are science investigators and Dan wants to know if there's anything in astrology and there isn't. Your birthday has no relevance to what happens in your life at all or your personality. What you're saying that it's not strictly true because actually the season that you're born in so whether you have a summer birth or a winter birth, that can have an impact on some things, including by the way whether or not you are lucky. This is a field called chrono psychology and Richard Weisman put it to the test. A few years ago I teamed up some Swedish researchers and we looked at the relationship between luck and whether you were born in the summer or winter. And we'd seen that luck was a psychological construct. The lucky people tended to be more extroverts. They tended to be more open to opportunities, more flexible and so on. And so we had this hypothesis that it's possible that if you consider yourself an exceptionally lucky person it will be more likely you'd be born in the summer. So we tested it. We had thousands of people come online tell us when they were born and fill out a questionnaire about how lucky they were and we saw, so near small effect, but we saw it, summer borns a lot luckier than winter borns. Tiny, tiny effects, but theoretically absolutely fascinating. And do we have an explanation for it? Well some people think that if you're born in the summer then maybe you're given more sort of free reign as it were that parental strategies are a little bit different than being a winter born when the parents might keep you closer to them. And if that were true, if there's a link between the ambient temperature and these effects, then in the southern hemisphere you'd expect the opposite. So we teamed up with the science festival in New Zealand, conducted the study again and found exactly that. This time the lucky people have born essentially in the winter. Be careful now Richard, because you're going on about all this stuff with temperature. I imagine there's some people who are keen astrologers listening to this who are thinking maybe it was heavenly activity that was affecting people's personalities or you know, alignment of planets and stars during the summer months somehow gives rise to a lucky life. They could but they'd have to explain them why that's reversed in the southern hemisphere and so on. Well, that's I down, isn't it? There is that. Yes. So this is not throwing the baby out with a bathwater I think and often science does that with a paranormal. It's very easy to have a knee-jerk reaction go you know there's nothing going on here. But actually as you start to investigate those things often you find out there is something there and it's theoretically interesting, it's just not paranormal. It's just not paranormal. I mean he's he's right this isn't the only example of where on the surface it looks like astrology might have had an effect on your profession. That's what Alex Boxer, Taurus and astrology Taurus told me and he should know because he's the author of a scheme of heaven astrology and the birth of science. For any profession that you can think of there is no evidence whatsoever that any one zodiac sign or star sign is disproportionately represented. However, there is an important exception turns out that this is not always true in case of professional sports. Alex says that there are more late born capricorns and aquariums in professional sport but it's not the influence of the planets it's something far more mundane. This has actually been studied for several decades it's called the relative age effect and it has a lot to do with sports that have very strict calendar cutoffs for the competitive youth leagues. So the most famous example is professional hockey for many decades professional hockey has had January 1 cutoff for youth hockey leagues and what this means is that especially if you're young you want to be born as close to January 1 but not before as possible because you will be the oldest person in your age cohort and when you're 10 or 11 years old being 11 months older than the other people in your cohort as a huge effect and so it turns out that over years and years and years of doing this by the time you get to the National Hockey League you can look at the distribution of zodiac signs of all the current and former NHL players and there is an absolutely very striking disproportionality of where the zodiac signs are clustered of the people who play hockey and this can be seen in other sports too. So Alex sees astrology as a kind of prototype of data science you're looking for patterns and numbers so it's people trying to answer questions about the future using the same sorts of algorithms that we use to date predict all sorts of things from insurance to stock predictions even to online dating we are using big data machine learning and artificial intelligence to make exactly the sort of predictions that astrology was making in the past. Think of it as a little bit of a magic trick where the planets and stars are really just a form of misdirection it's the complicated mathematics that is the deeply seductive part. So if you think about your health insurance is based on an algorithm of how long you are expected to live your online dating profile is trying to match you up with people they think you will be compatible with but yes we are using algorithms today to predict everything about our world from the most intimate details down to you know major economic and political swings and the question becomes what are the limits and some models are good and some models are bad and are we as data consumers able to consume this information intelligently because the point I want to make is that we have always been susceptible to numbers figures charts and graphs this is not new. Right so Hannah this is your area it's data science after all are we just really easily seduced by a really slinky graph. Yes completely so there's not to say that all graphs and figures and numerical facts are false but I really have noticed this certainly in the last 10 years or so that a lot of the stuff that comes out under the sort of umbrella of being data science actually has a lot more similarities to astrology than we might like to admit. You know I have seen people claim that you can predict at birth whether someone won't go on to be a criminal by the time they're 18 I mean you can't you can't people saying that they can predict what day you will die you know even one of my favourites was there's an algorithm that claimed it could predict whether you would go on to become a terrorist just by the angles on your face I mean there's a lot a lot of absolute nonsense out there. So as an example of kind of how easy it is to do this I made a little machine learning algorithm called a neural net to look at the price of Bitcoin as a function of the positions of the planets to correlate the past position of the planets with the past price of Bitcoin. Now of course what happens when you propagate that into the future okay well now I have a prediction for the future price of Bitcoin it's all looks very scientific I have fancy charts and figures to show this but the point is it's a hundred percent junk I have not made any Bitcoin buys or sells based on my planetary model of the price of Bitcoin and I suggest that nobody out there does the same. There's an old expression garbage in garbage out now I can make the garbage look very fancy and I think because a lot of these algorithms are new there's a sense in which you know people are willing to report and get excited about these new models and these new algorithms and the things that they may or may not predict but just because you have a fancy algorithm doesn't mean that it's better as the old saying goes it's tough to make predictions especially about the future. All right then could it be argued that astrology is good science but they're just using the wrong data. It could be argued that but you'd lose that argument after about four seconds. Yeah okay all right one last thing to throw you then because there are examples of where creatures on earth have had their behavior impacted by what's going on out there in the cosmos. That is definitely true because the sun and the moon have real effects. I don't know I'm not talking about sort of circadian rhythms and like sunlight and all of that stuff I'm not talking about that I'm talking about the position of celestial objects in the sky and in particular I want to tell you a story about oysters. So in the 1950s there was a guy called Frank Brown who was looking into how oysters know when to open. So oysters when they're in the shallows they open twice a day when it's high tide so open closed open closed and Frank Brown he had a bit of a hunch that these oysters they weren't responding to what was going on around them in the water but they would just continue this rhythm anywhere. So what he did is he grabbed a whole bunch of oysters, stuck them in a box, put them on a truck and then took them a couple hundred kilometers inland to Illinois and he put them in brine and put them in the really dark room so it was sealed off so they had no idea what was going on on the outside well basically. And at first these oysters they continued to keep their rhythm open and close open and close but then after a while they started to shift getting later and later and later every day until eventually they got to opening at three hours late every single day and at first Frank Brown was like what the hell's going on here why have they slipped into this weird pattern until he realised that actually the oysters were effectively adapted to the local tide if the tide had come in that fire in land that is the moment at which high tide would have been. So they were detecting the moon? Yes they were detecting the position of the moon or at least that was the suggestion from this study it's been an incredibly controversial area of research ever since. That sounds really interesting but it doesn't exactly demonstrate that the astrology is real. I mean okay I accept that like a bunch of oysters opening and closing does not make a particularly strong guess for us needing to read our horoscopes but I just thought you'd like to know about it. Yeah well you only like that because you're a Pisces and you like wet things. So have your own ghosts. I think astrology is on the rise right now there's certainly a lot of very popular online sites to do with astrology and you're getting social media accounts so it's kind of changed when I grew up in the 1980s it was all about that column in the tabloid newspaper or magazines you know and you'd have the zodiac signs and there'd be a little line with a prediction but now it's much more online and interactive. I do think this is interesting that this is an interest that's growing especially in people who score as being quite stressed. Who was quite stressed? Okay so this is Millennials and Gen Zedders so largely there was a survey that asked people in the UK who agreed with the statement I often feel stressed and two thirds of millennials agreed or slightly agreed and almost three quarters of Gen Zedders agreed that is compared to just over half of Gen X's. What are you going to have to remind me what am I? So I'm a millennial. You're a Gen Xer and that basically means you've got a bit of life for me. Right no. I mean I can see how astrology might be growing because it is so perfectly suited for the internet age because there's a sort of low barrier to entry it doesn't require any particular expertise there's endless depths to plum on social media if you feel like falling down a sort of you know a Google research hole and the availability of more in-depth information online has given a sort of you know this cultural wave of astrology a certain cache. Yes that's certainly one explanation or it could be that millennials who are born between 1983 and 1995 they've got Pluto and Scorpio and Scorpio of course is co-linked since Christchurch connected to the occult which forbidden knowledge and transformation and generation Z so those between eight and 22 or they've got Neptune that's transitioning through Aquarius which is a sign oriented towards technology of future. So Dr. Rutherford when it comes to the question of whether there is anything in astrology can we say case solved? Sure we can the position of celestial bodies at the time of your birth has literally nothing to do with your personality the universe does not give our monkeys about you or your future or your job or your relationships but the season of birth might have a tiny effect on how lucky you are but astrology is very popular lots of people think is a bit of fun and it was very important in history but today it's time to put this cobbler's duress well you would say that though wouldn't you because you're Capricorn. Now I really really enjoyed doing that and I enjoyed scripting it and fee scripting it and all of us I'm not nearly as hostile as I as I make myself out to be about astrology I mean it is coblers but it is kind of harmless coblers. Yeah but I you know this is I've spoken about this on the podcast before it's like it's one of those things where the rational side of my brain is absolutely certain of the fact that there is really nothing in this but I just can't help but get sucked in every now and then so for example there was one occasion this is about five years ago and I was doing some filming for the Skype night in fact that they're long running BBC show on astrology and as part of the filming we went and to go and see this very famous astrologer in Covent Garden and this guy was going to do my horoscope for me and I was like yeah yeah whatever he came out with this it was basically like a PhD thesis the amount of stuff that was in it it was like extremely comprehensive so he kind of went through the little issue and I was like yeah yeah yeah whatever anyway then it's like we're about to leave he kind of grabbed my hand and was like I just want to tell you one thing you need to get your team around you because you've got a chance but you need to get your team around you a chance for war just like for success I guess right but the thing is that week I'd had this this massive kerfuffle because the BBC said that my clothes were really rubbish and I was so I was trying to decide whether or not to hire a stylist or not and it was just like caught me in that moment my clothes weren't really rubbish and you read that if I put it like surely that was not I mean that is ultimately that's just confirmation bias isn't it though you know it is so I you know I had my tarot and I've revealed in that story what I think I've ever revealed and that's terrible you can go on TV but you're not allowed to wear cards against anyway look I had my tarot done I did yeah yeah it was done over the phone which was a bit disappointing because I always had in my head that tarot would be a bit like in James Bond the living let living that die though James Seymour is a tarot reader and she's quite glamorous oh okay I thought I thought you were about to say you wanted to go through you know a sort of a velvet cursor and yes smoky room with that to do and orb in the middle yeah that that too but it was done over the phone so and it was I was writing it for a newspaper and her name was wander and she was very lovely and we had a nice conversation but she also said she said I think something big is coming for you soon maybe in the north and it was literally that said the cell the commission for the cell came from BBC Scotland which is in the north yeah and the difference between me and you is I went that's just chance you could have said anything then and I walked away from it's going well wander is really nice but that was cobblers yeah maybe that is the main difference between you and me I can think of other differences the fact that you're wearing two pairs of trousers right now is one of them but let's park that so I think that is our we've dipped our toe in the world of pseudoscience and we don't want to be too sort of debunky about that because that can be kind of dull well also I think that people are broadly aware that there's not much substance to it but but just play along with it and I use it as a bit of fun and I think that's there's nothing really necessarily wrong with that I agree but don't send us questions about rakey or homie opathy now we're not we're not going to do this again no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no right listen let's do Q over a week Q-reo of the week now something unusual has happened here because we set out the Curia of the Weeks in advance of deciding which program goes where and I've just realised that you know what my picean skill set is clearly speaking to me when it comes to this this Curia of the Week oh god is it a dance it's not a dance guess again it's is it a poem it is a poem we've got a poem in from Emma who lives in Christchurch in New Zealand and you know what I think I should perform it don't you I think you should I think you should please don't do dance though you can imagine the dance I might do with this in your minds here is the poem there is a special part of my brain not part of my heart that tells my lungs to breathe so I can listen to your podcast lots of random facts and Curia of the Week when I tell my friends they call me a geek I love it I love it also say some notes so this we do proper lit crit on this yeah go on we're terrible lit lit crit um so Emma Emma Miller from New Zealand uh she's she's she's spelled Curia with a cue I quite like that I quite like that too but this is actually question whether we do spell it correctly no we know we're spell it with the cue yeah well we may adopt that later but listen Emma you are Curia of the Week for the poem but not for the 77 questions that you asked also in the same email some of which are absolutely brilliant but they're whoa that was a big brain dump I mean she's trying to be greedy basically she's trying to comment here the entire series right and we're 12 parts now half an hour long age and and even still that would not be enough to answer all of Emma's questions there are a lot of good questions in that I mean we could yes we could do devote one series to to Emma Miller yeah so why they're different colors why do we wonder I like that one do you are that animals thinking the way that we do do they have dreams or do they just think about survival and food that's a nice one too how does gravity pull us yeah I don't think we really know the answer that's lots of great questions in lots of other universes well look we we probably will do some of these questions at some point and not to vote on series two but Emma Miller from IITOIT school in New Zealand you are Curia of the Week so all the remains I say this every week and it's the same words every single time I got in base so all the remains is to thank you for sending in your questions to curious gators at vbc.co.uk where you can also send through any entries that you have for Curia of the Week I should tell you that we have a couple of slots left more than a couple in fact actually quite a few slots left for the remainder of this series that have not yet been filled with winners of Curia of the Week so you know you might be able to get away with doing something quite rubbish but no more poetry no poetry the poetry slot is done we will be back next week with an episode on mosquitos but until then what's this sort of freaky thing you can say about astrology, Zen to you keep watching the skies so go ahead keep watching the skies well thank you rutherford and friday for another curious case great stuff as always I hope you'll forgive me for intruding but as you're obviously curious about the world and how it works I thought you might like the life scientific podcast for nearly a decade now I've been interviewing leading scientists finding out how they got to know what they know and revealing their passions and their quirks it's been an incredible experience talking to so many remarkable people and learning about everything from black holes to bacteria cloning sheep to coral reefs fossils formula one fracking funggy fruit flies you get the idea in fact there are now more than 200 interviews available on the life scientific podcast all there for you to enjoy so if that sounds like the kind of thing that you think you might like you might want to give it a try that's the life scientific podcast hosted by me jimalke lily you can subscribe for free right now on BBC sounds and if you don't like it I'll give you your money back
