Hello and welcome to the podcast version of episode five of the curious cases of Fry and Rutherford. And this episode is about rubbish. Which some might argue is the same as all of the other episodes we've done. Well yes, although in particular I think we mean solid waste actually again. Waste rubbish trash garbage. Well we do have to address the issue of our international listeners. When we are getting through this we thought rubbish is actually a pretty British specific word. So when we say rubbish for our international audience what we actually mean is trash or garbage junk glitter. Nice. Is that do they have the word litter? I don't know. I don't know. Outside of Britain. But you mean things like what we mean is things like old bottles, crisp packets. I don't have the word crisp packet there in America. Why? Chips, isn't it? Oh yeah. But chips are actually fries. Yeah. It just gets really confusing doesn't it? Anyway last episode in the series we hope you like it. An exceedingly curious case today. Yes the last case in our current series is perhaps not quite as practical as our previous investigations. Yes it was brought to us by an Elizabeth Hill via the medium of Facebook she simply asks. Can we shoot our garbage into the sun? Now you might assume that the answer to this is quite obvious. And quite short. Yes. Never let it be said that we are only interested in conventional assignments or that we will not go the extra mile or parsec for you dear listener. And the thing is if we can detect gravitational waves if we can take photos of Pluto and land on a comet. Surely we can sense and rubbish into the sun. Right. But it really depends on how much rubbish we're talking about. And I think as scientists it's only fair that we generate our own data. And by we I mean you. Hang on I thought you did the fieldwork of this duo. No no I've had enough of this week you've made me faint you've made me drive around the end 25. I didn't like it. I didn't like it at all. So I'm nominating you you are going to carry around and collect your rubbish for an entire day. It's like quite an invasion of privacy this. Yes what you're volunteering for. Okay. And then we're going to analyse it. Welcome to my rubbish. Days worth it rubbish. It started off last night. I went to dinner last night at restaurants. I had two beers. And then I stole the empty bottles of beer from the restaurant look like a crazy lady. Beyond that the other thing that I noticed my diet might not be as healthy as I expected. So here we go. There's a box of doughnuts, quick packet of crisps there and a tin of pop as well. Most of the rubbish day was actually generated after I got home because I had a delivery which just has this ridiculous amount of polystyrene. And then I went through my fridge and got rid of anything that had gone off including four points of milk that expired embarrassingly about ten days ago. And then the last thing I need to do before my 24 hours is up is feed my doggy. Mollies it. And then the bin and now let's weigh it. Okay that is 2.2 kilograms. Actually pretty ashamed. Mollies even crying. Mollies ashamed of me too. Beer, doughnuts, crisp and four litres of kind of milk. And you're basically a student. No I'm proud of my lifestyle. Okay. And how much was it? It was about 2.2 kilograms. What's the UK average? It's about 1.85 kilograms. So you're about third over that. I am that you. However the US average is 2.3 kilograms. So I'm less than that. And if I wasn't sending my rubbish to the sun I would actually be recycling a lot of it. Now you call them those bottles. It sounded like it a little bit more than 2 to me. 3, 2, 1, 0, 0, have a hand in the cup. But what are the options for sending my rubbish into space? I consulted astrophysicist and all around the next chap Andrew Ponson from University College London. Well if you take an example like the Arian 5 launcher which is a popular choice, very good choice. Then you can send that into space for $200 million. And it will take 7,000 kilograms if you need to get it to what we call transfer orbit. So how much is that per kilogram from this? Okay so I make that about 29,000 per kilogram. So for one day's rubbish for me it's about $60,000. Yeah. Bear in mind that other people it'll be cheaper for them because they have less rubbish. Okay that's just get it into the outer orbit right? That's right. Is that the only option that we have? Well it's not completely the only option that might be available in the future. Certainly commercial operations are developing to take things into space for less. Like space X is the famous one where they're developing cheaper launch. Here's maybe closer to $90 million perhaps that would take more like 21,000 kilograms in. So you know it's slightly cheaper. I mean it's still more than a year salary to get rid of a days rubbish. Yeah. Theoretically there are other ways of getting off Earth. Let me introduce you to the space elevator. This is an elevator that goes into space. Now it sounds totally bonkers but a company called Foth Technologies in Canada are already filing patents to try and make the space elevator a reality. This is their space engineer Ben Quine. The patent is on a self-guided, pneumatically inflated tower and allows us to reach the near space environment at around 15 to 20 kilometers which has a huge commercial potential. The current world's tallest building is the Burj Khalifa which is in Dubai and now that's 800 meters tall which is you know it's pretty damn impressive that's more than half a mile. You're talking about doing something which is what 20 kilometers. Yes so we want to start an amounting maybe at five kilometers and then we would build a non-taper tower. It would be about 300 meters in the base and it would stretch up to 15 kilometers and from 20 kilometers we could take off in a space plane they would be able to in a single stage access low Earth orbit. I believe as soon as one of these platforms to 20 kilometers is constructed this will be the only method that humanity accesses space because rocketry would be obsolete. Right they're planning to build a 15 kilometer tower on top of the five kilometer mountain. Yeah not just a 15 kilometer tower but a pneumatically inflated 15 kilometer tower. And then launch space planes from the top. Yep and then if you want to escape the Earth's gravitational field completely though the space elevator tower would need to be 35 thousand kilometers high and you'd have to attach it to a geostationary satellite. Well they're definitely dreaming big but is it that improbable? Yeah well they said that about the right brothers didn't they? Oh but hang on because our client Elizabeth Hill wants us to send waste all the way to the sun. Yes the sun being what's 93 million miles away. Yeah we're talking long haul here. If you wanted to build a rocket that would take you to the sun then you've got a huge amount of extra work to do. The big problem that you've got is even once you get away from the Earth you're still orbiting around the sun and just like the Earth will switch around the sun it's not going to fall in anytime soon. It turns out you need to actually spend a lot of energy if you just want to directly plunge into the sun. In fact I did a quick calculation of this one I reckon you probably need about 10 times more energy than you've spent getting it off the Earth. If you need 10 times more energy you've got to carry more fuel with you in the first place and then it costs you more to launch because you're carrying more fuel so the thing is heavier and these things kind of stack up in such a way that it's basically impossible. We're talking about an awful lot of money. You're talking about something that's physically impossible and if it wasn't physically impossible it would be an awful lot of money except that of course you don't have to just fire a rocket to get into the sun. There are cleverer things you can do. If you look at something like NASA's solar probe plus they're planning to get very close to the sun indeed and instead of just firing a rocket to do so they're going to use what we call gravity assist. So that's where you fly a rocket towards a planet and then you use the gravitational tug of that planet to kind of kick you into a different orbit. Like a slingshot. Like a slingshot exactly. What they're planning to do in this case is repeatedly fly past the planet Venus and every time just kick into an orbit that gets slightly closer to the sun but it does mean that you have to fine tune your mission. So much so that for this mission which is going to launch in 2018 they already know that they only have a 20 day launch window. So this is so that the planets are in the correct place for them to get this slingshot. Correct. Exactly. So apart from just getting it into the outer orbit how much will it actually cost me to send my 2.2 kilograms into the sun? So you've got the launch costs and then on top of that you're going to need some expertise to plan out the mission, follow it on its multi-year journey. I suppose if you add in all of that maybe 210 million. Not that cheap. Really is it? Are there any other options? Well, Deedspace one used ion thrusters which I accept sound like something out of Star Wars but they're the same principles of rocket but instead they use charged particles of Zenon. So that Zenon the noble gas not the photocopier. Yeah rocket powered by photocopiers would be extremely inefficient but ion drives are very good but they're very slow. How slow? About 2000 years to get to the sun? Yeah that's not going to work really is it? What about solar sales as an alternative? So these are sales that use the actual pressure from the light of the sun to drive physical sales. Can't say I'm into the window can you? No so that writes so that will actually send you away from the sun. Yes I also see your probably. Sight over side. Yes. Okay so minor technical hiccups aside what would actually happen to your crisp packets and all the rancid milk when it finally reaches the sun? Solar scientists Lucy Green is someone who ought to know. So imagine that you leave the earth and the rubbish is being heated up to maybe a hundred degree Celsius on the sunward facing side not on the side facing the cold darkness of the universe. You get around the orbit of Mercury and you heat up to around 600 degrees Celsius. You keep going, you keep going and just before you reach the surface of the sun you're going to be heated up to temperatures of thousands of degrees Celsius. So you can imagine by this point metals have melted and the particles making up the material are starting to come apart. So as you get close and these temperatures get reached it will just change its stage. There's no oxygen there to set fire to it so it couldn't combust it would just be the molecules coming apart as you heat up the materials. But if we could get through all of those technological hurdles it's actually a pretty smart way of getting rid of rubbish right? I think it is. I like the idea in principle and also I think there's something interesting in well could you send your nuclear rubbish there given that the sun is effectively a nuclear bomb that's just sort of contained in its nuclear processes. Maybe it makes sense to send the material there. Yeah well sending nuclear waste up in a rocket I'd say that was a pretty risky strategy because you know you only need one payload to explode on takeoff and that's basically the end of all times. That's the apocalypse. Best avoided. But when it comes to household rubbish as well as the astronomical cost there's also of course an enormous carbon footprint from actually sending the rockets up into space. So Dr. Fry can we send our garbage into the sun? Theoretically possible yes. Realistically desirable, probably not. What about sending rubbish into the Mariana Trench though? Well that is a whole other program. And unless you want to hear this entire episode again but underwater please send us your everyday science mysteries to curiouscases at BBC.co.uk. And that is it for the first series of the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry. Although we do have another series coming up later in the summer. In the summer. So if you have any curious cases that you would like us to investigate or have been affected by any of the issues raised in this episode or any others in the series then please email us at curiouscases at BBC.co.uk. That's it for this series. Thank you Dr. Fry. Thank you Dr. Rutherford. Thank you Michelle our excellent producer. Yeah. And thank you to our partners BBC Future. And if you go to the BBC Future website you can see some wicked cool stuff. You can indeed like videos and lots of stuff about the series. Yes and send us your issues. No not those issues. Send us your problems. And questions. Every day science mysteries. Okay bye.
