I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. Yes, I do like it and today you're going to like it because Hannah is extraordinary. I'm really excited. I'm really going to. Hannah is really excited because today we're doing some maths. We only get to do maths. Maybe we have other series and this is one which is all about maths. She's been let off the leash today. It's proper. Stats, maths. I honestly, a little face is beaming. So let's have a listen. Hello, this case is one and a million and it was sent into curious cases at BBC.co.uk by Vince Scots from Edinburgh who asks, My boss insists that if you choose the same numbers in the lottery each time, your probability of winning will increase. He says he learned this in a textbook and a lecture at university. Is this true? I get it. It's nothing like getting one over on the boss and nothing like 15 minutes of delicious probability theory. Okay, well, lotteries today may be a load of balls but in the past they involved everything from beans to machines and formed basis of entire societies. In ancient Greece, lotteries were the backbone of society they were used to elect politicians, civil servants and even executioners. This random method of choosing candidates was designed to prevent fraud and corruption. Later in Rome, avid gambler Emperor Nero ran lotteries during his sumptuous feasts, offering lavish prizes from ships to land, although losing was also costly as booby prizes could include a spot of torture. Today, national lotteries are played in more than 80 countries worldwide and in the US alone, lottery sales topped $80.5 billion in 2016. But when it comes to choosing your lottery numbers, the question is, does sticking with the same set every week increase your chances of winning? I consulted someone who knows exactly how likely virtually anything is to happen. Statistician Jen Rogers from the University of Oxford. So is Vince's boss right or wrong? Vince's boss is wrong. Your chances of winning the lottery do not change at all, whether or not you change your numbers every week or whether or not you play the same numbers. Whatever numbers came up last week have no effect whatsoever on what numbers come up this week. It's completely random every single week. So the fact that one came up last week doesn't mean that you're any more or less likely for a one to come up this week. Sometimes it feels like they should. I mean, it feels like if you stick with the number one, eventually it will come up, right? Yes. There are some people who look at the long-term frequencies of numbers that are coming up and try and say, okay, well, this number hasn't come up in a while, so therefore it's due to come up. But it doesn't work like that. Just because it hasn't come up in a while doesn't mean it's more likely to come up. It is counterintuitive. Our psychology is just wired not to think that. And to demonstrate how badly wired your psychology is, that's all. I have a coin for you. How many times do you reckon you have to toss that coin before you get four heads or tails in a row? You can either either head or tails but you want to run a four in a row. How many times do you reckon it will take? 50? 100? A million. It's just laughing at me because I'm rubbish at probability. 50, you reckon. Go and give it a go. Give it a go. What a hear. Yeah. I'm not going to flip the coin 50 times We'll see how many it takes. Go on. Fine. Tails. Tails. I've lost the coin. It's a head. That's heads again. And skip to the end. Three heads. Tails, that's three tails in a row. Oh. Oh, that was tails. It took you nine tosses before you got four tails in a row. That feels very small. It feels very small but actually you only need to toss the coin 11 times before it is as likely as not that a run of four in a row will happen. That's surprising even to my science brain. Is that right? Yeah, it's called the gambler's fallacy. You see people sitting in casinos trying to count up how long it's been since the number 49 came up and said, this is where it's due is its turn. It's nonsense. Same chance every time. In my defense for my own stupidity, I called up David Spiegelhalter who is the professor of public understanding of risk at the University of Cambridge, aka Stats God. If you flip a coin and it comes up heads three times in a row, you sort of think a tail is due. Now of course, if there's anything more likely to come up, it'd be heads because there may be some evidence that it's a bias coin in some sense. So there's no mechanism by which a tail would be more likely to come up after three heads. There are situations, of course, where the odds do change as the game progresses and that's why card counting is illegal in casinos because when you're dealing cards out of a shoe of cards, maybe there's about four or five packs that have been put in there. If you're counting the cards and you realise a lot of aces have gone, that actually means it's less likely there's going to be an ace on the next draw. So in games where there's a fixed set of cards that are not shuffled in between each game, then there is some memory in the system. What's happened before does influence the chance of what's going to happen in the future? Yeah, so for those kind of situations you've got to consider something called the conditional probability, the chance of something happening given that something else has just happened. Right, so things like the lottery or roulette wheels, they don't have a memory, which means that they're purely random. Ah yes, but there is a twist here because while that is true in theory for roulette, not everything is quite as random as it may at first seem. In the 1970s when he was just out of university, mass graduate Doe and Farmer walked into a casino with a secret scheme to beat the house. I remember very well because I was quite nervous. It was in a very flea bit in casino and downtown Las Vegas, was in the middle of the winter. Tegana with his university pals, Doe in Cook's up a plan to predict the outcome of roulette using what they describe as the world's first wearable computer hidden inside his shoe. You would enter clicks with your toes when the roulette ball passed a reference mark on the wheel and you would enter clicks for the rotor as it rotates in the opposite direction. And the computer would plug those numbers into formulas that we derived and made a prediction about which part of the roulette wheel hit thought the ball was most likely to land on. Okay, but hang on, isn't roulette supposed to be just random? Isn't it supposed to be just chance? How can you make that kind of a prediction? Well, yes, roulette is random, but whether or not something's random depends on what you know. According to Newton, if you know the position and velocity of something and you know the forces acting on it, you can then predict its future motion. Is this stuff illegal, technically? I mean, were you worried about getting caught? We were very worried about getting caught though it was not illegal at the time. Now in about 1984, the state of Nevada passed a law against using a computer to predict the outcome of a game. So did it work then, the system? Are you now sitting on a yacht in the Mediterranean, swanning around having made an absolute fortune? No, I do have the yacht in the Mediterranean. Yeah, I'm just back from the sailing trip in Greece, but I made the money for the yacht on the stock market. I would guess we logged in 100 hours of casino play. We beat the house at a 20% rate. You know, we made maybe $5,000, but we had a lot of hardware problems. We never managed to get it really reliable. I have to say we were also chickens. I mean, we were graduate students. We were worried about having our kneecaps broken. We'd heard some scary stories. So was the stock market a bit less risky than in that respect at least? Well, they don't break your knees for a wedding. No, they don't. I've seen the film Wall Street. No, I don't think that film was a documentary. Incidentally, though, Dome is now a professor at Oxford University, where the chances of getting kneecapped aren't even lower. Okay, so hang on, did the shoe computer actually predict what's number the roulette ball would fall into? No, it would split the wheel up into eight sections. And then it would buzz on a particular bit of their foot to indicate one of those octants. And then the team just memorized those numbers that were clustered together and would bet on those. Very clever. But even though they bypassed chance, actually the whole field of probability started by studying games of chance. And the first person to think about this was the Italian mathematician Gerolamo Cardano. Cardano is notorious for lander and gambler in 16th century Italy, who wrote the first sort of book on chance. He's the one who basically worked out that if you throw two dice, there are some combinations which are more likely than others. There's six ways in which you can get a total of seven, but only one way you can get a total of two, which means that it six times more likely, you're going to come up a seven than a two when you throw two dice. You know, you think, well, that's pretty basic stuff. But nobody done it before staggering. And did he then go on to have a very successful gambling career? No, he was in and out of prison. He was completely hopeless. I'm noticing a trend here. We haven't yet found that elusive character who became rich off the back of gambling. No, this may not be a coincidence. No, quite. Now, getting back to our original question about the lottery, we know that each number comes up randomly. So there is no benefit to sticking to the same set. But there are some numbers which might be better to choose than others. A statistician, Jen Rogers explains. So you can't improve your chances of winning, but you can maximize the amount of money that you would get were you to actually win. How did you do that? So the idea is you've got to try and pick the numbers that other people don't pick. So actually the numbers one, two, three, four, five and six are really common. A lot of people choose days. Birthdays people tend to choose. So the numbers one to 31 and the months of the year, they're quite common. Not that long ago, the numbers changed from 49 to 59, meaning that the numbers 50 to 59 are quite new and not very many people have picked them. You know, if you've got the same numbers that you've been playing forever. So you can try and pick the numbers that other people don't pick, meaning that if you do win, you've got a higher chance of keeping that jackpot alter yourself rather than sharing it with lots of people. All right then. So before everyone runs out and spends their entire life savings on buying just loads of lottery tickets, what are the actual chances of winning? It's won in 45 million 57,474. So it is a... I'm so impressed that you know the exact number that. What's that equivalent to? Well, actually, interestingly, if you buy your ticket 24 hours before the draw, you're 100 times more likely to die in those 24 hours than you are to actually win the jackpot. 100 times more likely. It is a tiny, tiny probability. Wow. Goodness. So Dr. Fry, when it comes to how you can win the lottery, can we say case solved? Well, yes, the answer is no. Sticking with the same set of numbers doesn't increase your chances of winning. Because each event is independent and there's no memory in the system. But you could maximize your winnings by choosing the least popular numbers like 32 upwards. However, the odds of winning lottery remain pretty long. If you niped out to buy a lottery ticket today for tomorrow's draw, you are 100 times more likely to die before the draw than to hit the jackpot. A nice cherry note to end on. Right. So a slightly morbid end to that otherwise quite jolly maths escapade. No, you know, actually, though, even despite those being the odds, I do occasionally play the lottery. But only because paying that grid or two quid or whatever it is is sort of, I think, you're buying a dream. But when you go to bed that night, you can have a little dream about all of the things you'd buy and all of the things you'd do with the money. And you're never going to win. But I think you're like paying for that fancy. That makes no sense whatsoever because you're paying for a dream which can never be fulfilled. I do, I think a lot of people do go through this sort of, you know, if I won the money, what would I actually spend it on? What would she spend on? I know the answer to that. Do you? Yeah. What would you buy? Did I live in half? Right. And I'd give a quarter of half of it to my four brothers and sisters. Oh, you know what? Even though this is obviously true and I believe this is the case because you're extremely generous. This is a boring answer. I wanted you to say, I'm going to go on then. I give it to my PhD supervisor. Oh, for God's sake. For God's sake. Can you not just buy a golden-crusted tarantula helmet or something? I've got one already, as you will know, because I'm wearing it. You know, I do with it. What? Spend it all on myself. No, she has out there. You wouldn't. You'd come in with lots of lots of bottles of pop, fizzy pop. You have no idea how much fizzy pop out of drinks. Not true. I have one fizzy pop a day. How long is your day? It seems to be in sort of two hours. I know I've got an addiction. It's bad. It's bad. Anyway, this is not what we're talking about. No, it's not. You know what I do find quite interesting actually. Is this? These papers have only... Well, I was going to say a light understanding. And no understanding at all, maybe it's slightly more accurate. So we found this article in the mirror, which is talking about exactly this question. Which number should you pick for your lottery? Maybe Vince's boss has been reading such high quality journalism as this and basing his suggestions about lottery numbers on it. Let me just read you a couple of lines from this article. It has a section where it recommends particular numbers for you to choose for your own lottery ticket. Reasons to choose top seven lotto numbers. First off, it recommends the number 38 and that's because that's the number of games in a Premier League football season. And it's, I'd say it was idiosyncratic. Choice justification there. I've got the ask of as well, but it also basically says exactly the opposite of what we concluded using the power of maths and statistics and people who know about these sorts of things and rational thoughts. Yeah, and it highlights the top seven numbers that have ever popped up in the 1,758 draws the national lottery at the time of writing, suggesting that these are the ones you should put pick because they always come up. Because they're the luckiest numbers. That's devoid of logic, isn't it? It's devoid of logic is one way of pushing it. But lightly, yeah, it is. You know, one thing I will say for the mirror though, they are excellent at coming up with headlines and the headline for this article is not a lotto luck, not a lotto luck. That's just an excuse for you to do your pretty good Irish accent there. Don't like it's absolutely excellent. You get that a lot actually in these papers. It kind of fundamental misunderstanding of statistics. Anyway, on the subjects of luck, I talk to David Spiegel, the stats god, god of stats, just around good chap. And I ask David if there is such a thing as a run of luck. No, no such thing as a winning streak in games of pure chance because there's no skill involved. And unless you believe that some goddess of fortune that's sitting over you, some external force of luck, then there's no such thing. Of course, actually there are winning strings. You know, because people do tend to win in sequences, you don't win lose win lose, there are nice orderly way. You tend to group together some winnings and you group together losses. And so it appears retrospectively as if you had a run of luck. And of course you did have a run of luck, but it's not like there was some external force doing that for you. It's just the way that chance operates. Chance does not operate in a nice orderly way. Things tend to cluster. Thing is though, you know, even though a lot of the time playing against, you know, the lady luck you end up losing, I myself love a good bit. Though we don't endorse gambling. And most of the gamblers in the, we talked about in the program ended up in jail. Sure, okay, I mean there's obviously a downside to all of this. Farts do love a good flutter, right? As does my husband, who is a sports writer. And one summer we had a discussion about who would make a better gambler, him with all of his sports knowledge. She's doing air quotes listeners. Just say you know, she did air quotes there. Or me with my mathematical prowess. She didn't do air quotes then. No, I did not. So what we did right is we set up at the beginning of summer. We set up two sports betting accounts. We put the same amount of money into it, 30 quid in each. And then we had an entire summer to use any strategy that we liked to try and make as much money we had a deadline, right? And at that deadline we were going to see who ended up ahead. I don't know what happened. We both lost loads of money. You didn't need that neither one. I mean we were up and down. But overall we both ended up down. What did you bet on? Oh, everything. It's just with 30 quid. It's great fun though. Yeah, great fun. But the conclusion is you can't win. Anyway, now it's time for Curie of the Week. Okay, so this is, this is an episode four of series 10. And a couple of shows ago was the episode about how voices change with age. It was particularly fun. Sophie Scott was telling us about how when she was growing up, people would say, Tissue. That's right. No one says Tissue. Tissue anymore. Yeah. And then in the pod chat there were a couple of issues about specific words, such as the way that I pronounce the place where it goes. It's called theatre as I mean, there's actually, but anyway, a few different people wrote in with some amazing pronunciations that they heard. So creepy sheep, in particular, I love this one on Twitter, said, my anatomy and physiology lecturer pronounce cadaver to rhyme with cadaver. So it only takes the moment out of dissecting a dead person when they called cadaver. I know. And amazingly, you've just just referenced the only word I get sniffy about what pronunciation, which is. Did I say it wrong? No, dissect and dissect. I've actually written it down. Oh, did I say it wrong? You said dissect. Everyone says dissect. It's not, it's bisect and dissect. I know, but I've been turned all my life. I've been saying this and people say dissect and I've eventually sort of given up. All right. Yeah. I wrote that down. It's turned as a countdown. Let's break it up. I'm going to go on through the top please, Hannah. Tom Haynes, who's positive lad on Twitter, and he's a big fan of the show and he always tweets us. We like him. We like him. He said, I think this is a sort of non-controversial one actually. So he says, he says, for years, I pronounce skeleton as skeleton. Is that non-controversial? I don't know. They absolutely don't. They absolutely categorically don't. My mom, for reasons that are unclear to anyone in our family, can't say words that begin SHR. So words like shrimp. She just can't, she just goes, but then she gets, and I always take the mechanical for that. That sounds like an actual speech embedded in. It's not sure you're allowed to take the makeup. Sure. It's definitely not. But then she gets her own back on me because you know the fictional character. He's like a vampire with pointy teeth. Bram Stoker wrote about him. Dracula. Dracula. Yeah, but I'm sorry, but this is just no. Anyway, Sarah Cornell. She also wrote into us to tell us that her lecture and her underground, underground biology lectures pronounced Lima to rhyme with Demir. That's ridiculous. I love it so much. Imagine being in that lecture and they put a picture of that particular mammal up on the screen and then said, and the long tailed Lemure. I imagine Attenborough saying, Lemure. I think they do just do what Lemure adds. Lemure. Lemure. Lemure. So good. We always say they, one other thing that we expect about the podcast was how we had got complaints before for saying kilometre. Because who else says kilometre? Obviously it's kilo metre or bruschetta. Bruschetta. Bruschetta. Bruschetta. And we did what any evidence-loving person would do and sought out the evidence. So I don't actually sent an email to the pronunciation unit. The special sort of ninja BBC force. You can send them an email or call them and they will tell you about the origins of basically any word that you want to know. So Adam sent them an email. I did. And this is what they had to say. No, I have to warn you. This is about four pages. You can't read it all. It's not going to read it all. It's literally about 5,000 words. It's so thorough and it's got references and it refers to their pronunciation dictionary which was compiled by the phonetician. Just on the word kilometre. Just on that one word. They do a little introduction which points out the difference between variant summaries and non-standard pronunciations. The examples being mischievous, instead of mischievous or nuclear, instead of new. So you can do either. Well, they're saying that we shouldn't. Broadcasters shouldn't use non-standard pronunciations for those words. We shouldn't say mischievous because that is wrong. All right. In the case of kilometre or kilometre, the short answer is that both pronunciations are attested and possible in British English. Although the pronunciation that we recommend is with the first syllable stress, kilometre. So I'm kind of alright but also wrong. No, it says you're fine. It says you're absolutely fine. And I think we should mix it up and alternate both every single time. And especially when it comes to, I'm not going to say, Bruce, get it. Well, okay, so we also asked them about, um, what's the first word for shetter. And they says that when, uh, when words are pulled over into this language, into our language, they then essentially take on life of their own. So things like pistachio used to be pronounced pistazio. You'd get people presumably in ill cafes asking for some pistazio ice cream. But now it's evolved and it's just pistachio because you don't really like an idiot. So the other one they said was ballet used to be ballet. That's ballet. I'm just going to go and just do some ballet. I think generally just, you know, let everyone say whatever they want to say. A language is there to make yourself understood. And as long as you're communicating yourself clearly, I think that's the only thing that's important. And with that, we bid you, babo, swear at all. Go, if we. A boy, brother. Rather, pudding, frah, corioles, out of ink. This is the BBC. Hello, my name's Jasey Long and I present Shortcuts, which is also made by the BBC and available as a podcast. You strike near somebody who already knows how to access podcasts. You're not going, what's a podcast? Well, it's like a radio show. You carry it around on your iPod. What's an iPod? I don't feel like that's you. We would love it if you gave us a try. Short documentaries for radio on a theme. It's like a longer documentary, but better, more time efficient. If that sounds like something you're interested in, please subscribe to Shortcuts. However, you normally get your podcasts. We promise you, you will not regret the decision. And if you do, we will probably have no way of knowing that. Our guarantee.
