Hello, Curious and welcome back to this week's episode of Curious cases of Brother Finn and Fry. That was a new voice. Have you been practicing a different voice for the programme? And it went to my repertoire to like it. I like it. Here's the show. I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. Three, two, one. Main engine start, zero. And liftoff of the Atlas 5 with curiosity. So you can clue this to the planetary puzzle about life on Mars. Today's case sent into Curious cases at BBC.co.uk takes us out of this world. Yes, our question comes in from Martin in Western Supermayor in the UK. And he asks, what would it take for humans to be able to permanently live on Mars? He goes on to ask, with no atmosphere or magnetosphere, is it really possible to terraform Mars or would any kind of population living there be forced to spend their entire living existence within human-made habitats? Well, that is quite a question, isn't it? What do you think? What to Mars? If I was given the choice. I mean, I'm not good on an economy flight to Dublin, Adam. I think if we were to find a brave, bold human being to represent our planet, I reckon it shouldn't be me. Where'd you go? Have you given the chance? Would you go? Maybe not me. I see, you know what? I don't know why I'm asking you. You've struggled to drive over to my house, which is 20 minutes away. I can't see you. South Circular is very difficult to navigate during the daytime, not apologising for that. Would I go? I think I support this as an idea, because I believe in these grand gestures of humankind, the moon landings, these service inspiration for a whole generation of children and adults, there's a huge economic investment, and there's something remarkable about this. This is what we do. Do you think this is something that's going to happen? I think it'll happen within our lifetime. OK, well, I love your optimism there, Adam, because it's actually quite hard to get things to Mars, you know? Shall I give you a quick rundown of where humanity has gots with Mars' exploration so far? Am I going to enjoy this? Probably not now. The Soviets were the first to build a spacecraft, a temp to fly by of Mars. But on 10 October 1960, the 1M number one failed to orbit. It was soon followed by the 1M number two, which failed to orbit. And the 2M v4 number one, which disintegrated in lower Earth orbit. Then there was Mars' one, communications lost. 2M v3 number one, which never left lower Earth orbit. Then Mariner 3, where the payload failed to set. OK, OK, OK, can I stop you? I think I'm getting the picture. No, no, the next one worked. Mariner 4, that was successful. Quickly followed by Zond 2. Do you guess failed to orbit? No, actually, communications lost. All right, so I'm not going to let you list every single mission to Mars through history. Let's try something else. Here's a different question. How many times have we landed on Mars? Well, see, that's also the wrong question there, hasn't it? Because Bigel 2 landed in 2003, just not in one piece. OK, a different question, easier question. How many times have we entered the Martian atmosphere? Wait, do you mean intentionally or not? How can you unintentionally enter the atmosphere of a planet? Oh, well, there was the Mars climate orbit, aren't we? We thought that we'd sent that one to do a fly past of Mars. It was just going to glance by about 150 kilometres up from the surface. But actually, there was a bit of a mix up between Imperial and metric units. So they gave it the wrong directions. It ended up crashing into the planet. Wait a minute, it was supposed to miss, but it didn't. Yeah. I mean, space is pretty big. That is literally a planet-sized era. OK, I get this, fine. I see the game you're playing here. I think you'd be a little bit obtuse. But here's the question then. Very specifically, how many things that humans have made that were intended to get to or near Mars have successfully got to or near Mars in the way that we intended? 21 times and eight operational. Thank you, out of how many? 58. Right, that isn't great odds. I accept that this is difficult, but it's not impossible, though. Well, it's going to get a lot harder once you put humans into the equation as well. Yes, I do realise that, too, because clever people at NASA and at the European Space Agency, they have been thinking about this for quite a long time. I spoke to Anita Sengupter. She was an engineer on the Curiosity Mission, she's now at University of Southern California. And she is a warehanner that asking humans to even do the journey to Mars, is a touch more challenging than enduring a low-cost flight around Ireland. It's a huge paradigm shift from an engineering perspective to design a spacecraft that can transport people because of the radiation environment and obviously the long transit time, as well as all the technologies that are required to safely land you on the surface, as well as to survive on the surface. Let's do some of the nuts and bolts of that. So how long would the journey take? So if you put yourself on a minimum energy trajectory, anywhere between seven to nine months. Which is quite a long time compared to our space exploration so far. And you mentioned the radiation. What is the danger with the radiation? Where is the radiation coming from? So there's two sources of radiation. There's radiation that comes from our Sun, and there's also radiation that comes from deep space called galactic cosmic rays. So here on Earth, we're protected by Earth's magnetic field, as well as the thick atmosphere that Earth has from both of those sources of radiation. And the transit to Mars, we obviously are going to be on a spaceship, so we're not going to be protected from either of those sources of radiation. And then when we get to Mars, it's slightly lessen because Mars does have an atmosphere, but it's still too high for us to tolerate it as human beings without additional protection. Yes, and I'm going to remember some of my school physics here. The best way to protect against radiation of any sort is to have shielding, and the problem with shielding on a spaceship is that it's heavy, right? Exactly, and then there's different energy contents associated with the radiation. So people have proposed using a water shield, for example, which will help protect you from the solar radiation, but it won't do much to protect you from the galactic cosmic rays. So that will require a different technology which has yet to be developed. Well, I told you it was hard. Hard, but not impossible. And don't forget that we have successfully sent extremely heavy objects, two miles in the past, curiosity, which you need to work on. That is the perfect example. Yes, that's true. Curiosity was one of the greatest space exploration successes of all time. I fully accept that. Yeah, it was still a bit hairy heading for the surface. Let's have a listen to the final moments of the descent. We are decelerating. Wrist mode under our camera moves. All right, it's 1,970. We are 150 meters per second. That's 335 miles an hour. You just as good. Touch out, good for us. We're safe on our way. The thing I really love about that clip is just how professional they manage to be. This is such a great, massive moment and they manage to hold their voice and remain perfectly calm. You can almost hear the moment where his voice breaks and he knows that he's able to celebrate and just breaks away from that professional. It is lovely. It is lovely. It's joyous, isn't it? Because you know that these missions take decades to plan and some of the brightest minds in human kind of devoted their lives to it and it's all down to that one moment. I think we do get a bit complacent about what a great challenge planetary exploration is because we successfully landed six times on the moon and the Apollo missions and you know 135 space shuttle missions. We've seen it done. We think it's easy. But actually it's really not for one thing these spaceships are traveling at thousands of miles per hour and then they have to stop gently. Not like bigger. That is harsh. Not true. That in my opinion is the most complex part of the mission and it's something that I spent many years of my career working on for the Curiosity rover. But the challenge is that you're coming in at incredibly fast speeds, probably 30,000 miles an hour. You have to slow down to basically two miles an hour in a period of only about seven minutes. So you have to dissipate the energy really quickly which means that you experience high deceleration forces and you also experience very high heating rates. And human beings, unlike robots, have a limitation of what they can tolerate even in terms of deceleration rates. Right. And we know that it didn't work out so well for Beagle two a few years ago. But you guys have successfully landed a whole load of rovers on Thomas. So what are the technologies that have successfully got kit from up there to down there? So one of the tried true technologies which would be required for a human mission tomorrow is a heat shield. The difference is that a robotic mission, the largest heat shield diameter that we've ever sent is four and a half meters. So let's say that's 15 feet for a human mission. It's going to have to be a lot wider, which means that it's going to have to probably be an inflatable heat shield. And good news is even those technologies are under development. And then we'll also probably want to have retro rockets, which are much larger than the ones that we've flown so far. And then they would have to be started supersonically as opposed to substantically, which introduces all kinds of interesting aerodynamic instability challenges. Okay. There are two things that I wanted to say about this. First, as someone who has a PhD in the subjects, there are a few sentences that could possibly be constructed that will make me more excited than interesting aerodynamic instability challenges. And I mean that totally. I did know you'd like that. Okay, but second thing, I think it needs to sort of make my point for me here. You know, the journey is a bit tricky, but doable landing on another planet is a bit tricky, but doable in theory. And then when you get there, you've got to think about the conditions when you arrive. Right? Well, I get off the plane to Dublin. Dublin is lovely. It's got fresh air, it's got green rolling hills, it's got good Guinness, and Mars, it's got none of those things. It literally has none of those things. Exactly. Now Bruce Jekowski is a professor at the University of Colorado, and he is in charge of the Mars atmosphere in volatile evolution or maven mission. So he has got a very good idea of what Mars is like on the surface. Mars is half again farther from the sun than the Earth is, so because of the thin atmosphere and the distance from the sun, it's a lot colder. Temperatures average about 50 degrees C below the freezing point of water. So it's not a very nice place to live right now. We don't think that the climate has always been like this, though. We think that early in the history of the planet, it was a much warmer and wetter environment. The reason we think that is we see geological evidence that water float over the surface. We see channels that look like they were carved by runoff of rainfall. We see evidence that there used to be standing lakes in some of the impact craters. Well, this is better news for our Martian mission. Water, of course, crucial for us to survive, but it's also horribly expensive to ship out in space because it's very heavy. But there is plenty of evidence that water is around our Mars just under the surface and completely frozen. So we should pack our ski suits, is what you're saying? Yes, I think we're getting a better idea of this alien utopia you have in mind. It's a Martian winter wonderland. Just wondering what you can't breathe. The Mars atmosphere is very thin today. It's about half a percent as thick as the Earth's atmosphere. It's predominantly carbon dioxide. The CO2 does produce a greenhouse warming on Mars, much as it does on the Earth. But because the atmosphere is so thin and because Mars is farther from the sun, it's a much smaller warming. When we think about the Mars atmosphere, the CO2 is one of the important constituents and there are two others. One is the behavior of dust in the atmosphere. Mars has global dust storms that occur almost every Mars year. These can put enough dust into the atmosphere to completely obscure the surface. The final component of the atmosphere we pay attention to is the water in the atmosphere. Mars is a cold atmosphere so it can't hold much water. The amount of water in the atmosphere is many orders of magnitude less than what's in the Earth's atmosphere. So we pay attention to these three components of the atmosphere, how they vary from year to year. And now with the Maven mission we're paying attention to the role played by loss of water to space as well. You see this is nothing but hellscape. The UC challenges and hellscapes and I see opportunities to instantly suffocate to death while joking on a dust storm and then you freeze. See I'm definitely getting the sense that you are not on board with this mission. You'd be right you'd be right. Where is your sense of adventure though? You know, humankind's reach should exceed its grasp, we should be reaching for the stars at Astroperadua. Okay you know what you're right, I am being unnecessarily cynical. I think let's assume this is possible. Thank you. Now despite the issues around landing and the atmosphere there are bits of Mars that might be more habitable than others. So I asked Anita and Gupta what would be the optimum landing site? I think I'm a second. You had the chance to talk to a real space rocket engineer and you asked her where to park. You're going to get two different answers. One is going to be from the science perspective and the other is going to be from the engineering perspective. I'm the engineer. The engineer obviously wants to select the location which is going to have the highest probability of success. So you probably want to have a smooth surface. You would want to be located below Mars sea levels. You've got more altitude margin. But from the science perspective you want to go to the most interesting location. And that would be for the potential to find evidence of either past or current microbial life. So probably we'll do something in between. But ultimately the goal will be to do a surface science mission. So you'd want to land in a place which has evidence of perhaps prior water flows and then maybe even subsurface aquifers. And this is why Curiosity landed in the Gale crater because it's thought to be one of the places with a good chance of having water. And that means the possibility of the conditions for microbial life. And no parking fines. Okay so in answer to today's question from Martin what would it take for humans to be able to permanently live on Mars. So far we've only got a few minor issues. We need to survive the eight month long journey to get there. And we need a currently uninvented form of launchable lightweight durable in space radiation shield. Yeah and a landing mechanism to allow humans to decelerate from 30,000 miles an hour to land safely on the Martian surface without turning to mush at any point during the descent or on hitting the surface. What's the status on that technology Adam? Is it currently uninvented? Yes it is. We also need some kind of habitat because of course Mars is a largely freezing desert with only carbon dioxide available to breathe outdoors. Now that is one on which we have made some progress. Mars was founded was the first simulation of round trip to Mars. It was run at the Institute of Biomedical Problems by the Russian Space Agency, the European Space Agency and the Chinese Space Agency. And it basically addressed the question of can humans survive the isolation and confinement of a trip to Mars. Now this is Diego Urbina who was one of the six crew members chosen to live in an interplanetary spacecraft mock-up from June 2010 to November 2011. We were in there for a total of 120 days which is more or less the duration of our on-crypt to Mars which is about eight months to go, one month on the surface and eight months to come back. That's basically the shortest that a trip to Mars could take. We were six people, three Russians, one French and one Chinese and myself. And we lived in, it's the size of two wagons of the metro. The size of a house basically but it was shaped like a spacecraft. It was two-bular models in which we lived. When we arrived to Mars we could go into a small module, three of us. And we simulated a landing on Mars in which we did the spacewalks on also a simulated Martian surface, always keeping the isolation from the rest of civilization. We didn't see anybody during one year and a half besides the six of us. We couldn't call our families, we didn't have internet, we didn't have phones. And we couldn't see sunlight during one year and a half. So we were in full isolation. Is that 18 months of no contact whatsoever? No contact with the outside world. Total isolation. Can you imagine if they did another one of these and they started sitting in December 2019? Or a way 18 months? Then come out real quick. Okay, lots to catch up on. I bet you'll list. We've got some good news and some bad news. There isn't much good news to be honest. There's a bit. There's a bit. This is not my invention of it. There's a long-standing idea that when astronauts have been up in space, but when they come back, they come through the atmosphere and you lose contacts with Earth due to the trajectory and trigonometry and stuff. And then when they open the capsule, we're all dressed in monkey suits and on horses. And the astronauts are like, what the hell happened? What did I miss? I mean, that's definitely going to mess with your mind. Right, back in the real world. The real stuff that actually messes with their minds are things like complete absence of sunlight for that entire period. So the scientists who are studying these astronauts, what these astronauts based on Earth, they do things like they draw bloods to check for stress hormone levels and their immune responses. And there are cameras everywhere so they can observe them and monitor them, except in the bathrooms. Because that would be an invasion of privacy, even on Mars. I mean, there's quite a lot of a number of different invasions going on here. I'm getting the sense of you. All the levels of literacy. You don't want to volunteer for one of these issues. I do. I kind of mindset it wants you to do. I don't know. I'm okay with that. Thank you. They have regular psychological tests. And one of the things that the crew reported was that they had trouble sleeping. Yeah, I'd have trouble sleeping too if I was stuck in a bogus waiting months. Does it actually resemble the real thing? Well, here's what Diego Abinus said about that. Yes, for the Moss part, if we go to Mars within the next 20 years or so, that's how we're going to live in an enclosed space, in our reduced volume, with a limited number of people, where yes, you will be exposed to maybe unpleasant, to call it sensory conditions, because you know, you're close to somebody that is sweating or something. So you have to cope with that. There's the issue of communications. You cannot communicate easily with the rest of civilization. The things that could not be simulated were the radiation. There's going to be radiation exposure for the humans, unless there's some proper shielding and the danger. So it's really dangerous to be pressurized environment, because you could have sudden depresurizations that could kill you or fire that really could also kill you. So that's the thing that we could not simulate, but the power of isolation and confinement that was pretty realistic. That's how we think humans would live in Mars in the near term, at least. It's going to be a relatively small environment with few people. Okay, so if we're going to Mars, we'll have to live in an enclosed space with a limited number of people for a prolonged period of time. I mean, we've been doing that all year with lockdown. And did you survive? Just. But okay, all right, maybe this is something that's possible after all. But you know, Adam, I think if we're going to do this, I want Mars to be better. I want Mars to be more habitable. It was in the past. It can be again. It's time to talk about terraforming. Let's talk first about what terraforming means and what we would want to accomplish if we did it. We would want to raise the temperature enough to allow liquid water to flow over the surface. That means raising the average temperature by maybe 50 degrees C. We would also want to raise the atmospheric pressure. Right now, if we were on the surface, we would need to wear spacesuits in order to survive. If we could get the pressure up higher, we wouldn't need spacesuits. What's a way that we can increase both the pressure and the temperature? The most effective way would be to put CO2 back into the atmosphere if we could find enough. If we wanted to raise the temperature to allow liquid water, we would need to put what's called a bar of CO2 into the atmosphere. One bar is a measure of the atmospheric pressure and it's about the same pressure as is on the earth. So you'd have to make the Martian atmosphere as thick as the Earth's atmosphere. That's a lot of CO2. If we could do that though, that would raise the temperature and it would raise the pressure and we would have succeeded in terraforming Mars. I think I might be on board now. I think if we can get over the issues of actually getting to Mars, we should just transform it and make it our own. Calm down, Galactus. I was more thinking from a scientific point of view, you know, get to Mars, have a little bit of a look on Mars, maybe have a spot of lunch and leave like we did with the moon. Who's lacking ambition now? We have actually covered terraforming on this programme before. If my mind serves me correctly, all we need to do to change the atmosphere to make it more habitable is just find enough carbon dioxide to bring up the temperature and pressure. Then you can plant loads of plants that can make oxygen. I mean, there's got to be enough CO2 somewhere, surely. We've done a careful analysis of how much CO2 there could be left on Mars. And there's enough CO2 that if we could mobilise it, it would raise the pressure and the temperature. However, the bulk of that CO2 is buried deeply beneath the surface and can't be mobilised. We would have to warm up the planet for 100,000 years in order to drive it out. In addition, we'd have to warm it up to really high temperatures. So it's not possible. The CO2 that's locked in the polar caps, we could put back into the atmosphere by heating up the polar caps, whether you do it with giant mirrors or nuclear weapons. But that would only double the atmospheric pressure, not enough to warm the planet significantly. There just isn't enough CO2 to put back into the atmosphere to warm the planet enough to terraform it. Yeah, okay, maybe that won't work. Okay, well, there is one planet that's got loads of CO2 too much, in fact, so much so that we're actually trying to get rid of it. Unfortunately, nowhere near enough still. Now, we're going to need to take our CO2 from somewhere else. The ideal situation would be if we could take all the CO2 that's on Venus and move it to Mars, then we would reduce the greenhouse warming on Venus, raise it on Mars, and we would effectively terraform two planets. However, that's a lot of CO2 to move. The amount of CO2 that we would need to put on Mars would be the equivalent of about a million ice balls a kilometer across. That's just too much to do. Now, there is a possible out, and that is we've been talking about CO2 as a greenhouse gas, because it's available. It's there. There's another approach that we could take, and that would be to manufacture specially designed high-efficiency gases that would be very effective at producing greenhouse warming. Chlorifloric carbons, molecules that contain chlorine and fluorine. We stopped making them on Earth because, in part, they're very effective greenhouse gases, and we don't want to do that. But if we could manufacture them on Mars, we could get enough greenhouse warming. The good news is that the elements you need to make it are present on Mars. The bad news is that's a lot of gas you'd have to manufacture. You would need to manufacture it at a rate greater than the entire global production of frion at its peak. Well, if my best option is an atmosphere full of CFCs, then I think I'm out. I don't want to go anywhere. I'm not sure you were ever fully in to be perfectly honest. No, okay. All right. He's what I really think, though. I would really love to see someone land on Mars in our lifetimes, and I think it is a possibility. And it's a grand challenge, and I think I really support that idea. I do think these big grand gestures are important for humankind. I inspire generations of scientists. And then there's this more mundane but no less important economic benefits, because we know from Apollo that for every dollar invested, they were getting something like seven to ten dollars back. Hundreds of thousands of people were employed for a decade. Basically, that was a ten-year period which invented the future for so many countries that were involved. It did. It's true. You took a war like effort to get that, though. And I think that the Apollo missions happened at a very particular moment in time. And I think that right now we're in a different moment in time, which is that the biggest challenge faced by humanity is climate change. And actually, I think trying to get someone on Mars doesn't serve that ultimate mission. And actually, it can detract from it, because if we focus too much on terrifying Mars, it might lead us to not take that much care of our existing planet. I absolutely agree with you, D.D. And this is what Bruce Jikoski said on the subject. I think it's really dangerous to talk about having Mars as a backup planet. No matter what we do to the Earth's environment, it's always going to be closer to an ideal environment than the Mars environment. It's always going to be easier to terraform Earth back to what we want than to change Mars to what we would prefer. So getting to Mars, that, I think, is a worthy scientific cause, but terraforming it, that's a completely different issue. And to be honest, it sounds like a pretty rough place to spend any considerable amount of time in. For sure, the more you spend time looking at other planets, the more you realize how perfect and beautiful an idealic Earth is. So Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to life on Mars, can we say it's a god-awful, small affair? No, it would be an absolute technological and psychological nightmare. Getting there is currently impossible for humans. A successful landing would be a stupendously difficult thing to do. Living there would be hard, and probably quite boring. But one day, we will fix these issues, and we're going to go anyway. Because that is what humans do. I love that sentiment. I think that is correct. Yes, I think most things you say are correct. Apart from when I was a bit harsh on Beagle. Well, yes, I feel like when we finally get to do social events in the future, we'll probably be at some event, and someone will come up just and go, I worked on Beagle too. It took me 15 years. And then it all comes down to a punchline of a stupid joke on Curious Cases. You know what, to be fair, they were underfunded. It's not really their fault. No, I think that's right. You remember also at the time that the band Blur, because I sound like such a dad when I said that, the popular beat combo, Blur, the Blur. Part of the sort of PR effort was that they wrote a song, and it was going to be the first song broadcast on Mars, because it would land, and Blur would be playing on Mars. But instead, as it turned out, it was the first song to not be played on Mars. That's lovely. That's really lovely. There is a song that has been played on Mars, though, you know about this. It's actually really nice. So, okay, Curious T, one of the greatest space explorations successes ever, when Curious T goes and takes soil samples, the machine has to vibrate at certain frequencies, just to make sure that the soil goes into the tubes, the little experimental tubes. So, this is the sound that it plays when it picks up a soil sample. And so, because Curious T can make noises, they deliberately programmed it to sing Happy Birthday. That is lovely. I really like it. I think it depends on the way that you look at this, though, because there was a thing a few years ago on Reddit where people were saying, this is actually a very sad story. This lonely robot singing itself Happy Birthday in the middle of a frozen desert, thousands, thousands, thousands of miles away from anything else at all. And there was one comment in response to this idea that it was a sad story on Reddit that I just remembered from years ago. I want to read it to you now, Curious T. I'm going to read it now. I'm going to read it now. I'm going to read it now. I'm going to read it now. I'm going to read it now. I'm going to read it now. I'm going to read it now. I want to read it now because I think it really sums up how me and Adam feel about these kind of things. It said, okay, so some of the finest minds currently alive decided to take incredibly important scientific equipment and mess with this until they worked out how to move it in just the right way to sing Happy Birthday. And then someone made a cake on Curious T's birthday and took it into mission control so that a room full of brilliant scientists and engineers could throw a birthday party for a non-autonomous robot, 225 million kilometers away, and listen to it sing the first ever song sung on Mars, which was Happy Birthday. This isn't a sad story. This is a happy story about the ridiculousness of humans and the way that we love things. We built a little robot and called it Curious T and flung it into the start to go and explore places we couldn't get to because its name is in our nature and then just because we could, we taught it how to sing. That is exactly it, that nailed it. Excuse me, should tell you the name of the person who wrote that, it's song called The Bacon Sandwich of Regret. They were on the up and then slightly lots of tiny bit of respect for them. As a wavering vegetarian, I've experienced the bacon sandwich of Regret quite recently. I think you saw me have it this morning. I did, I did indeed. You know I have actually been to JPL, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. I'm so jealous of you for that because I never have and that's a big bucket this thing for me. That's where they make the Rovers, the Curious T-Rover and more recently the Perseverance. Now the thing is, is that I know I've spoken about this on this podcast before, but we're in what? It's Series 17 now. Lost cows? I don't remember. I can't remember what I've told you. I can't remember what we did last week. I can't remember when I told you. I think as a man I am both sending into that boring uncle. You just don't have the same stories over and over again. No limited number of anecdotes. And you just have to endure. Oh yeah, God, he's going to tell the one about the JPL. Tell us. I want to hear it again. I've got nothing to add though. You can listen back to his Series where I'm finding if you want to. You know, just to demonstrate how much Adam and I can't remember what's been going on. We were halfway through recording this script today. This is true. And a bit embarrassing. I kind of popped up and just went, I, if we, I, was there something about terraforming Mars that we've done before? And Jen, I'll produce a chiptim with, I don't remember. I don't remember. We had to Google it. And it turns out the Series 3. Yes. We did terraforming on Mars. We did terraforming on Mars. It was only a 12 minute program. There's much more in this one. And completely different. And there is a rule in broadcasting that if you do the same thing more than three years apart, then it's not the same thing. And it's definitely fine. We just know unfortunately that the QA is listened to our back catalog repeatedly and say you'll know how often. And then we repeat ourselves and how much like boring uncles we really are. But speaking, of course, of things that we repeat often. Adam. Where are you going with this? I mean, you sigh, if I think. But you know what? I'm from Galaticus. Galaticus. Where's he? Galactus. Galactus. Who's Galactus? Galactus. From the Fantastic Four. He's an eternal being from the pre-big bang universe who consumes planets. Let's see if you can imagine Hannah's face right now. You know, the Silver Surfer, Norton Rad, who is it? Should I stop talking now? Okay. You know what though? I am pleased that we managed to get through an entire episode of Mars without you apart from Galactus. Are you mentioning science fiction films at all really? Yes. Well, that is more a facet of having a decent editor rather than my own constraints or ability to edit, subfed it myself because guess what? What? Listen. Now regular listeners and indeed Hannah will be amazed that I've got this far in the conversation without mentioning science fiction films. There are many that deal with living on Mars or exploring Mars. Which ones do it well? I'm a huge science fiction fan, so I'll start off by saying that. This is the area that I love to tap into. Good. And I'm a Trekkie. I am not a Star Wars person. I'm definitely a Trekkie. I love to have on Star Wars people just kidding. Okay, you just lost half the audience there. I know. Bring it back. I still like Star Wars, but I consider Star Wars to be sci-fan. To see where I consider Star Trek to be sci-fi. I agree. So that's the distinction I make. I agree. Hannah has lost the will to live. But keep going. Sorry about that. I shouldn't say it. Those are fighting words. Well, so I think the book and the movie, The Martian, did a really good job in terms of accuracy, in terms of representing the challenges that you would face, and also potentially some of the solutions of living off the land. They had a few of the things wrong in terms of the premise of the movie that not being able to communicate that probably would not happen. And you'd be able to see from orbit that he was perfectly fine, setting those few knits aside. That was probably the most accurate. Whereas I think it was, was it mission to Mars? I forget which one it was with Jerry O'Connell, and that was terrible. So we needed to big science-ficking fan too, huh? Oh, yes. Yeah. Massive. And she made that distinction between Star Wars and Star Trek, which I think is right to love Star Wars, but it's not really science fiction. It's just big space opera. You're going to get letters. Not from you, though. Okay, let me ask you about Life on Mars, though. What's your current thinking? I know why you're asking me this, because I do know a little bit about Life on Mars. But for slightly obscure and science fiction related reasons, which is that I was, I was a script consultant. I was a scientific consultant on the film called Life, which is a science fiction film from a couple of years ago. And the plot was the recovery of a sample from Mars to the International Space Station. And when they get it to the International Space Station, they open it up, and it turns out there's a single cell thing, organism in there, and they've discovered for the first time, life in the rest of the universe. And that's super cool. Except, of course, it's a horror film based on the International Space Station, so it immediately goes and eats everyone. And this was a super fun project to be involved with. So the two lead actors were Jake Gyllenhaugh and Ryan Reynolds. And I, part of my... What's Ryan Reynolds' like in real life? Ryan Reynolds is so handsome and charming that he really challenged me. And I think it's a very interesting film and charming that he really challenges one's status as a heterosexual man. Did you struggle to speak to him because he was so beautiful? Yeah, pretty much. I went into his, sort of, little tent area on set and just went, hey. I noticed you're not saying the same things about Jake Gyllenhaugh. Strangely. He was less friendly, but I spent some time with Ryan Reynolds. About ten minutes, most of which I spent drooling. He was very funny on set as well, because everyone had earphones on. You can hear all the directions, because it's a big set. They built a mock-up, actually a 120% scale of the International Space Station. And it was an incredible set. And they were all unwise the whole time, because everything was set in microgravity. Wow. Rebecca Ferguson, I remember watching her being smashed against a wall. 27 times in a row, which looked quite painful. Anyway, every time the director said, I think the actors would be ready to do this really hard scene. Just as it could go quiet, we've all got earphones on, so we can hear everything that's happening on set. Ryan Reynolds would start singing deliberately. Deliverally doing the way everyone. Just to be afraid in the ass. And he did it every single time. And it was a different song every time. So we'd go, okay. And quiet everyone. And why do birds suddenly appear? And you can hear the rest of the act. Just go, oh God, sacred Reynolds. I don't know what I'm telling you this. I'm enjoying it. It's a good story. I'm enjoying it. The part of it was I had to write a backstory for this alien. His name was Calvin. And it did involve doing a two billion year backstory for this alien and how it got to Mars. I mean, that's a lot of paper. My lot of it was in my head. And none of it made it into the film whatsoever. But it is in there in the DNA of that movie. Okay. That's good. Is this a strange, because I haven't really heard of this movie. Is this the one that your contractually applied? It's not the same thing bad about. It's an excellent horror movie on the International Space Station. Shoot movie by. I absolutely stand by it. And we're back to Will it snow? Oh, what? Why do you hurt me? Shoot, you think you have the wing. I think we better. I'm the prime curator of the week. Okay, so Curia the Week this week. William Britain from Cardiff University, Centres. An astonishingly good email. I love this so much. All right. Okay. Here is William's letter. Dear doctors of other Finn and Fry. I am currently an engineering PhD student in the field of tri-biology. Oh, tri-biology. Oh, tri-biology. Oh, tri-biology. Oh, okay. Researching the fatigue failure of heavy loaded gear surfaces. Any idea? No, no, but this sounds like the type of, you know, you said in the program how excited you get when you hear whatever that phrase was about fluid dynamics. Yeah. What of it? Well, that, I don't know. That's the same fatigue failure of heavy loaded gear surfaces. I mean, fatigue failure is getting me going. I'm not going to lie to you. So I just don't know what heavily loaded gear surfaces. Keep going. Okay. Since first discovering curious cases, I have become an avicurio and as a tribute to curious cases, I have snuck an interabang into my thesis and have agreed with two of my fellow tribiologists. Tribologists. They will do the same on punishment of buying a round of beers should they fail. That is awesome. So just in background here, so our curious will remember that interabang became a thing once we've got a whole album. It was a Danish rock band at one point. I know it was at the name of our band, wasn't it? We were in terabang. Our song was called Earthquake in my soul. We've got our mark work. We've got everything, right? Of course, the interabang itself is a question mark and an explanation mark fused together. Yes. And so William goes on to say, I'd like to propose that we make this the secret sign for all curious who we can identify a fellow curious from our published work. A great idea. Don't you think? Interabang. It is a great idea. And this is an absolute shoe in for Curie over the week. However, I think William and your two unnamed fellow tribiologists that we need documentary evidence to make this. I need to see a photograph of this. In fact, actually, let me see. So we don't need to do a thesis yet. Right. So this is correct. I need this to be post-viber. I need photographic evidence of this post-viber. Because otherwise, it's not as, you know, you could just change it, William. You could be tricking us. William Brisson from Cardiff University, you are Curie over the week, pending corrections. Harsh. I want, you know, what they also, I want to know if you're an examiner's spotted. If they spot it and mention it, can you tell us that would make me very happy. Yeah. And we'll raise the stakes as well. If you and your two unnamed tribiologists managed to successfully do this, in published work, then will buy you beers. Well, thank you very much for that. I really enjoyed this. If you are standing for a PhD or even a master's, in fact, or even an undergraduate dissertation and you want to put a little cheeky and jerry rang in your work and send us a photo of it, other batches are available. Yes. But we need documentary. We do need documentary evidence. We do need documentary evidence. All right. That is the end of this episode. Don't forget to send us in your questions or entries for Curie over the week to Curie's cases at BBC.co.uk. And we'll see you next week.
