I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. Hello, Curios. We're back. We are back. Series 18. It's been a very uneventful year. Well, I don't know if I'd quite go that far. But we're going to tell you a bit later on about where we've been and what we've been up to. And why we've been away for so long. Indeed. Indeed. I've had lots of messages from people saying they missed us. That made me feel really good. That's weird. I haven't had any. Hmm. Okay. Should we go on with the show? I think we should. Ffff. MUSIC We've got two excellent dogs. I was struggling to decide which one I like more. And they were a little paddling ball. Lots of treats inside. And they're just having the best possible day. And so am I, frankly. Today's episode is all about dogs. But not just any dogs, guide dogs. The crem-del-a-creme of the K9 world. Yes, because our question sent into Curious cases at BBC.co.uk from listener Christina is how do guide dogs know where they're going? It's not like they're handler whispers in their ear and ask to go to the pharmacy maybe to buy some toothpaste. So how does it work? Well, before we get to that, let's start at the very beginning. Because K9 helpers have had a very long relationship with humans. Well, yes, we have. Dogs have been with us for at least 10,000 years. Maybe 50,000 years depending on who you believe. We know that long ago the ancestors of all dogs were wolves, maybe a species of wolf that no longer exists. And we know that we've been using dogs to help us with hunting for at least 10,000 years. What we don't really know is how that transition happened. What transition from wolves to dogs? Yeah, exactly. Wasn't it just that one day, I mean, I might be oversimplifying here, but wasn't it just that one day there was like a particularly nice wolf who was a bit less bighted than the other wolves? And then that nice wolf had nice baby wolves. I mean, yes, you have just basically described evolution there. A little bit, a little bit simplistic. Your whole understanding of dog evolution seems to be based on one nice wolf. Okay, one thing I do think is interesting about this, though, because I think people imagine that humans stayed exactly as we are, and that wolves evolved into dogs around us and sort of by us. But actually, that's not quite true, is it? We sort of evolved simultaneously. Yeah, we call it co-evolution, because basically we domesticated each other. So whatever that dog ancestor was, we then spent time hanging around with it, and it changed our behaviour, because it meant that we could hunt different things, which means that we change our diet. And so we co-evolved dogs and humans have been living together and changing each other for tens of thousands of years. How does that start, though? Because I understand once you're at the stage where you can take a dog wolf out hunting, that's pretty useful. But at the very beginning, what are humans getting out of this? Well, we don't really know the answer to that, but one answer might be protection, so if you've got your friendly single, then what did you call it, the nice wolf? The nice dog wolf. The nice dog wolf that is not so bitey. So maybe nice non-bitey dog wolf is hanging around, which means that other more bitey wolves leave us alone. And they get bones and scraps in return. They get bones and scraps left over from the hunt as a source of food, a secure source of food. Maybe it's campfires, maybe it's, you know, petting. Animals like to be stroked, so you create a very familiar bond with another creature. So when did this happen, then? Was there actually one nice wolf? No, there wasn't one nice. You have to let the one nice wolf theory go, but we don't really know the answer in all truth. It is beginning to look like, based on some genetic evidence, as well as mixing up with bones, that's domestication of dogs happened, multiple locations, multiple times, all over the world. Over the course of several thousand years. And then fast forward a bit in time, and you get to the stage where you can start selectively breeding these nice, now dogs, to make them into the best sniffers, the best retrievers, the best scritchers, the best snugglers. Yes, you can. I mean, you really have skipped over several thousand years worth of dog evolution, but that is the basics of doggy genetics 101, which is exactly how we bred in characteristics like loyalty and obedience, and the things that make for a good guide dog. Quite, and in this episode, I got to go and meet some good guide dogs, because I visited guide dogs training school in Lemington Spa, where I met Graham Kenzett, head of Canaan assisted surfaces for the Midlands region, and trainer Jenna Curtis, who brought along one of her current trainees. So this is Wilmot, he is a golden retriever across German Shepherd, and he is approximately seven to eight weeks into his early training phase. So Wilmot is possibly the shinier dog I've ever seen. He's a jet black, but just a little hint of the German Shepherd poking out behind his ears. It's just a little tough to tan behind him. He's a very, very beautiful creature. But what's unusual, though, is I was sort of expecting a golden retriever, Graham? Yeah, and you know, a lot of people think that we are just using golden retrievers or Labidors, and in fact, when you look at the ratios of the dogs that we're breeding, it's around about 45% golden retriever across Labidors, and around about 45% Labidors. Then there's a 10% which sort of make up the extras. That could be a German Shepherd or some of the German Shepherd crosses like we have here with Wilmot. Right, Wilmot sounds very nice, but you do know that Jesse is the shinier dog you've ever seen, right? What your whip is? Yes, he is. He's not. No, he is, though. I mean, he's not. But also, would he make a good guide dog? Um, definitely not. I mean, he's got two speeds, which are about 30 miles an hour and a sleep on the sofa. So not, you know, not really a very useful guide at all. Unless you wanted a guide to where he left his latest chewed out rabbit ear, true story. Yeah, that's true stories. But some breeze are better suited to this job than others, and part of that comes down to the dog's particular characteristics, like their sense of smell. Their sense of smell is probably about a million times greater than that of human beings. So of course, it's a huge temptation for them when they are out and about. Part of their training would be to discourage them from sniffing. But of course, we do that by encouraging them to remain focused on the handler and rewarding them appropriately, using the positive reinforcement, whether that be toys or whether that be food. But you know, what's really important is that the dog still need to have that foraging experience, that opportunity to sniff. So of course, when they're not working, we give them those opportunities. Let me make sure I understand what you're saying here then. Is it that dogs whose noses are really, really developed, like bloodhounds, for example, wouldn't make good guide dogs because they just want to have their noses to the floor the whole time? I think what was really important is we look at the characteristics of the dog and we look at the behaviors of the dog and we try to match those accordingly if it's going to be the working dog. Is there also something about intelligence here? Our sun breeze just not quite smart enough to make it. Love of all the same. I think it's about shaping the individuals. Now, not all of us would be brain surgeons. What's important is that we look at like those key characteristics and match accordingly. You're being very polite, but all I'm hearing is no choirs. Also, they've got tiny, tiny legs, so not built for it. Right. So brains and sense of smell and legs are not the only ingredients that need to be thought about when trying to find the perfect guide dog. In a seeing dog, of course, sight is important to you. We expect the dogs to have perfect dog vision. Okay, now that is slightly different to human vision because the eye is made up of rods and cones and the cones are responsible for colour and the rods are responsible for movement and you'll find that dogs have a lot more rods than they do cones. So generally speaking, dogs we consider would see more in black and white than in colour, but you know one of the interesting facts is that dogs can now watch television. So with the introduction of 4K and the greater acuity that we have with television, you will see that your dogs will react to other dogs when they're on television. Whereas just 10 years ago, that would not have been the case. I love this so much. Whereas now, stick on waffle the wonder dog and they're all over it. Absolutely and in fact, my dog that I have at home enjoys Wimbledon when the ball goes to the back of the court, she'll go to the back of the television. Okay, so I had no idea that dogs didn't watch TV until the mid-2000s. What did they think we were doing before? No, I just... Saring a weird box in the middle of the room, which would be pretty strange. Actually, Graham's dog, called Pepper, very sweet dog, didn't make the cut to be a guide dog because she barked too much. And was too obsessed with tennis on the television as well. But I think that's the point. Even when you've got a perfect puppy, the way that you raise a guide dog is absolutely critical to their success. Right, so you want a bit of nurture with your nature. Precisely. The first eight weeks are what you would class as a critical period. And that's where fears and phobias can very easily be established. So if we're looking at the first eight weeks for adults, we want those to be really, really positive experiences. But we also want to maximize the stimuli for adults. That would be different sounds, different objects, different people. And just generally bringing those experiences together to be really, really positive. The more experiences you can cram in the better, you get more psychologically balanced dogs if they're exposed to positive situations and get a lot of stuff to play with. Yeah, and they start them really early with this. When they're really tiny, little baby, baby puppies, they hang things over their nest to encourage them to look up a bit like you would with a mobile toy over a baby's cot. But here it serves a really important purpose because the dogs need to get used to looking up as much as possible to help their future owners with things like putting out the laundry. And the training gets much more intense that older they get. So Jenna Curtis told me, one of the very first things they do once they're old enough to start training in earnest is an obstacle course. What we're doing with the obstacle course is really needing to simulate the external environment. So as we can see, Jenna, she's working her dog through, working with Wilmert's through. The key point here is that Wilmert is given clearance for the handler. And that would have to be height clearance and also width clearance, a little bit like us when we drive a vehicle. So Wilmert is looking at the gap and assessing whether there's enough room for the handler to walk through it? Correct, yes. And providing the gap is wide enough then Wilmert will continue on that straight line of travel. If the gap is not wide enough, then Wilmert will need to stop and either pause and go around the obstacle or just pause and alert the handler that the handler is not able to progress. Now the key to this kind of training is something that we've heard mentioned already. As I'm, can you remember what Graham said about how they get dogs to learn to do what they do? Was it positive reinforcement? Yes, it was. He's a good boy here. Have a treat. I won't. Oh, you are a good boy. Thankfully, they for Wilmert, other methods of positive reinforcement are available. Where Wilmert has done great work going through the obstacle course generally is now rewarding Wilmert with a playtime. Ah! Yes. So is it different for different dogs then? Some dogs most best fast food, some dogs love it and sweet food. Oh, absolutely. You know, you will have different dogs some that will be more motivated by food, particularly some of those Labrador's. And Jim Chessid, they very much like a sort of chase response. Okay, so Wilmert sounds like a bit of a superstar. Honestly, he's the very best good boy. I think I realised when I was there that guide dogs are sort of the canine equivalent of astronauts. They've got to be the very best there is. They've got to be super bright, super loyal, hardworking and just totally, totally unflapable. Do you mean like me? No. No, no, I really don't mean like you know. Yeah, okay, fine. But what happens if they are a bit like me and a bit less like Buzz Aldrin? Okay, well there are options. So they can become a pet or a companion or even a buddy dog. I have them Harley in training. He's a golden retriever. And I've had him straight from his puppy walkers. So he actually really struggles to step out ahead because all he wants to do is to walk next to you and look at you and be loved by you and look lovingly back at you and carry a toy. So I'm rather than push that and maybe affect his well there. We've got OK. We have a buddy dog system where we need the dogs to walk beautifully on loose leads where we need them to want to be with you and actually that's his purpose in life. What does the buddy role in tail? So buddy dogs go to children that are blind or partially sighted. He just gives them the responsibility and experience of having the dog around. They're not guide dogs, they're just companions. Right, so far we've got a good idea of how to build a guide dog. Next step one, start with a wolf. Co-evolve with it at least until it stops trying to rip your throat off for every opportunity. An essential first step, I'd wager. Breed it for several thousand generations. Keep going until it has all the characteristics of a very good boy or a very good girl. I feel like you've glossed over some of the boring bits. And then you just train it to guide. Easy. Simple. Right. But the question was how do guide dogs lead their owners to get right to the toothpaste style? Well, actually I got to try something like this experience of being guided while I was in Limington. We went out onto the street with the help of another excellent canine trainee, a beautiful German Shepherd called Wendy. And I got hold her harness for a walk. So up ahead we're going to come to a crossing. Now there's nothing to tell you when coming up to it. If you can't see apart from tactile paving on the pavement, so the minute you filled the tactile, it was which had a little obstacle. You bumped, yeah. Askew to stand, okay? I had to stand. Okay. Alright. So we keep on going. Okay, you can feel it stand. Lovely. Step up to her head and show this so she knows that you're going to change direction. Turn your body to the left. Good girl, to wait. And I'll just ask her find the box. Find the box? Oh, I didn't know. How extraordinary. And they take you directly to the box to press the button to cross the road. To put it in the road because they've done a really great thing to be positively reinforced. And then what that does is it brings you to the box on the right because underneath there's a cone. And if you can't see the green man and if there's no auditory signal, the cone spins when it's time to cross. So then you know it's safe to go. Okay. I'll get that. I'll get that. I'll get that. I'll get that. It's good girl. Hold on a sec. Wendy sounds amazing and that was very impressive. But wait, there's a spinning cone underneath the button box on Pelican crossings. Yeah. When did that happen? I've checked every single one that I've been passed ever since. They're just underneath right at the back. It's like the still black cone that spins when it's time to cross the road. Never noticed them before. You didn't know that. No, not before Wendy took me to it. No. Right, but Wendy, Wendy's the dog. She doesn't show it to you, right? She walks straight and then stops at the obstacles and feels the tactile curb underneath her. You're in charge. Yeah, yeah. She's not like pointing with a ball like where the cone is. So you have to know the route then. I'm doing the directions, yeah, exactly. And that means that people who are blind or partially sighted don't automatically qualify for a guide dog because you also have to know where you're going and you have to have good mobility. What we're looking for is people have a level of orientation and mobility already because you can't expect a dog to learn routes alongside the person learning them. Some people prefer the long cane. You can put a long cane in a cupboard. You know, a long cane. A long cane doesn't get distracted by pigeon or another dog. Can't tickle a long cane though, can you? Absolutely not. And obviously you don't get companionship from them. You don't get a response to you. Okay, so this really is a partnership between dog and human. And that's exactly the way that Richard Lane described it. He's been totally blind since his early 20s and his own three guide dogs, Norton Simpson, and most recently, topper. Obviously it takes time to get used to each other, but you do get this sweet spot, I would say, in my experience, maybe the dog's nearly two years old when it comes to you trained up. I would say between the dog's age of sort of three and a half to seven is when you're really at the peak with the dog and you can really, really have some fantastic mobility. Take us through the process. So, you know, give us a daily scenario for you. You run out of toothpaste in the morning and you need to get some toothpaste from the chemists. What is the process? I love the question of running out of toothpaste. My experience of getting toothpaste, other than asking my wife to pick some up next time, she's in town. If I have had periods of my life where I've lived alone with a guide dog, with topper, for example. And so what I would then do is I would decide, okay, I'm now going to go out into town, farm in Surrey, where I live. I know the route into town, top of nose the route into town, because we learned it. When he was training with me, and included in town will be somewhere like Boots the chemist. Because that's a place we all go to from time to time. So that's a bit of a no brainer in terms of a route that you're going to do, along with the route to the railway station, maybe to the bank. Not forgetting the pub, of course, and other essentials. I'm just going to jump in here because Richard is being super cool about this. And he's glossing over one quite major challenge in getting from your front door to the Holley Street. I'm also going to jump in here just to point out how much you clearly care about your dental hygiene. I don't know what the problem is. I like to maintain a healthy mouth. Anyway, there's not really the point. To say, to say. The point is that even if you know the route, you probably have to cross quite a lot of roads to get there and not be able to see whilst trying to avoid oncoming traffic. Is, shall we say, a little bit tricky? The dog does not change the traffic and the dog does not tell you the blind person when it is saved across the road or not. And most people think that is the other way around. And most people think dogs are trained in green cross code and know when it's saved across the road. They don't. This is down to the blind person estimating or judging if or when it's saved across the road. Or sometimes simply, it's a case of saying, I don't think I know if it's saved across this road. And I will wait until I hear a human being and I will ask them for help. Okay, so there's something really interesting here because if you're standing at the edge of the road, you're the one who's choosing when to go and it's the dog's job to stop you. They've got to disobey the forward command to stop you from getting his and to train a dog to know when to disobey you. That is a very tricky thing indeed. So you would set it up very carefully. You'd have another staff member driving and you would do it in a very quiet area where you can control as much as possible what's going on around. Is Wendy ready for that guy now? Oh yeah, he's ready. Oh, Wendy, you don't disappoint. We're going to cross this road straight over now. You are in charge of the road crossing, not here. So she, if you made a mistake, will hopefully not go. Yeah. But you are now in charge of deciding when it's safe to cross. Okay, it feels like that's a moment. So you were just telling a forward. You're going. There you go, lovely. Oh, Wendy is a good girl, isn't she? How did that feel for you? Well, okay, it wasn't the same feeling as it would be for somebody who's blind. I mean, I wasn't wearing a blindfold. I could see everything. I had a human helper with me. I didn't have the pressure of trying to get somewhere in a hurry. But I will say that overall, being as honest as I can be, me and Wendy, we were majestic together. I can imagine. Anyway, look, I'm sorry to harp on about this, but Richard really needs some toothpaste. Is it identical to the emergency atom? As we're getting into the high street, in my town, perhaps boots is the first shop you would get to on the high street that dog might recognise. And with learning, the dog will pause and indicate, and you can tell, because you can almost sense it's turning its head. It's looking at the door that comes and saying, I know this place, do you want to go in here? Yes, please, good boy, find right, find the door. Next thing I know, we're in boots. What I don't do, as some people possibly may think I might do, is then kneel down next to Topper and whisper in the museum and say, Topper, let's go and find the toothpaste aisle. Wouldn't that be great? But that's not how it works. Chances are, someone in boots would see the lovely dog, someone working to say, hello, so are you okay? Can I give you a hand? And the last bit to get to the aisle, whether toothpaste is, is done by a bit of human intervention, and that's fine. I mean, unless I really, really had some kind of curiosity and I wanted to go to boot every week to buy toothpaste, we could probably get the dog to learn where the aisle was, but by the time we done that, they'd then move the shop around and the toothpaste would be somewhere else. About us often, as Adam buys toothpaste apparently, I do buy a lot of toothpaste. I bet Topper could have found that toothpaste on his own right there. Yeah, super easy, barely an inconvenience. Listen to Richard describe his commute. When Topper and I were working at our best, once we got used to each other, I could hold the handle of his guiding harness with one finger and he would guide me across Waterloo station down into the underground, up to my office in London without me even having to ask for help, we even touch anything. And just to encapsulate why guide dog mobility when you're blind is so extraordinary is because when it works well, it means you can glide around without touching anything. I mean, I can't walk through Waterloo station without bumping into someone, so is that a different process for you and your guide dog to avoid touching anyone? Not really. Topper isn't trained differently to deal with Waterloo and he doesn't analyse it and go, oh, golly, it's Waterloo, isn't it busy? He did quite brilliantly once, get so frustrated with a doodler in front of me, a woman was just gassing on her mobile phone, I could hear her, and Toppo was just impatient in a good way. I could tell he was peeping round her, he was like trying to overtake a slow coach on the road, you know, when you peep round can I overtake and suddenly we're gone and we just left this woman in a wake and I just heard these words trading away, oh my god, I've just been overtaken by a blind man in his dog. I hope Topper then looks back with a slight, you know, like shake of his head is going, honestly, choose a lady. Yeah, get in the right lane, you know, speed up lady, come on, what is going on here? He was just so, so cool. I can't imagine the strength of the relationship that must be created between a human and a dog in that situation. Absolutely, and when Topper eventually became too old to work, he did stay with Richard and his family. Effectively, he retired at nine when my wife Liz and I and Topper had a sabbatical in France, so we lived in rural France here, which is quite cool for a guy dog's first year of retirement to be running around rural France. When we came out from France, he was retired at night. I made a conscious decision to not have another dog while Topper was still with us because once he was retired, the harness is taken away, he loses his guy dog status, he becomes a pet dog and he was the most marvellous pet dog. And interestingly, even though he wasn't officially working anymore, my wife said he was still having his eyes on me all the time. And if I went out to the room, his eyes would follow me and he would be slightly wears down gone and he would be much happier when I came back into the room. So, although his official work had gone, it's almost sort of this sort of magnetism is quite hard to define and he couldn't lose that bond. I think of in the Philip Pullman books, the demons that people have, the animal companions, which are sort of reflections of their souls. And sometimes when I'm trotting, well, Jesse's trotting along next to me and that adoration, you know, glances up just to make sure I'm doing the right thing and he's doing the right thing. And that's how I think about my dogs over the years is that they're sort of an extension and a reflection of your own internal state. Correct, I couldn't agree with you more and all my dogs have been that. And they become more like you and you become more like them and it's almost as if there's a meeting of two personalities. We don't quite become each other but we become very, very like each other. Well look, Richard is currently without a guide dog because Topper died at the age of 13 earlier this year. It is beyond description because the bond is incredible because it's like you're losing a friend, a son, a member of the family and someone who has also been your eyes. When Topper died recently, I still feel as I have a huge hole in my heart and I can't fill it. It's difficult. I mean, I'm soppy with dogs. I always have been long before I needed a guide dog. I grew up with pet dogs and I just adore dogs. So when I became blind, which I wasn't anticipating, but I had to deal with it. Getting a guide dog was a straightforward decision because I knew I wouldn't have a problem looking after a dog. But the downside of that is I have the incredible pain because I love the dog so much and every eight to ten years or so they die inevitably and then you have to get over it and it's really difficult. And the annoying thing about human life is that it doesn't get easier if anything it gets worse. Tough question here, but Richard insisted that I asked it, is he going to get a new guide dog? Not sure is the short answer to that question. There's no question logically that a guide dog in the future will give me enhanced mobility. But there's a part of me emotionally that is saying don't get another dog because I get too close. The bond is so strong and inevitably the bond has to be broken every eight to ten years or so. Perhaps I will not have another dog and I will be prepared to have slightly worse mobility as a result. But I won't have to go through this awful pain every few years when the dog dies. Why don't I know how I feel about that? You've just described the hardest choice but possibly the sensibilist one. That's why I feel at the moment but I haven't said definitely not. No you didn't, that's true. I did not say definitely not. So emotionally at the moment I'm saying not another dog but I'm also not ever ruling it out because who knows. So Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to how guide dogs guide us, can we say case song? Well Professor Frye, guide dogs are carefully selected for astronaut levels of unflapability. They're showing how to navigate obstacles to tell left from right and how to bring an owner to the curb. This is all trained into them from birth with stimulation and treats and lots of love. But it's the owner who has to know which way to go. Dogs have been our best friends for thousands of years but guide dogs, the very best friends a person can have. Right there you go. Just when we found out, when we decided we were going to do dogs for the first episode back after a while, my heart sang. I was the one that got to go to the puppy training center. You know what? Okay, so Wilmot was a good dog. Don't give me wrong. Wilmot was great. They're all good dogs, Hannah. But Wendy, oh my lord, if I could have just taken Wendy's lead and run off into the sunsets, I would have been a very happy person for the next 10 to 15 years. But Wendy would have, she would have gone very slowly and stopped at every light. He wouldn't have been able to run off at all. She would have looked at you like this. What you're doing? Come back. The Grace of Skate Dog. I took a picture of her. Do you want to see her? Oh yes please. What you can notice in this photo is that I'm much more into Wendy than Wendy's into me. Oh she's not very fast. I think she's just being a good dog the whole time. Oh Wendy's the best dog. I know. Oh, she's not Wendy. Just to describe her, she's got hazel eyes and then she's 90% ears. There's a lot of ear going on there. Hello Wendy, you are a very, very good girl. Jenna told us that Jenna had her since she was a puppy and she said that her ears have basically not changed size but she's just her head's kind of grown into them slightly. Wendy is a very, very good girl. She is. We talk about our dogs quite a lot in the program. Do you think some of the listeners just really don't care about dogs at all? I think we would have lost them about 17 series in the first place. Yeah. I remember being on the phone to you one morning while you were walking just in the park and we were having a lovely time and then you turned around and were like, give me a moment. And then I heard you just running across the park as you chased Jesse as he went the entire width of the park and out the other side because there was a sexy girl. Yeah, it was not that was not fun. He can run considerably faster than me. So I really couldn't keep up. So we had to have done almost immediately after that. So it's not best story. Oh, Jesse. I know. I mean, I think he didn't seem to notice it was more me and my son sort of constantly missing during that whole process. Thing is, one thing we didn't get into in that program despite us talking about sense of smell there was just how amazing dog sense of smell are. So I think people know broadly speaking that you have dogs that can sniff bombs, you have dogs that can sniff certain types of diseases, like cancer. There are dogs that now can sniff COVID. But there's one story which I really love. Like crossing my fingers that I haven't told the sun's fog guys before. Because let's be honest, they're all blended into one. We are turning into uncles who can't remember their anecdotes. Absolutely. It's a story about dogs in the army. So when it comes to conflict zones, one big problem is that a lot of cash gets smuggled through checkpoints and it can be pretty dangerous because that cash can be used to buy weapons, a useful sort of nefarious purposes. So the army wants to keep a handle on the amount of cash that's traveling through. So they decided, knowing how good a dog sense of smell is, they decided to try and train dogs to detect cash. And actually, the dogs performed amazingly well when they were in lab settings. They did incredibly well. Like we're hitting the cash every single time, knew exactly where it was. Signalling perfectly. So you take what they're trying to get them to detect and you let them smell it and then you hide it somewhere. Yeah. Dog finds it wherever you put it. And they're amazing at it. Right? Absolutely. Amazing at it. So then they took those dogs out into the field to put them at checkpoints to see if they could perform as well. And suddenly the dogs were absolutely terrible. Couldn't do it at all. Like so rubbish. Even on people who were subsequently then found to have cashed on them, the dogs just completely missed it. And everyone was like, what the hell's going on? Took them back to the lab. They were amazing at the field terrible. Until they realised the one key difference between the field and the lab was in the lab to prevent the cash from being damaged or stolen. They had wrapped it in cling film. And they inadvertently trained these dogs to sniff out cling film. It's not money at all. Not money at all. So possibly in these terrible war zones, they'll be good at, I don't know, finding dips that you haven't finished in the fridge. Exactly. Old satseeking. Brilliant. That is amazing. So I took it a good form. They've actually, too, we often make comparisons between dogs, the amazing ability that dogs have to smell out cling film or broadcasts or various diseases. And we often make a negative comparison with humans that we're not very good at our sense of smell. That's not actually very true. We're much better than we give ourselves credit for. And one of the experiments in which they discovered this was by blindfolding people. We've got an elaborate headset. So you really couldn't have any external stimuli, you know, from your, with earphones and sort of blackout helmets. And then they trailed a bit of chocolate on the ground on a sort of 10 by 10 metre spread. I think this is at Harvard or. And try to get the people to follow the smell on the ground. Crawling like dogs. Crawling like dogs. And they were actually remarkably good at it. But it was one of those papers. Well, remarkably not terrible at it. But it's one of those papers where the paper itself is much less interesting than the video supplementary information, which is a bunch of people on all fours where in these ridiculous headsets and smelling the grass. What a day at the office. What a day at the office. In the last series, we had promised you 12. But we actually only managed to get to 10 for. Well, for various reasons, but the main one was, well, I had had COVID the year before. And Hannah decided. Very badly. From which I'm almost completely recovered. But Hannah decided that it was her turn to have a life threatening illness. Not to be outdone by Adam Rutherford. I decided to go and get cancer, which is I'm going to say it might be too early to call it, but I think overall it was a bad thing. Port choice. Port choice. Port choice. Everything's completely fine now. I am back completely fit and clear and healthy. And during the whole process, I documented it all and I'm now making a big documentary about what it means to have cancer in this day and age. And what it means not only to treat a disease, but to have to treat the risk of a disease returning and it's sort of the impact that that has has a documentary that I'm making at the moment. Which we're super excited and super excited about you being well. It's the most important thing. Mostly because the curious cases of Rutherford doesn't work on its own. No, it doesn't. You know what though? The curious cases of doctors, Rutherford and Frye. I mean, that's done now, isn't it? Yes, it is. Now, the very eagerly-ed of you, Owl-eared? What is the- what is the- yeah, Owl-eared? Let's go with Owl-eared. Owl-eared of you will have noticed that in the wrap-up to that programme, I said. Yeah, I said, yes, Professor Frye. Yes, yes, because I'd decided to get two things. Can't say I'm a Professor chip. Those two things are not equivalent. One is very good. The other is terrible. No, you got something good too though, Adam. I did. I was very, very humbled and grateful to receive the Royal Society David Attenborough Award last month or a couple of months ago. You know what I really love when people use word humble to mean proud. Very proud. I'm proud to. Well done, Adam. In the last prize I won was my silver swimming certificate, A16. So it's very nice to get a big- 25 metres. Well, 50. I can't get a little metal with this one as well. You get a little coin. I don't know what you're meant to do with it. Do you have a party? Yes. Can I come to the party? The party's already happened. Oh, okay. So no, good. Shall we take care of the week? Okay, so this week's Curie of the Week is a little bit unusual because the badge is going to someone making us do something that we really don't like doing at all. That's true. Yes, Caroline Champion E-Mod and said, Dear Hannah and Adam, please find attached a short audio file that I hope will help you to circumvent your finer feelings when it's time to ask for reviews and ratings. Yeah, well, Caroline knows it's very well. So this is one of the things that we do occasionally begrudgingly and we consider ourselves to be a little bit too British to blow our own excellent trumpets. And so we've always a little bit blow our own excellent trumpets as the phrase goes. I actually am fine with it. I've gone over it. I'm completely fine with asking people to rate and review our show because it makes such a difference. It does make a huge difference. I'm over it. But now we don't need to be over it now because we've got Caroline. Yes. He's done it for us. She has, and she's, I mean, this is a massive get out of jail card for us. Thank you, Caroline. You are our Curie of the Week. And so let's hear it to play us out. Here's Caroline. We interrupt this program with an appeal spoken by a voice actor because Adam and Hannah are shy, even though they're not asking for money, but only for a few kind words. Podcasts love us everywhere. Please give us just two minutes of your time. If ever we've made your day with our podcast now is the time for you to make hours with a review of curious cases. Let us bask in the glow of our well-glowing review and we should be eternally grateful. Normal. Normal program rithians. What's the link between poisoned underpants? They wanted something that labs against your skin. A plot to kill Nelson Mandela to find a poison that would cause cancer and have him die shortly afterwards. And the deadly riots in South Africa this year. I'm Andrew Harding with a tale of politics and paranoia. Some people who wanted me dead. Oh and the link is Jacob Zuma, South Africa's former president. Indeed it was quite a strong poison. That's poison from BBC Radio 4 to listen to all five episodes just search for seriously on BBC Sounds.
