I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC We've got a rather special episode of Cureus K.C. It's a lot of excitement going on in the Cureus K.C.S. studio. Yeah, in fact, we're in a different studio. We're in the studio where they have lots of musical instruments. Certainly are. This is where they do classical music, isn't it? Indeed. You know, we've got a piano in the corner. We've got a kazoo in the corner. We've got this weird instrument, which we think is called a melodica, which is a bit like a tiny rubbish piano that you blow through, basically a toy. There's a couple of bugles. There are indeed. But we've also gots the Cureus K.C.'s band. Take it away. MUSIC A very special instrumental case for us to solve today? Yes. And for the first time, possibly the only time, we have live musical accompaniment from the actual musicians who wrote and performed the amazing earworm that is our theme tune. So, this brilliant question was sent into Cureus K.C.'s at BBC.co.uk by Natasha Cook, aged 11, and her dad, Jeremy, aged dad, age from Guelph in Canada. We play many musical instruments in our family. Lots of them produce the same pitch of notes, but the instruments all sound different. Why is this? Great question. So, the band are going to help us out with some tunes. They certainly are, but also, here with us in the studio, is acoustic engineer and musical maestro, professor Trevor Cox from the University of Salford. All right, Trevor, let's get some of these basics down there. So, this is going to be about a sound and pitch and tone. But what is the science behind how these sounds are actually created? Well, in the end, sound is vibration. You might have, say, in the guitar, the physical vibration, the string and the wood. And that then makes the air molecules vibrate and then gets to your ear, and that's what you hear. So, what you're listening to is tiny little vibrations of air molecules. And one of the important things about sound is when you make a musical note, it isn't one frequency. It's lots of frequencies, and that's one of the things that determines the colour of the sound and why different instruments sound the way they do. Now, we've got a number of different instruments with us that we're going to play today. But all of them are different sizes, and I guess that's something that would make a difference as well, right? Yeah, it's very simple, really. Bigger things happen to make lower frequencies. And it's because if I say take a wind instruments, then at low frequency, the tube length gets longer, and that means the sound takes longer to go down the tube and back again, and therefore it vibrates slower. So, if you add mass to something, it'll alert a frequency. If you look at the guitar we've got here, the bass guitar strings are thicker than the higher ones, and they need to be thicker to make a lower frequency. So, if I was to go into falsetto, what I'm actually doing there is I'm letting my vocal fault and thinning them, and therefore the massive vibration is going down, and therefore they go up in frequency. And you sound marvelous while doing it. Yes, perhaps a better example than your excellent falsetto there, travel would be our first instrument, which is the guitar. So, today we've got Matthew Chanda, who's one of the two co-writers of the theme tune. So, Matt, why did you choose the guitar in the first place? Well, it started when my older brother got born in an electric guitar for his 16th birthday. I basically fell in love with it and played it more than he did. He was actually a hymn, who ended up buying me my first electric guitar, just so that he could get his back. And presumably now you are better at the guitar than him. I went ahead with it. You're a professional musician. What does he do? He's a geneticist. He's a geneticist. Yeah, like me. Yeah, very much yet. Just for the record, to the listeners, Matthew Chanda is not my actual brother. So, Matt, give us a tune. All right, so Trevor, what is actually happening there? What's producing the sound? Well, the sound starts with the string being plucked, and that gets the string vibrating. And it's the string that determines the frequency and the pitch, the note that we hear. But on its own, the string, as you can hear, isn't kind of going to be loud enough. So, violins and cellos and guitars all have big wooden bodies. And these vibrates and that provide amplification, colours the sound and makes it sound more beautiful. Matt is using his fingers, but the guitar is often used to play. Trim, does that make a difference? How does the string is actually struck? The interesting thing about anything that is plucked is essentially, once the musician has let go of the string, it's all down to the instrument to make the sounds. And so, actually, how you start off, it comes incredibly crucial. So, with your fingers, which are kind of soft, this string slips off it. And so, you get a sort of more warm sound, less high frequencies. Where the pluck drum, it comes off really sharply, and you get much more high frequencies. So, it sounds more edgy. Now, our next instrument is going to be demonstrated here, if I wait and look at... Gaffric, give us something on the cello. Sure, okay. There's something irresistibly cool about the cello. Why did you choose it as an instrument? I didn't. I've got chosen. I just remember the lady coming around, and there's about six or seven in schools, saying, right, you're doing that, you're doing that. You, you're playing the cello. Forced you into it. Yeah, then they've led me to love it. And I did, I absolutely adore it. Now, Trevor, there's a lot of similarities between the guitar and the cello. I mean, both wooden instruments, both stringed instruments. And yet, they sound very different. So, actually, could both of you play me an A? Yep. What's the difference in sound that we're hearing here? So, we've got lots of minute differences. So, you've got the fact that you've got steel strings on the guitar, you've got cat-cut strings on the cello, the bridge that takes the vibration, the strings, so the body is a different shape, the body itself, which vibrates is different shape, endless little differences. But I guess the big difference is how they get the sound started. It's the fact that one of them is bowing, and the other one is plucking the string, because we detect the difference between it being bowed. What's happening there is the bow is actually pulling across the string. It's getting snagged on the string, and then letting go of the string and snagging and letting go. This stick-slip kind of motion is what gets it going. And our brain picks up on that and goes out to bowed instrument, whereas with a plucked instrument, when you let go of it, it's then sort of kind of just free to ring. And so that's one of the big differences is in that attack phase. What happens if you use a bow on a guitar? I'm curious. Got a sort of zither-like quality, but that's the real thing. All right, so we've got the whole orchestra here today. But the next one is going to be the piano. So Wayne, who's been playing the cello so far, is multi-talented. He also plays the piano, so could you give us a tinkle, please? So Trevor, obviously a piano is substantially different in look to a guitar or the cello, but they are kind of similar, and there are strings inside the piano. Yeah, actually from a physics point, if you're almost identical, I would say. There's some subtle differences, so the string is hit with a hammer. So the excitation is a bit different. So if you play a harpsichord, which is plucking, that's nearer to a guitar, and that's why a harpsichord sound different to a piano. But in the end, it's a string vibrating, there's a bridge, there's a soundboard that vibrates to amplify. And so it's got many similarities. I guess one of the big differences is the strings under huge tension to make it loud enough. So the actual soundboard is really thick. The vibration is much richer for that reason. Okay, and there's also the pedals, which have the effect of dampening, louder and softer. How does that work? Well, you have dampers on the individual strings, so that you can stop them vibrating, because obviously unless you reach into the piano, they just keep on ringing as long as they know, as long as they've got energy to keep going. So there's various dampeners, which kind of just like pinching the finger, I guess, onto a string and to stop it vibrating. Okay, and just in terms of making the noise louder, you hit the keys harder. That's sort of different to how you attack a string in a guitar or a cello. No, it's actually really similar. You've got to put more energy. So if you want to make a guitar sound louder, you would literally displace the string further when you're plucking it, and you're getting a more edgy sound. You get a different tomber out of that. You get techniques like slap bass, where you get actually the string then hits the fretboard and all sorts of things going on. And the same is true with a cello. You want to make it louder. You dig in more with the bow, so you actually put more energy in, that's probably being a bit sort of simplistic and what's happening, but it's kind of what you're trying to achieve. Okay, so all of these instruments that we've come as a far are essentially made from wood, but to help us get to grips with the science of the materials, we are joined by Zoe Laughlin from the Institute of Making at University College London. So what is it that makes wood a good material for all of these instruments? Well, for something like a guitar, it's actually a very specific type of wood, which is the most prized material, and that's spruce, because it has a very particular grain structure, which is very even and parallel, and that's strands of hard soft, hard soft, hard soft matter in the body of the guitar, that resonate and amplify certain characteristics of the sound. So it helps absorb certain frequencies and promote others, so it adds to the richness of the experience of listening to it really. Our most guitars made from spruce then? Acoustic, yes. The body often is... Easy words, mate. It is, yeah, it's spruce top with the rosewood back in sides. How about the telly? It's a spruce top, I think it's maple back. So that spruce top everyone's describing is the sort of face of the guitar, the front bit, and that's the bit that sort of is closest to the strings, and helps to filter the sound and provide that amplification. So would it make a difference then if you made a guitar or, you know, a telly from a different kind of wood? What if I made one from plywood? It would work, there's no doubt about it, but it would also sound completely different. So it would probably not have the zing and the brightness to it. It would dampen the sound much more quickly, because the material itself is a much more complex structure, and plywood is made up of layers of wood with alternating directions in their grain. So everything is done to make that material not vibrate, actually, and be a much more stable solid material. We're actually... You want that little bit of dancing in the structure, which is what you get with spruce. So when we talk about wood instruments, the violin and the cello and the guitar, often musicians talk about the density of the grain, and that better quality and the classic violins, like the strands and the granaries, have very, very dense grains. Is that important to creating that amazing sound? The density of the grain is important, and that's to do with how closely packed the hard and soft bits are together, and it makes it a much more resonant material, because it's stiffer, basically. But it's not the only part of the grain that's important, also the evenness of it. It's not just having it dense, but it's having it straight and consistent throughout the material. Those ridiculously expensive violins, like the Strativaric, the millions of pounds of violin, does it come down to the material that it's made from? They are made from a very particular wood, and that's also grown a very particular area, and it's the sort of era of even growth, when the weather wasn't changing a lot, and the trees were able to grow these even grain structures. But it's also undoubtedly the cache, and the social construct around what that means, and the person who made it, and that skill as well. OK, we're going to come back to Zoli later in the programme to talk more about materials themselves, but we want to keep moving going to the next instrument. Now, this one is completely different. It's the saxophone, and Trevor, as well as being a professor of acoustics, is also not bad at the sax. Unfortunately, the listeners will now be able to judge, I guess. So, that's annoying when people do, I really get it, multiple things. I hate them. Really annoying. Anyway, Trevor, thank you. How's the sound producing the saxophone? Well, it all starts with a mouthpiece, so what you have is you have a hole, and you have a reed, and this reed flaps open and close across the hole, and that breaks up the flow of air coming out of your lungs, because sound is a variation in pressure, so you need some high and low pressures to actually create the sound. But on its own, the mouthpiece sounds not very nice. There's a very high frequency sound. It's always above the frequency of the instrument you're using, and what happens is the vibration of the reed locks into the resonances of the air ball. So, a saxophone, if you look at it, is full of loads and loads of keys, but essentially it's a conical tube, is what you're playing, and the longer the tube, the lower the note. It's the iconic shape of the saxophone. That is important for generating the specific sound of the sax. Yeah, it's really important. I mean, I used to play a clarinet, which has a very similar mouthpiece, but it's a cylindrical ball. The difference in those two sounds is down to the shape. The cylinders of the clarinet produces a set of sounds where some are missing. We talk about the overtones of the sounds, the harmonics, and every other one is missing in a clarinet, whereas with a saxophone, they're all present, and that's what gives it a really, well, very loud sound for one thing. And when you get up close to a saxophone, you can see that it's a highly technical, mechanical instrument. How do you actually produce the different notes with the keys? Well, all you're doing really is changing the length of the tube that you're playing. So as you close the holes over, the tube gets longer and longer, and therefore you get a lower and lower note. I mean, there's weird things that happen at the high end of the instrument, if you place sort of an autissimo range, where you're starting to actually use your vocal tract, actually the resonances of the air cavity in your mouth to actually create the frequencies you're trying to get out. And we've been talking about the materials as well. The sax is, well, it's made of metal, but the clarinet he talks about playing the clarinet earlier. That's a woodwind instrument. The difference in between metal and wood, is that the difference between the clarinet and saxophone? Not, there's a little bit there, because the ebonych that the clarinet's made out of is a bit lossy, so it doesn't quite have the high frequency content the saxophone has. But most of it's about the shape of the ball. And in fact, I was in the saxophone shop yesterday playing a plastic saxophone, and okay, it's not as nice as this one, but it certainly sounded like saxophone. Well, well, because our resident materials expert was looking at gas for that answer. Yeah, so materials make no difference. They are vital. I mean, the physics would say, okay, it's just a bigger bit of air or smaller bit of air, changes the sound. But actually, the musician will say, no, I want a brass that's lacquered, or I know I want a silver content saxophone, like the material absorbs some of that energy that's passing through it and shifts the sound. And to the untrained ear, maybe it's not so distinct when you're talking about different types of alloy of brass. But actually, once you start to really broaden that material spectrum out, you can hear it. Now I noticed that you have brought a number of props with you. So let's have a little play around with what different sounds different materials make. Okay, well, I'll just start with big, impactful, proof Trevor wrong type thing. First off, we've got the copper bugle, okay? Okay. Ah, ah, ah, ah, ah! Too late from the bugle. Beautiful. Now, I'm about to play an identical copy of that bugle. But instead of being made of copper, this one is made of lead. Ooh. So lead is a much softer metal, so soft in fact, that if I drop this on the floor, it would bend and deform. And this should absorb the energy differently and sound different. But I'll attempt to do exactly the same thing. Ah, ah, ah, ah! Ah, ah, ah! That is a thing of great beauty. So I'm really trying. But it's because it's so soft and it's absorbing so much of that energy, it just doesn't have the attack, it doesn't have the brightness. And it's mournful and sounds very different and it's much harder to achieve the same notes from. Wow. That was an excellent demonstration. Putting in full welley into both both situations and one just not working out quite as well as the other. Yeah, the player was the same, the only variable was the instrument. Right. Well, so to try and unpack that a little bit more, I've made some tuning forks of different materials. Now, this is your standard tuning fork. This is a 440 hertz steel tuning fork that will produce the note A. So all customers would use this to tune to. And then you can imagine the orchestra tuning up. Right, so the gain was keep the form identical because you can change the sound of a tuning fork in many ways and it's generally by making it bigger or smaller. And then a bigger one will produce a lower note because there's more matter to move around. A smaller one will be higher pitched. But here, this next tuning fork is identical but this is made of brass. So that's actually a lower note. And not only that, this one rings and rings and rings. It has this amazing sustain. It's still going. You may be we can't hear it but I can feel it in my fingers. What is it about brass that's making that happen? In a way, it's sort of magic. I mean, it's this kind of property of the material that is to do with its elasticity, its density, that is only of brass that gives it this certain kind of attack. And it has a structure which means that that energy is not lost as it vibrates as quickly as other structures and that gives you that brilliant sustain. And then you think, oh, of course entire sections of orchestras are made out of this stuff. It's brilliant. But it's made out of zinc and copper. So there are two metals both on a periodic table. So two pure elements but they don't sound anything like brass but in mixing them together, you get the brass. So here's the copper. It's disappointing. I mean, there's not much there. There's a little bit of a note and it's pretty low. And that's because copper's much more dense. So it takes more energy to vibrate so it moves more slowly and that's a lower frequency. And this one is the zinc. Now, it hasn't done anything. I've pinched it together and it's a vent. Because it's just so soft that it won't ring at all. In fact, it's starting to fatigue and crack. So just the energy of hitting and trying to play it will snap it. So those two metals that sound nothing like brass, you mix them together and then you get it's the combination. It's that combination. Okay, but there's, I mean a lot of the oceans also made of wood. What happens if you try and make a tuning fork out of wood? Well, you would think maybe nothing but amazingly you get sound. And you don't just get little knocking sounds that all sound like someone banging on a door. You get a range of different pitches. So different words will give you different notes. So this is walnut. It just doesn't go on for very long. Yeah, so it has no ring. It has no sustain to it. But it does have a pitch. And then this is spruce, our friend from the guitar body. So you can hear there's a walnut is much higher. And this one and this one's a lead tuning fork. Now this should, again, no noise. The noise you can hear is just my fingers rubbing on the material. And in attempting to kind of pinch it and generate a note, it's squished together. Because it's again so soft like the zinc it just deforms. And it really shows why that lead bugle absorbs so much energy because it's just such a soft material. No lead section in the orchestra. That's what I'm getting from this. Okay, we could keep jamming all day, especially with those tuning forks. Maybe release a great set of album, but we do have to get back to the question, which was from Natasha Cook and she asked, why do instruments sound different when they're playing the same note? And I guess to sum up then, the answer is lots of reasons. There's how the notes generated. There's the material of the instruments. But I guess Trevor, also the harmonics really matter here. Yeah, that's increasingly important. So if you listen to a nice sustained part of the note, that's what you're really hearing. And because a musical instrument doesn't just make one frequency at the time, it makes multiples of that. So it'll make 100 hertz, 200, 300, 400, all at the same time. If you change the balance, the strength of those different harmonic higher frequencies, you change how it sounds. And that's, for example, the crucial difference between a clarinet and a saxophone is how's harmonics, some of them are missing with the clarinet and some of the present with the saxophone. But that's all we've got time for today. So thanks to our experts, Trevor Cox and Zary Laughlin. And to play us out, we have the awesome match, Honda and the amazing Wayne Erkert, the curious case is banned. Take it away. So amazing. Of all the things that we've ever done, I think that was the most exciting recording of curious cases ever. Oh, I don't know if it's definitely top one. My favourite bit was the piano, which I'm really worried that Michelle is not going to be able to fit into the main programme. So I thought if I say this now, then she'll have to. Yeah. Because Wayne said beforehand that he didn't really play the piano and he was a bit rusty. He looked shocked when we asked him. When we asked him to step up. And he sat up. Just just sat. Absolutely. Amazingly talented and also Trevor Cox. Who knew that he was that guy on the saxophone? Well, he did. He's still sitting here. He's still indeed. Or indeed, Zary, who knew that she was that good on tuning fox? And the beautiful previous. It's slightly hard to me. I've also noticed that she's doing playing the piano, Ellie, who she's also extremely talented. Yeah. And but she's got what she's got in front as well as the tuning fox. She also has a set of bells. I know. And one of which is actually glass. Yeah. The hold the bells. I thought maybe well there's four of them. We could all play one. Oh yeah. Okay. Trevor, do you want pick your bell? I'm not going to go for the glass one because I know my own strength. I trust Trevor. Trevor, you can go glass. Can I do? Can I have the shiny brass one? Yes, can. Oh, I wanted to prevent any. You want the shiny brass bell. As a result. This one, this is a bronze bell. This was my grand father's ART warden. Put that light out, bell. That was fantastic. Is that really? Oh, that's real. And the ART, the Air Aid. Yes. That's so cool. And then I've got the lead one. Okay. It's so heavy. It looks really heavy. It does look very... Right. So let's have brass, Hanuman brass. So do you... Clang a lang away. Clang a lang away. I'm being at school. It's just like being at school. That's a proper school yard bell. Still going. Still going. Still ringing. Good old brass. Should we like line up now and go for lunch? So, okay. And this is wet play. Add them on the bronze. This is bronze. So that's head for the shelters. Head for the shelters. I mean, it's really... It's doing a great ring, but that's a bell metal. That's what church bells were made out of. Same material. Trevor. Trevor on glass. I'm a bit nervous here. Now, it's making a tingle, but it's not ringing in the way that maybe if you flick a wine glass, it might ring. And that's because we made that to be an exact copy of Hanuman's bell. So it's the same thickness of brass, same form factor, identical to your one. All we've done is change glass. And that's why the sound changes. But if you wanted to make a glass bell that rang, you would do a different shape and you'd make it much thinner. So you could make a glass bell that was like, PING! You could make a glass harmonic. You can't do that, frankly. Yeah. Which, you know, like running your finger around the outside of a wine glass, you can do that with a mechanical device called a glass harmonica. Well, you can say Franklin did that. You mean a wreatha or Benjamin? You guess. I'm going to go with a wreatha. It's your turn, Zane. So this is the lead bell. You're ready. No one's coming in for lunch or just if you're in the night. No, no. So I'm doing that one. No ring at all. It sounds wooden. I mean, it sounds like a live phone. Yeah, because it's absorbing all of that energy because the material's so soft. Yeah. Which explains why there are very few lead instruments. Are there any lead instruments? No, well, apart from a lead bugle and none. But I like it because, you know, it still makes a sound, but it's designed not to be rehearsed with in that sustained exposure is a bad idea. Unlike any other instrument where you should practice, this one you definitely shouldn't practice. It's a bad idea in the sense that A, terrible sound, B, quite poisonous. Yeah. And C, extraordinarily heavy. It's good training. Yeah. It's interesting you mentioned it sounded wooden because actually the difference. When you do a perceptual test if you make identical bits of wood that you clang of different materials, it's the decay. How fast it takes the decay away is what people pick up as a clue as to whether it's metal or it's wood. So because it's got a fast decay, you're assuming it's wood, even though actually lead is a metal. What instruments do you play, though? The guitar is official. Like I had lessons in that. When I was about nine and was in bands and things. And then when you're in bands, you touch other things that are also in the band, don't you? I can play a few things, but not to any particular standard. What instruments do you play, I don't? Because I don't know if I'm somewhere in the back of my mind. I assume to remember you saying a story about you being a chorister. Is that right? Yeah, I don't know what I'd hear. I told you that. You do barely mention it. I haven't mentioned it at all. How I actually played the violin. And I still do. Michelle asked me to get my violin out today. But when I opened the case, two of the strings were missing. Ah, when I'm missing. What they'd broken. Oh. Yeah. And in fact, I don't have a boat at the moment as well. Are you like grade eight violin? Yeah. Are you really? Yeah. I need to see this. Yeah, it's true. Yeah. I was a violinist in a folk rock band. It's true. Are the videos. I don't, there are no videos. There are cassette tapes. We were called the only fruit, named after the genetic winter sun novel, oranges are not. And we were big in and around it, which in the early 90s. Yes. No, this is quite the image. Quite the image. What about you? Well, so I don't play any instruments. But last year, I decided that as a treat to myself, I bought a very, very old, battered piano and to have been slowly plodding through loads of YouTube with the old, to teach myself piano. Anyway, Trevor, what musical instruments do you play? Well, I started off with a clarinet when I was a child. And I gave up for about 15 years when I was an adult. And when I restart, I picked up the saxophone because I couldn't stand the thought of relearning from scratch. So I think you're playing yourself down here, Trevor, because I've heard that you're also a dab hand at the kazoo. Well, the kazoo must be the easiest instrument ever to actually kind of play, because actually it's a vocal thing. You're singing in it. So with most musical instruments, actually, you're letting the instrument make the sound. But actually, in this case, it's your vocal chords, which are vibrating. So you just go and tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, adjourned. So it's actually really easy to play verändert. What is it because it's essentially a hole through a bit of metal? So what you have is you have a tube, which then has a little side hole on it. So you've got a branch. And then there's a bit of paper. In this case, it looks like a bit of plastic, which rattles. And that gives it the complete phase. So having said it's easy to play, I keep pay off the pad. You get that rattling sound because of the paper rattling against the edge of the hole. So presumably we could make a kazoo out of different materials, other than the metal that you're holding now, such as... Well, you could make one out of a carrot if you really want. Which we just happened to have a carrot right here in the studio. And the other equipment you'd need to make a kazoo out of a carrot would be... A very large masonry drill. Oh, well that. I've also bought my drill in. Hang on. I just like to... I know that you can't see this. But Adam has not only got a drill, the bit on the end of this drill is approximately four meters long. Yeah, so when preparing for this demonstration, I thought, you know, I need a decent sort of, you know, a centimeter or maybe 12mm width bit. But also I figured we needed a long one because I didn't really know the length of the carrots that Michelle was going to supply us with. Have you ever bought a carrot that long? I mean, it's cut honestly. I mean, it's like a, it's like a 40 centimeter carrot you'd need. This is, this is, that drill is thicker than most walls. Well, it was for that. I bought this when I was making my cat flap. So, so I've got the drill. With the extraordinarily large masonry bit, I've got the carrot. Trevor, talk me through the process. Well, the main thing is to do it really slowly. Because you can actually feel if the drill's going outside and you actually don't want that. I've got an idea. Why don't you hold the carrot and we will insert the drill. No, I mean, I definitely would once be looking down the drill. Yeah. And do it as the slowest speed and get your drill to do it. Well, thankfully, you've got a lot of drill to look down. Okay, so, and we've got, we've covered the studio in some cleaning material. Could you be, have we done it? We haven't saved the assessment. Try not to drill through your hand, okay? I don't want to see you. So you say slowly. Carrots are wetter than I thought. Yeah, occasionally back it up so you can get rid of the gunk. Where's just dribbling carrot juice into my hand? Yeah, I think straight. We can't tell it's in your tally in your... I think as if you don't present your vein so much, the drill will hold it more like, hold it more like you're holding in like that. No, no, no, no. Like a microphone. Not easy to drill. Can you make sure your fingers out the way? It's the way the end of it's quivering, which is rough. Come on. Do you ever just have a slight out body experience? Like, this is my life right now. It's four scientists sat around the table watching someone drill a carrot. Yeah. You can now hold it at the top with the way from where the drill's going. I think I'll be on the way through and so I just need to get out the other way. It needs to be a whole tube so you just keep going. This is normal day job for me. I mean, we've made about 250 carrot flutes at least. Oh my gosh. I'm pretty pleased with it. Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's good. Yeah, yeah, yeah, you, I mean, you, I didn't line up well. So what you now need is a side hole. So if you look at a kazoo, you see it's got a hole on the side. Right. So I'm just going to clean it off a bit. Yeah, blow down it but don't point it and you won't when you do it, it would be nice to just you. Digging my ears, Joe. I'm just going to eat this because that just looks like delicious carrot. And this is a big real video. It's very nice. It's got quite a lot of masonry on it from when I made the catflap. I instantly regret that decision. Did it get in your mouth a little bit, a little bit of masonry in there. Tiny bit of brick. Actually, what point do I put the side hole? It makes really no difference at all. Just somewhere in the middle. Where's the real kazoo? It knows your model. So I'm going to go around about here. So and in but I don't want to penetrate the. Oh, yeah, don't get all the way through. I just want to go into the middle and stop. Right. I think I didn't charge my battery. The fact that this rather expensive drill is struggling against a carrot. Come on in. Oh no, off my mouth, please. You're joking. Oh for goodness. The drill was failed me. Yes, we can improvise. I've got pens. It's a lot of style over substance with that particular drill there wasn't it. You look all very manly with your five meter drill bit. I mean, I mean, he didn't charge his battery. He stopped dissing my man with masculinity. Right, so that's basically it. I've just dried the outside because you're going to put a bit of paper across it. And that's the hole on the top. Yeah, so the distinctive sound of the the raspy sound of the kazoo is about that rattling bit of that's a bit of grease-proof paper or something. So I'll make it a bit smaller, shall I? Doesn't matter. How do you stick it down? I just held it with my hand. I mean, you could stick it with something, but as long as you don't hold your hand across the hole, all the way it doesn't work up. And just I just stick it down it. I just covered a gene once. That's not working. I'm wanting to. Look at this. I mean, that one is it's good. Come on, Flourwick, because I can make this a little professional dinester. It's Dr. Adam Rutherford. You're doing it. What do you mean? You just need to let the paper be a bit loose. So I'm just holding around the sides. It's rattling. What do you mean? You also have to be a professor at Keystone's Galvesting to work. I never believed it. I think it's because we've got skills in other areas. Not playing carrot kazoo's. Yeah, it goes. I don't think this is hard. I don't know what to do. I think it's confidence. It's confidence to produce. It's confidence to produce. Oh, it's like harder. So he's much better at that. You know what? I think we should. The fun should not be ours alone here. But I should also say that if you are going to make your own carrot kazoo's at home, make sure that you have an adult to help you. And one who is more responsible than Adam Rutherford. Yeah, and also remember to charge a battery as well, which is just one of the absolute basics. We would love you, the curiotes, to send in your versions of the theme tune played on any instruments, including ones that you have invented yourself. In any styles, I mean, I particularly enjoyed the reggae rendition. Yes, it was superb. We could have a blues rendition. Could have a... What other... A hip hop? Oh, yeah. For the kids. Folk. The possibilities are virtually endless. But for now, here is our curi of the week. Rutherford and prize curiote of the week. Okay, so in keeping with the musical instrumental theme of today's programme, we have a musical cure of the week as well. We've had two more emails in about the bands that we formed last series in Terro Bank. Yeah, do we have a... It was not a single earthquake in my soul. Something like that, yeah. Obscure Danish metal bands that's... Curio James Cooper, related us to the album cover of which looks strangely familiar to... Yeah, it's our podcast photo. Exactly. But inverted. So one of the emails came in from Andrew No Cername. Just letting you know, there is already a real band called Interro Bank. Oh. They've got a website and everything. They're not Danish, they're not metal. It gets better. Quote. In 2012, former Chumbe Womba members Dustin Bruce and Harry Hamer formed a new band in Terro Bank. And did you think we should explain who Chumbe Womba are for international listeners? Yeah, Chumbe Womba are best known for two things. One was that song... I get knocked down. I get knocked down and I get up again. No one ever going to keep me down. I get knocked down. I get it. Which was a sort of... Goes on and on. Party Banger from the late 90s. Yeah. And the other one was that one of them through a glass of water at a senior member of the Labour Party in the last electoral cycle. Is it Chumbe Womba where the video is just like an almost nude, extremely overweight man? Is there a song about that? Oh, no, you're thinking fat les. Oh, sorry. It's so easy to get confused with these high-class British bands from the late 90s. The second email about the same issue comes from Stuart B. We think the Stuart B might be Mel B's brother or husband, not sure. He says he's in brackets aged nearly 24. So he's 23. Yeah. Yeah. And he's from Winchester. He said, I just listened to your episode of Viking Code, which is the one we recorded in the London Eye. And I agreed with Adam that the version of the theme tune sent in important to be a Danish metal band in Terabang didn't sound metal enough. And to that effect, I'm attaching a version by a rival Danish metal band called Knaborekny. Knaborekny. Name turned upside down is in Terabang, a very clever. But he's actually done the music for it. He's done the music for it. So let's hear the actual Danish metal band, Knaborekny's version of Curia of the Week. He did. That is exactly how I like to see myself. That's the soundtrack to my life. It's very on brand, doesn't it, really? He must have a really sought-through after doing that as well. That was like a hard core. Can a slightly sweaty, maybe with some heavy eyeliner. You might find down on the floor, legs as far apart as they can be. In another life, Adam. Yeah. If it doesn't work out for us with the science podcasting, it's what we can do. Knaborekny and in Terabang, that's awesome. So thanks to you, B. I hope things work out with Mel B, but that was absolutely awesome. That absolutely definitely wins Curia of the Week. Most definitely. I think it has gold badge territory. Yep, yep, yep. And next week, in the next episode, we are going to be talking about rock. I'm doing the rock fingers here. And it's really unimpressed. What was the next episode? Moon Rock. Oh, okay. Very clever. Double episode on our nearest neighbour, the origin of the Moon, white's vital for life on earth. Rock. So, two every week. Oi, you. Wally Ray. Have a listen to this, Richard. Four is four. An environmental thriller for BBC Sam. He's a neat pan. Why? She lives a few centuries from now. After a data crash that wiped out most records of life. So, when she finds an old recording of a ring for us, she has no idea what it is. Four is four, oh four. Nine part three, nine part talk, nine part soundscape. Starring Paul Mackey, Tony Moody, and Pippa Haywood, with The Music by Bernobos. Subscribe now on BBC Salon. Subscribe now.
