Welcome to the podcast of the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry. Episode four, the squeamish swoon. Is another one about you? I know, well, you get to do all the field work, I get to have all of the episodes about me. But the squeamish swoon is why you faint so easily if I even mention gushing blood. In many ways, this episode is about you enjoying torturing me by bringing up images of deeply horrifying so blood-based. No, I'm doing that. The sound of blood gurgling from an open wound. That's the problem here, is it? No, stop it. Don't like it. Today's case is one which has perplexed medical science for centuries and yet affects almost half of the population. Yes, it was brought to us by the excellently named Philip Lourish. He asks the following question. Why do some people faint at the sight of blood or a hypothermic needle or even if they bash their funny bone? Does it serve any useful evolutionary purpose or is it just some kind of cerebral error regards Philip? Yes, why do we faint? What happens when we pass out? This is what we'll be investigating in the case of the squeamish swoon. Although I do have to say I've actually never fainted in my whole life. I have fainted a couple of times. Really? Yeah. And I am extremely squeamish and do feel pretty light-headed anytime I see any depiction of violence. On film? Yeah, I mean, even reading about it, even people talking about it. Any reference to it whatsoever affects you going a bit funny. Okay, so I take it that you can't watch horror films. No, no. They've avoid them at all costs. I feel like you're missing out on an important piece of culture simply by just shutting off this part of it. I feel like you're missing out on a crucial life experience by having never fainted. But luckily, I can give you that gift, other than rather foods, because I know a place where they can make you faint. So here I am off to the cardiology department at the London Bridge Hospital for a tilt test which I'm told will induce fainting. I'm not really sure what it involves, but these are the things that we do for you, dear listeners. Inside a tiny room crammed full of wires, monitors, and an ominous looking bed, cardiac physiologist Shelley Dockety asks me to disrobe and the procedure begins. So basically, I'm just going to wire you up to an ECG, and that way I can monitor your heart rhythm. Yep. So it's just 10 stickers and it's 12 different angles of your heart. Right, so you're just attaching all the wires to these various tabs? Sorry, my hands are freezing. So when you rip these off, you're going to leave little ball patches. There's not that much hair there, so I didn't need to shave. Normally I would shave people. I'm not sure what I should tell you about, it's a compliment on my masculinity or otherwise. All right, can I get you to take a lie down on the bed? Of course. Pop your feet flat up against the board at the bottom. Okay, so it's just a bed, but it's got a board at the bottom where feet are flat up against. So just pop all your fingers together. This is the fino press, so this takes your blood pressure with every heartbeat. So it's a bit of a pulsating sensation. Your finger will go numb by the end of the test. But as soon as I take it off, it'll go back to a normal colour. What is it? A normal colour? Sometimes it can go blue and purple, but that's perfectly normal. Honestly, why didn't Hannah have to do this? Because your life insurance policy was cheaper? Yes. Well, we're going to come back later to see how close I come to a really dramatic Victorian swoon. But what happens inside our bodies when we faint? And what has it got to do with our heart? So I asked Nicholas Gould, consultant cardiologist. Obviously, what makes us different from other animals is that our head is higher than our heart. So our bodies have to pump blood upwards. As soon as we stand up between six and 800 miles of blood, go south. And so our bodies need to have reflexes to pump it back again. And how we do that is increasing heart rate to a small extent. And tightening up blood vessels, so squeezing blood into the circulation. Imagine the blood pumping through our arteries. Our nerves and heart work together to maintain the perfect blood pressure to help push it against gravity into our brains and other organs. But sometimes, especially when we exercise, our arteries open tiny gates near our muscles to increase the flow and deliver oxygen where it's needed. And this smooths blood away from the brain. This is also what can happen when you faint. Your heart rate will increase as it tries to raise the pressure to get more blood back to your brain. And if that doesn't work, the brain pulls an emergency stop. The brain sends signals to the rest of the body to say, I am really struggling to get enough blood. And I need you to do something about this. And at this point, the brain says, I'm not getting enough blood. And I'm going to need to make you faint. And so the brain actively tells the heart to slow down and tells various blood vessels to dilate. So blood pressure drops, heart rate can drop. And so patients lose consciousness. You fall to the floor because you have no muscle control. And then the heart and the brain are at the same level. And so the system recovers. So one of the points of fating is to make us fall over? Well, apparently so. If your body is horizontal, obviously, it doesn't have to work against gravity to pump blood into the brain. The thing is blacking out does seem like quite an extreme way just to make you lie down. Because the thing is fating is quite an unnerving experience. It's almost as though someone turns the brightness down on your vision starting from the outside. And then you feel just incredibly light-headed. And the next thing you know, you're lying on the floor. With lots of people panicking around you. I'm feeling terribly unbridaged. That is very interesting. And it is literally an experience that I have never had. Which is why back in the hospital, I was being well wired up and strapped to a table. I'm just talking a few straps over you. You really just feel your safety. They're not to restrain you or anything like that. Right, so massive Velcro belts across my chest. So be across your chest, your waist and your knees. So basically the idea with this test is we get you up to a 60 degree angle. So lying backwards or forwards? No forwards. So you're standing up but leaning back as if you're leaning against a wall. I see. And kind of confuses your body a little bit. And basically by standing there for up to 45 minutes. All the blood pools in your extremities. And we want to see how your blood pressure and your heart rate respond. I feel a little bit funny as I originally told you out. That does feel a bit funny. Shelley, you've been very kind to me and I, I hope we make it through to the other side. I'm sure we will. And now you want me to stop talking? Yes. Well that would be a relief for everyone. What was it like there? You remember that scene in Science of the Lands where you see Hannibal Lecter strapped to a sort of gurney. It was exactly like that. Apart from the face mask, I was basically being wheeled around strapped in me. And the cannibalism. We weren't going to mention that. Why is that lovely? But why are some people fainters and other people not? Here's cardiologist Nicholas Galigan. Up to 40% of people will faint in their lives. But most people who faint may faint once, twice, three times. It tends to be a much smaller proportion of patients who will faint repeatedly. There are families which appear to have a greater susceptibility to fainting. Women are more likely to faint than men. Women tend to have smaller hearts, smaller blood volumes. And it seems, therefore, that when we stand up and gravity drags blood downwards into our legs away from our head, that there's more strain on the system. Now what we don't know is the connection to squeamishness. Why certain triggers in certain individuals, Dr. Fry, make one faint. In all seriousness, even that phrase of gravity drags blood. Makes me feel a little bit woozy. I just want to say it again now. Gravity drags blood. I'm sorry, I'm being mean to you. You're a little bit worried that we're making you out to be a colossal whus. I am a colossal whus. I'm quite comfortable with that. Anyway, back to the hospital for me, where I've been tilted backwards now for 45 tedious minutes at 60 degrees for them to try and induce fainting. But did it work? Oh, finished. Get rid of these. Look at your toes around, look at these up and down. They're feeling back to your feet. I didn't come close to passing them. So, listen, Shelley, are you telling me that I'm unfaithable? Come on. I think we could get anyone to faint if we stood them up for long enough. I think that's like some sort of evolutionary super power, surely. It's the fun part. Okay, so you're unplugging the 10 different pads from my chest, from my nipple. Oh, god, just steady on. You're fed a bald patch. I haven't. That owl. He's the worst now, Dr. Rutherford. Yeah, it's quite slightly embarrassing that, but you know, still unfaithable. Pretty impressive, right? Godlike. Almost. But that's not the end of Philip Lerit's question, because he wants to know where their fainting serves any evolutionary purpose. So I asked cardiologist Adam Fitzpatrick, who runs the blackout clinic at the Manchester Royal Infirmary. Well, it's thought that the fainting reflex is very, very ancient. Right in the centre above the pituitary gland, there's a airy-coldy hypothalamus, which is part of the ancient midbrain. And that's where the cardiovascular system is controlled, the heart rate and the blood pressure in particular. And it's thought that when ancient humans were threatened by predators, it was helpful to be able to collapse to the ground and appear to be lifeless. So under those circumstances, an individual who tended to faint at terrifying times, collapsed down, go very pale and motionless, and then the predator would wander off. There are some people like me who have fainted a couple of times, and then there are other people who've never fainted whatsoever. Do we know why that's true for some people and not others, or is it just a mystery? Well, I think that with the evolutionary theory in mind, if an advantage was conferred, then the individuals with a fainting capability would have more children, who would go on to have more children. And almost certainly there are genes which express the tendency to fainting. And I guess you must be one of the evolutionary superior beings who has the fainting gene. That's how I like to think of myself. Yes, wow. As the evolutionary component to this team, I'm giving that a massive, not really sure about that. It may have a genetic component, but that doesn't mean it's necessarily an evolutionary advantage. And there's no real way of testing that my fainting friend. Well, maybe, but it does just sound like you're making excuses now, because you don't want to concede to my evolutionary superiority. Yes, well, maybe. But listen, I have a little surprise for you. First, I need you to hold this collection of tissue here. And this is a Victorian set of ampules containing smelling salts. No way. They're really cool. Crush an ampule in a hankerchief or a pad of cotton wool and inhale the vapour. So you need to wrap it up in that tissue. Oh my gosh, hang on. And then you're just going to have to crush it and inhale. Oh, it's actually quite hard to crack. So it's like, oh, now smell. Wow, you can feel it moving down your nose. Well, you know what it is. It's ammonia. Is that what it is? Oh my god. It's pure ammonia. I mean, it smells so much like cat urine. Oh, wow. That's horrible. So, Dr. Fry, I think we've conclusively solved that case. Oh, I feel a bit weird. Dana. I feel a bit weird. Dana. Hannah, are you OK? Hannah, where you at? Thank you for listening to the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry. This program was made in collaboration with BBC Future. And produced by our excellent producer, Michelle Martil. She's pretty good. Look at her there. She knows. She's got some skills. She's got super skills. Look at that. Look at her fingers poised on the sliders there. Look at that. I don't even know what all those sliders do. No, I don't think she does. She does. It's quite a lot of them. If you, dear listener, have your own curious case that you would like us to investigate, then you can email us at curiouscases at bbc.co.uk. And if you go to bbc.com forward slash future, they'll be posting videos and other things to do with the show. Thanks for listening.
