I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC Hello, final episode in this series. Sorry, one. But one. Ten ultimate. You've got to see me one more time, Adam Rutherford. I like seeing you. But this is another super mathsy one. I don't know quite how we've organised it, so you get two mathsy ones in a row here. Physics followed by more calculus. I'll tell you how we organised it, because you got to scare the living of Jesus out of me two times in a row. That is fair enough. And later on, I get the Jesus scared out of me by equations. So let's go with that. MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC Here we are outside in the rainy London streets. And I... I don't think they're never going to get... I think it's pretty obvious that we're actually in a nice warm, all-be-it-slightly-broken BBC studio with some fairly surety sound effects. OK. But we did plan to record this opening outside to fit in with today's theme, because the forecast said there was a 55% chance of rain. But guess what? It's not raining. And it's just this kind of inaccuracy that led Isabel Weber from Vienna to email us to ask. Why is it so difficult to predict the weather? It seems rather straightforward to calculate wind speed, look at clouds and data from the past to make accurate predictions, and yet it's just not possible. Why indeed? We've got computers, we've got summons, we've got maths. You've got maths. Right. But I have history, my friend, because the first historical figure to try and calculate the weather was a Norwegian physicist, Wilhelm Björknes. He'd been working on a circulation theory to describe how fluids flow around a curved surface. But the mysterious disappearance of a polar expedition took his work in an unexpected direction. Amidst cheering crowds in 1897, three Swedish explorers set off on a voyage from Svalbard in the Eagle, a hot air balloon heading for the North Pole. Running them on board with 36 carrier pigeons, ready to send back news of their progress. But only one bird ever returned, and the Eagle plus her crew vanished. 40,000 people had seen the Eagle off in Stockholm, and everyone wanted to figure out where the Eagle had gone. Andrew Blum is author of the weather machine, how we see into the future. And it was during a lecture on his mathematics, Björknes' mathematics, that someone said, you know, wait, this could actually apply to the weather. As public obsession about the fate of the Eagle grew, scientists began to wonder whether they could locate the missing balloon by tracking the wind and the weather. And this is what turned Wilhelm's mind to meteorology. Everything before him had kind of been more empirical. They looked up at the sky and they tried to see patterns. And what Björknes did that was unusual was he tried to turn it into a science experiment, using math and physics in a way that was repeatable and verifiable. And did they ever find the Eagle? They found the Eagle many decades later. I needless to say, the Eagle did not make it to the North Pole, and only that one pigeon wherever he came back with a message. Okay, but out of this tragedy, he begins to work out how to use mathematics to predict the weather. So what did he come up with? Björknes came up with seven equations that could describe the future state of the atmosphere based on observations of the present state of the atmosphere. And how do you get on? Because of course, we always take the make-you-out of whether people for not getting the weather right, but what was his predictions like? Well, his predictions weren't very good, but his process was right. His equations really did form the foundation of modern forecasting, although it took another 50 or 60 years. Hang on a second, Svalbard, Hot Air balloons, the North Pole, small animals. Are you sure this isn't just the plot to his dark material? It was a bit like that, but with more maths and therefore worse. Not worse, better. Anyway, as Andrew said, it didn't really work out that well. So what was wrong with his sums? Okay, so these seven equations that he came up with, they're what's known as differential equations. So in theory, you can work through them all and an answer pops out at the end to tell you exactly what the atmosphere will look like at any point in the future. Easy peasy. Hmm, if only, because there is one slight problem. All of the bits in this equation are tangled up together. So wind speed depends on temperature and that depends on pressure, but pressure depends on temperature and that depends on wind speed. Oh, God, this sounds like one of those impossible homework problems. Right. And the fact is that these equations are so intertwined that you cannot solve them by hand. Right, this is not the kind of homework question I want to help with. No, quite. Wilhelm recognized that his equations held the key, but he knew that he couldn't solve them. And it wasn't until the 1920s that the British mathematician Lewis Frye Richardson, no relation, took up the mathematical mantle. He realized that you don't need an exact solution at all. If you plug in huge amounts of observational data, it was still possible to estimate what the weather would be like in the future. It would just take an eye-watering number of calculations to get there. To run the numbers, Frye Richardson imagined a forecasting factory housed inside a giant domed stadium with a map of the world painted on the walls. The North Pole would be at the top of the ceiling and sitting below 64,000 people. Each one was a human computer responsible for calculating the weather equations for the patch of sky directly above their head. Yeah, this sounds kind of ambitious. How did it work out for him? Well, for some reason, no one came forward with the funding for his human calculator stadium. So instead, he was left doing the numbers on his own. And the calculations to do a six hour forecast for a small test area took him six weeks. Six weeks, right. He hasn't really grasped the concept of a forecast. Quite. But today, of course, things are very different. So to find out how mon-volcasting has progressed, I went to visit a domed stadium of sorts inside new broadcasting house. It's the home of BBC Weather, where I met meteorologists and weather presenter Helen Willets. Right, we are standing above the quite famous BBC pit of journalists that you see on the BBC News in the weather presenting area. Now, you've been presenting the weather since what the mid-90s or so. How has that changed in those years? The forecasting has changed quite dramatically. Mid-90s, I trained as a meteorologist when we actually used the cube. I don't know if you remember the magnetic symbols. No. But when I was learning, I was just about. Oh, yes, I do. I did my weather presenting as part of my initial forecasting course with the Met Office. We actually used the cube, which rotated with the magnetic symbols. We used to draw the surface charts, all the observations that came in. We used to draw those up by hand. But obviously, you can imagine what has happened in those 25 years now. We've had huge advances in technology. And of course, now you've got computer models that can help you with the forecasting. We had computer forecasts, so I'm not that old. But only just. Most computers receive millions of pieces of observational data, temperature, in the atmosphere, the wind, the wind direction, the pressure. We use some of the most powerful computers in the world. They do billions and billions of calculations a second. So it's almost like you've got this gigantic computer bigger than a room in a... Like a sports hall. Like a sports hall, churning through these equations, running a sort of simulated version of the world. And you're feeding it in observations from the real world to make sure that they look alike. Exactly. So you've put everything in. You've got your very, very complex mathematical equations. Delicious mathematical equations. Absolutely, and they're repeated many, many times. And each time the forecast is set a few minutes further in time into the future, so it enables us to produce forecasts. A few hours ahead, a day or two ahead, and years and years ahead as well. So the accuracy has improved, even though it doesn't feel like it's sometimes? Yeah, so Helen told me there are two main things here. The computer power has vastly increased, we're able to crunch through fry-richsons' equations much faster and much more accurately. But also how far into the future those equations can look. And if you look at the overall trend here, forecasts are improving by a day every decade. Okay, but nowadays we can also gather tons more weather data since our observatories became airborne. It really wasn't until the arrival of polar orbiting satellites in the 90s and 2000s that we had a real leap, not just to useful two and three day forecasts, which meteorologists could do pretty well without the computers, but really to the four and five or six or even eight day forecasts today. And that sort of accuracy, so we can do a few days in advance, but further than that, what's the sort of drop off in accuracy as you go forward into the future? The European Center for Media and Rangel Weather Forecast, which is the organization that builds and operates the kind of world leading weather model, known at least in the US as the euro. They are trying to predict extreme events 14 days in advance by 2025. And at the moment, they can predict extreme events about eight days in advance. We saw that in New York really vividly with Hurricane Sandy seven years ago, where we had a pretty clear sense that this storm was coming a full eight days before. That is true, although we of course can't predict exactly where hurricanes will land. All know if it's definitely going to rain tomorrow. But if we gain a day, a decade in accuracy, surely we're going to get to the stage where we can predict the weather weeks in advance. Well, the biggest challenge that's going to be really hard to solve is that the weather is chaotic. The weather is an example of what mathematicians describe as a chaotic system. It doesn't mean it doesn't follow rules. It just means it's incredibly sensitive to small changes. And that makes it very hard to predict. As Professor of Mathematics, he was struck at his explains, chaos is often described as the butterfly effect. The butterfly effect is the apocryphal story of a butterfly that flapped its wings in Brazil and caused a tornado in Texas. The idea is that little things can have cascading effects that build up so rapidly that they can change the future in very dramatic ways. We always knew that big complicated systems like entire nations or societies could be chaotic. There's an ancient poem about a war that was lost because of one horse shoe nail that was missing. It goes for want of a nail, the shoe was lost, for want of the shoe, the horse was lost, and so on and so on. And pretty soon the rider can't ride into battle and then his sight loses that battle and the whole country loses the war. So we know that big complicated things like wars and nations can behave in these unpredictable ways. But the big surprise with chaos theory is that even much simpler systems can be chaotic. Just like the weather. The point here is that while the equations are correct because you're only estimating an answer, the tiny errors in the beginning of your forecast can end up sending you off in wildly different directions by the end. You can predict the weather a minute from now and you can certainly predict it even a few hours from now. So it's not completely higgledy-piggledy random. It is predictable on short enough time scales, but if you wait long enough say a month because of this exponential growth of uncertainty, in effect, prediction becomes impossible. All right, maths face. If it's impossible to forecast the weather very far in advance due to chaos, how can we predict what is going to happen to the climate in years to come? It's because you're talking about the difference between a large scale long-term trend like the climate and tiny fluctuations. My favourite explanation of this is that if you imagine looking out from a helicopter down on me walking my dog Molly through the park, I'm holding her lead. She's sniffing around in a grass. She's zigzagging all over the place. You don't need to be able to predict exactly where she's going to go next to still be able to see that my path is headed in a clear direction. Is Molly the weather in that scenario? Yes, and I'm the climate. And did you deliberately use this analysis shoehorn another reference to your dog? Yes. Now the most frequent contributors to the program apart from me and you? Yes. Look, the point here is that it's always going to be difficult to predict what's going to happen every day. So weather forecasts don't always get the answer right. So that is what I finished by asking presenter Helen Willitz. Do people get annoyed if the BBC forecast is wrong? Long time ago when I was at an event in South Wales the weather front was meant to clear and it was clear but we were left with quite thick low-level clouds but it meant the difference between feeling that lovely warm mace and shine and going to your outdoor event where you're meeting the local meteorologist to Cloudy skies when it feels quite chilling you need to actually have a coat on in May. I did get quite a lot of groans and moans that day. What's the forecast and it was fun? Well, you know these things happen but generally speaking I think people are very forgiving and they understand the vagaries of the weather and you know we don't go out to get it wrong. It's quite a tricky thing really isn't it? Everything that you're dealing with is in chance and uncertainty. It's like you're throwing loads of dice back here trying to work out what the forecast is and then after all of that process is done you've got to come up with one single answer. That's all anyone cares about. Tell me what the answer is. Absolutely and that's what we're here to do even in amongst all those dice that we're throwing we are more accurate now absolutely more accurate than when I started 25 years ago and you know hopefully that will continue into the future. So Dr. Fry when it comes to why it's so hard to predict the weather can we say case solved? Yes the weather is a chaotic system meaning that small errors snowball into big uncertainties and this means that the further we get into the future the less reliable the details become. Right now the accuracy of weather forecast is improving by a day a decade but best still pack that probably just in case. Of course Adam and the first this program is not your first foray into weather forecasting is it? Yes I've had a little look through Adam and the first documentary back catalog and I'll tell you what listeners there's some real gems in there one in particular caught my eye ground baking I was surprised it went a chapter frankly surprised it wasn't up for you know Emmys all the awards Adam Rutherford and Kate Humber stars in the 2000 when was it? I don't recall the year. 2000 and he doesn't recall the year documentary will it snow? Yes yes I feel like I deserve this not least because of the torture I put you through on roller coaster and the horror film not least because of that but also because the program itself was terrible. Tell me about when it snow. I feel like there's enough distance from it that I can do the thing that you're not really meant to do in TV or cinema which is slag off your own work. The year before in the winter there'd been a massive somewhat unpredictable dump of snow and Britain ground to an instant holes and any more than four snowflakes exactly exactly. So BBC 2 came to us me and Kate Humberland said we should do a quick turnaround program we'll record it really quickly in Glasgow where it's more likely to snow and we can do a sort of scientific analysis of of weather prediction the difference between weather and climate and my role in the program initially was meant to be sort of more sciencey more investigative what's the controversies about climate change and so it wasn't that program it was going around trying to find out whether it was going to snow or not and can you tell whether it's going to snow? The conclusion after an hour of groundbreaking TV was yes it will snow but we don't know where or when. I have yet to track down a copy of Will It's No One Night. I haven't watched it. I've tried quite hard to raise them all. If anyone manages to find it I noticed it hasn't got any ratings up on IMDv yet so you know open open to a high jack. Yeah but we ask listeners to rate curious cases please do please don't go and rate will it snow? There was one scene you know these programs like a lot of it was studio based and it's me and Kate talking to each other and she's fantastic presenter and I love it dearly but I had to go into a video a VT where you go out and you record something and then you drop it in the program later it was it's standing on what was what in my script said the largest grit mound in Europe but during the course of me standing on this and explaining how gritting worked. TV gold this we had a call from the producer to say actually they just done some research and it turned out it was the second largest grit mound in Europe and so there I was I'm standing on Europe's second largest grit mound. Freezing my asshole for this rubbish program. All right all right look look it's all in the past I'm over Willett snow I think and sometimes you do things that just don't quite work out. I had a listen to some of the recordings of your interview with meteorologist Helen Willett's bit of a there was a little bit of a sort of verbal fumble in that. A lot of verbal fumble. Well you had a bit of a sort of metaphorical mixup so you know something of a confused mixing ones metaphors. That's true we had to cut it out of the program. Yeah I got a bit confused between nailing your colors to the mask and pinning your hopes on something and what did you come up with? Pinning the tail on one donkey. I was trying to say I was trying to say how you got all these probabilities and you have to in the end honing on my answer. Yeah yeah I think we should all pin a tail on one donkey. That should be the phrase. You know what on the question of pinning your tail on one donkey though. The thing is is that with all of this probability with all of this like messyness this uncertainty, weather forecastes have to choose a single symbol right like if when you go on your weather apps or whatever you see like one symbol sunshine rainy cloud whatever. That's the one donkey. That's the one donkey right it makes perfect sense but the question is what symbol should they choose and there is a phenomenon known as wet bias which is this idea that meteorologists will often choose the wetter symbol right so even if there's a lower chance of rain than that they can be sure that it's going to rain they're leaned towards showing the rain symbol because people get much crosser with them when they're wrong saying it won't rain and it does then if they say that it will rain and it doesn't. So there is there's one person who went through and studied all of the forecasts that came out of different weather stations. I think there was one in Kansas I hope I'm remembering that correctly and they counted up the number of times that this forecaster said that it would absolutely definitely rain 100% chance of rain and found that it only actually rained 75% but they were deliberately playing to the psychology that it's worth to be caught out. Exactly than to go out with your broly and not need it. Wet bias. Wet bias and tails on donkeys. See all comes back. Nice nice. Now we've we've actually had a few questions over the years about weather so we did put in a couple of extra questions to our experts first was this one from David Jirk. I've always wondered about the old saying red sky at night shepherds delight red sky in the morning shepherds warning. Is there any actual scientific meteorologic basis to it and if so is it more or less applicable in different geographic regions? So when I went and met Helen Willetz in the BBC weather centre I asked her whether there is any truth in this old saying. First of all it's a question I really like to answer so thank you David. Actually this is an expression that goes back to the bible book of Matthew. When in evening you say it will be fair weather for the skies red? No we go but a lot of weather law actually has a scientific basis because it's involved from decades of just observing the weather so follows a pattern. Firstly David asked if it's more or less applicable in different geographic regions. The answer is it's most reliable when the weather systems come predominantly from the west so here in the UK so not further parts of the world necessarily not relating to weather either coming from the east but the sky at night red sky at night is often proven true because a red sky at night or red sunset means that fair weather is generally headed towards us because the colours we see in the sky are due to the rays of the sunshine being split into different colours as they pass through the atmosphere so as they travel they're dispersed by water vapor and all the particles that we have in our atmosphere so blue light has shorter wavelengths so it's scattered more easily and that's why we have a blue sky so it sunrise and sunset when the sun is low on the horizon it's coming through the thickest part of our atmosphere so a lot of the light is scattered and particularly so when you've got a greater concentration of dust and small particles that are trapped in the atmosphere and that often happens with high pressure so that's often a sign at night that we've got high pressure advancing in from the west and then in the morning sunrise in the east it's departing the other way so shepherd's warning allowing something wetter in windia to come our way okay so it's that way around the surface a red sky at night going to be a nice day tomorrow yeah red sky in the morning get your umbrella out shepherd's warning yeah that's brilliant did you ask the question about what landmints with potatoes on top is you know that didn't come up in the conversation I had with professional and extremely impressive meteorologists didn't come up no I would have gone with that quite early on in that and that's the difference between you and me I'm not challenging your interview technique I'm sure it's fine I just think that would have been a question I would ask I mean I'm not immune from asking slightly silly stuff because there was another slightly more unusual email that came in which I also put to Helen this one is from Ron van Blokland he says our family is sort of weather station which always works always there I mean that's quite that's quite a statement it really is given what we've just talked about isn't it I'll say but anyway my father recently passed out a tow which predicted coming frost goodness his tow had severe pain strokes if the temperature was going under zero I feel extremely tired if there will be a storm in two to three days time and our daughter once had a ski accident and broke her shoulder she had an operation and the scar predicts rain so shall we as a family start weather forecast station well I'm afraid I think that's more for medical doctor they need to be consulting for me I'm not sure I can help with my physics background really interesting points though raised yeah remember getting asked once in an interview actually about why cows lie down before it rains again it flawed me completely as this question it's just flawed me now I think it's a medical doctor you looking for I know when it's cold I'm prone to chill planes yeah but not when it's about to be cold yeah okay well thanks Ron yes Ron's question was so intriguing that I also asked my interviewee Andrew Blum exactly the same question here's his answer well I kind of side with the scientist on this but that said of course if the pressure is changing you know you can see it on the brawmider but you might also quite clearly see it in your bones my dog gets a bit gets a bit funky when the pressure is changing dramatically you know she she starts running around in strange ways and you know there'll be a storm coming and next week an episode on confirmation bias there was I had a moment I didn't express it but there was a moment when he said that that I had a bit of possibly British stroke American language interpretation because when he said my dog gets a bit funky I just assumed that the dog was really smelling bad what did he mean well I don't know I'm like around the place yeah funky it up I guess it's exactly but anyway if Andrew's got a funky dog though maybe she'd join Ron's family and create a you know multi-species weather station now Ron we want he's keeping data on this I think we need to approach this scientifically so what we need to do is get a ledger I want you to mark down the ledger what are we in the 19th century he probably has a computer if you're going to do it do it properly and that means doing it the old school way and then take a Robinson's tincture to improve your chill blades good day sir I want all right to be done with a quill wow we've gone back like 150 years in this episode it was all that talk of his dark materials and the Norwegian chap his name I've already forgotten vilhelm biurkness yes yes yes that's cool that one it did you like the chaos thing yeah I really did actually I don't really understand it to be honest can I tell you a cool chaos story there is a point between the sun the earth and the moon where the gravitational forces of those three almost perfectly balance each other out right so this point called the Lagrangian point and you can sit in that point quite comfortably and not really move anywhere in relation to those three kind of just you're gonna put along there but it's a chaotic point so if you just nudge off into one direction you'll go spinning off around the moon nodding to another direction you go spinning off and you go spinning off around the sun like my headphones just did and I just knocked headphones onto the floor but we're gonna just ignore that yes and the thing is is that if you are very very clever like rocket scientist clever you can use this kind of chaotic point to your advantage so there was a really beautiful example of this in the 1970s and 80s where NASA sent out a spaceship and for a few years its job was to just put the around the sun taking some images and then they decided they want to set it on another mission but hardly had any fuel left on board what they wanted to do was for it to fly through the tail of a comet that was coming through the sailor system in a few years time so what they did knowing that they couldn't just you know hair around the solar system with hardly any fuel if they were sitting in this point in this Lagrangian point and they waited did all calculations waited until the perfect moment and then just went boop with the rockets and then just nudged it onto a trajectory so it went off around the moon kind of flew around the moon a little bit and then at the perfect moment they just went boop and then it kind of flew off and perfectly intersected with this comet is it flew through the solar system? 12 blasts of its rocket I think in the end it took to perfectly line up. I love that it's just ballet isn't it because the forces are so there's no resistance up there and when you're in the Lagrangian point you're perfectly stationary. Lagrangian yep. I'm not going to take name corrections from you missies. I might not be right I'm just being an idiot but you can just give it the gentlest nudge. New Horizons did that a couple of years ago so that was the spaceship that flew past Pluto and they had a bit of extra gas in the tank after it had completed its mission and so spent about a year calculating how far they could change the angle with the remaining fuel in order to point it at something interesting and then they did choose the largest object that they could see in the in the potential cone the cone of possibilities the cone of possibilities which we talked about earlier today when we were doing the script which I just think is the best name ever yeah it sounds like something really philosophical can I be in the cone of possibilities I can make quite good grunge band and on that beautiful perfect radio segway introduce so we had our excellent dubstep is dubstep still a thing team tune remix and we now have I suppose an evolutionary antecedent of dubstep we have a drum and bass version sent in by Dan Axe who contacted us on twitter to say been binge listening to curious cases the last few nights contemplating making a beat out of the theme tune and yesterday this happened you On a previous episode where someone sent in some music Adam did what he turned inverted next week. Michelle says I can say some of it Hannah. It's just the best story. You know I'm into hip-hop. I've heard. Yeah and I did this in one of my books I did this comparison between the origin of sampling and music and the origin of sampling and genetics where so the concept of gene engineering, genetic engineering and part of that story was that the origin of the breakbeat comes from a two-bar drum solo in the B side of a 1968 seven-inch single by a band called The Winston's and the track itself was called Arman Father and the B side Arman brother. Actually when I'm saying this people don't know what B sides are anymore. I mean I think in general there's a lot of detail in the story that my brain is skipping over. I can see that but I'm going to keep going. Anyway what happened is that that single's out it was largely ignored. In the 1980s when after people had started sampling things it all became digitized and then in the East Coast in New York City 1987 they started releasing albums with just samples on them and one of the samples on the first album that did this which was called Ultimate Breaks and Beats. I'm going to keep going with this. I've committed now you're just going to have to run this on it. It was a track called The Arman Break. Now The Arman Break is the looped version of that drum solo where everything else cuts out in the original 1968 Winston single and I'm going to ask Michelle to play it now. She was unaware that we were going to do this so I'm going to have to ask her to find the drum break solo that became The Arman Break and it sounds like this. The Arman Break is the basis of all drum and bass ever recorded and in fact you know Futurama the cartoons by the same guys who did The Simpsons. The theme tune to that features The Arman Break as a tribute to it. On Amy Winehouse's album Back to Black it uses it as a live version so they got a drummer to actually redo it as a tribute to The Arman Break. To simplify this is this based on the World Home Screen but for music? Yeah a little bit I suppose so the the World Home Screen we talked about in earlier show The Frightful Scare I think it was. Yeah a little bit but that's just a sort of joke right that's just a little reference as a joke whereas The Arman Break is actually the basis of a whole music genre. The first time it was used we think was in Mantronix King of the Beat in 1988 and the second time was straight out of Compton there isn't a drum and bass track including Dan Axe's remix of our theme tune that doesn't include The Arman Break. I know you did it three hour electron. I didn't I didn't feel like I needed all of it but isn't it just weird that the whole music genre is based on based on two bars of a sample from the B side of a 1968 record. Yeah I mean I like that story now that you've given me the TLDR. Fifteen minutes. Did you just TLDR me? I just got TLDR that's it that's I don't that's the end of that for me. Michelle doesn't know what TLDR is it's for when you can't be bothered to read a really long boring essay or internet post and someone just the book goes TLDR someone copied some odd drummers music. Yeah too long did not read it's what it stands for. Right I don't know how much of that discussion is going to make it into the program but this is my only chance to include it so I like some of it. Thanks. Can't believe you TLDR me that's it. See you bye.
