Hello, Curios. Welcome to episode four, series A Million. And, less than we've lost count, how many series we've done. You said that so quickly. What did I? It was great. It was like, let's get into this. I just want to get onto the mind-bending stuff. I actually more want to get past this episode and onto the podcast extras to talk about last episode because this episode made my brain fall out. As people all here, now you may also be able to hear the sounds a bit strange today. And that is because we are currently sat in Adam Rutherford's garden a good two metres away, I should add, good two metres away. But there's a particular reason why we're sat in Adam Rutherford's garden which we will come to after this episode of a delightful half an hour of the most mind-bending stuff you may or may not be able to wrap your heads around. Enjoy. I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. A cheery question for today. How will all this end? Come on, surely it's not that bad. Not this. The universe. Because we've had a question in from brothers Raffi and Zay from Rome who wrote to us at CuriousCases at BBC.co.uk. They say, everyone knows how the universe started, but how is it all going to end? OK, let's just bear in mind that this is the type of question that we occasionally do and during that process my brain melts and leaks out of my ear. Occasionally? Yes, anytime we've touched physics, I've noticed. OK, fine. But I have actually done some revision this time. So before we get to the end of time as per Raffi and Zay's question, I figured out that we should start at the beginning because you can't get to the end from the beginning without starting at the actual beginning in order to get to the end. How's that brain melting game for you Adam? It's happening already. Can't breathe. In situations like this, I turn to cosmologists and all around the universe Guru Andrew Ponson. The big bang. Was it big? Was it a bang? Nobody really knows whether it was a bang. The name big bang was invented at a time when we thought maybe it really was just a kind of bang out of nothing. But these days there are rather more subtle ideas about what was going on and it might have been more of a process rather than an instantaneous bang. Right, when you say process, I think in human terms, which is stuff that happens over a course of time, how quick is the big bang's progressive time? It could have been absolutely tiny, tiny, tiny fractions of a second, one extreme. On the other hand, there is an idea floating around in theoretical physics circles called eternal inflation, which kind of stretches out the big bang into a process that's going on for an infinitely long period of time. So the answer to the question, how long did it take is somewhere between a tiny, tiny, tiny fraction of a second and infinitely long. You see it simple. I'm not okay with this. I don't really understand how you are okay with this. It's just a range of answers. Yes, but it's an infinite range. Can I just have one definitive answer? Are we at least happy with the idea that there is a time when there was nothing and then bang, there it is, everything? Well, I'll come on. At least give me that. Why don't you ask Andrew? I did. We don't know that the universe came absolutely from nothing. There is a possibility that it actually sits within a kind of broader, something that we would call the multiverse. But in any case, what we do know is around about the time that we call the big bang, something very fundamental shifted in the nature of whatever was there, and all of the different types of particles that we know and love today, so that would include the material that you and I made out of, and the material that stars and planets are made out of, but also light. All of that was manufactured and came into existence more or less simultaneously. Ah, but did it though. What if there was something before the big bang? See, that's my problem with this. One of many, admittedly, the word before requires time to exist. And if time begins at the big bang, then you can't say before the big bang because there is no time, so therefore there's no before, I think. Right? Isn't it? No, because you're constrained there by only how you've decided to define time as starting at the big bang, whereas I mean, you've got freedom to define it any way you like. Freedom to make stuff up is what you're doing. It's not making stuff up though, is it? Because you know what, for this, on my side, I asked Joe Dunclee. She's not just a professor of astrophysics, I should tell you. She's a professor of astrophysics and physics at Princeton University, and I asked her whether the big bang really was the beginning of everything. We don't know. Okay, so we think that this event happens about 14 billion years ago, where suddenly the space we now live in began to grow. And something caused it to grow. We don't know what it is yet. And it may have come from nothing. It may have come from something. We don't know if it's really the beginning of everything. It's just the beginning of really the universe we live in. And do you know how they worked out? I haven't got a clue. All right, okay. Imagine that I've got a balloon, and I draw loads of dots on the balloon to represent stars and galaxies. Now, if I blow that balloon up... Nice action. Yes, that's nice sound effects. If I blow that balloon up, those dots and stars are going to be moving away from one another. It's expanding. Now, that is the situation that we are in in the universe right now. But if you can imagine that going forwards, it means that you can take the state of the universe that we're in at the moment and rewind it going backwards. Here is Joe Duncley to explain. It's a little bit like a simple example of people driving in a car. You know, for car is driving away from you at 60 miles an hour. And it's 60 miles away from you. Then you know that it's set off from you an hour ago. That's the kind of some we might do at school, anyway. We do the same thing with galaxies, which is kind of awesome. You can just look at galaxies around us and say, how far away is it? How far is it going? And therefore, how long did it set off? But it's important to realise that we are not the middle of the universe, that anyone anywhere in space, if it was growing, would kind of perceive the same thing. It's just this effect that we see from space itself, expanding. So you say you can just work out how far they're going, as though it's a really simple thing. But I mean, if you get a telescope and you look out in this guy, it's not like you've got stars very obviously zooming away from us. That's certainly true. If you look at a galaxy, you can't just like go and look at it and then go and look at it again tomorrow and see, oh, it's moved away from me, I can work out how far it's going. That would be really cool. If you look at the light coming from something that's moving away from us, there's this neat effect that the wavelength of the light gets stretched a little bit longer. This is actually the thing called the Doppler effect and we hear it with sound as well. If something is sending out a sound and is moving away from us, we hear the pitch of it shift. Like a car going past, gang. Meeeeeew! And so we see this from the galaxy, the wavelength for the light gets longer. So if we think of the rainbow of light, red light has a longer wavelength than blue light typically. And so by looking at the light coming from the galaxy and comparing it to what we'd expect to see if it wasn't moving, we can then figure out how far it's going. And this is thing called red shift because again, it's like shifted towards the red part of light. Okay, can we just go back to you doing the Doppler shift demo because that nail was absolutely brilliant. Thank you. I'm all about the sound effects, so I'm going to enjoy that. So the point is that you look at galaxies and stars in the sky and you know what you expect them to look like, but sometimes they look redder than you expect. And if they're redder than you expect, it's because the wavelength, the light that's being kicked out from these celestial objects is being stretched as it travels further and further away from you. Okay, I get that and that is all great. But Joe said you need two things in the equation to rewind back to the beginning of time. The speed of the galaxies is one thing which you see with the red shift, but you also need to know how far away they are. Aha, well I'm glad you asked about that. Imagine a field filled with twinkling T-lights. If you had a photograph of that scene, it would be very easy to work out which lights were close to the camera and which were further away. Each T-light is identical. They have an intrinsic level of brightness, which makes the question of distance easy. If only you could know how intrinsically bright something was, you would know how far away it is. If it's dimmer, it's further away. If it's brighter, it's closer to you. So there's this big challenge is finding these objects that we call standard candles, which are objects that we can actually figure out the intrinsic brightness of. And so one of the things we use is these things called sephid variable stars. They're big pulsating stars. They're like growing and shrinking over time. And this pattern was worked out by this amazing astronomer, Henrietta Swan-Love at about a century ago, that the rate at which these stars pulsate directly relates to our intrinsically bright they are, how luminous they are. If you can actually then go and look at these big sephid stars in these distant galaxies, measure how fast they are pulsating, you can then convert that directly into knowing how intrinsically bright they are. You know that episode of Father Ted, where he's got a cow and he's trying to work out with the cow, is just small or far away. I mean, it's basically that, but with stars. It totally is, yeah, exactly. Right. So a crucial cosmological concept can be reduced to the same scenario as a confused priest and a bovine quadruped. Why not? Sure. Okay, so I do actually get this. And Henrietta Swan-Love at is a huge scientific hero, deeply undervalued in the history of science. She was one of a group of women known as the Harvard Computers. This is computers in the sense of people running through quite laborious calculations rather than an actual machine. Yes, that's right. So this story starts with the astrophysicist Edward Pickering at Harvard University, second half of the 19th century. And he assembled for reasons which are probably not that cool. A team of women to perform some of these calculations, these computations that laid the foundations for the future of astrophysics that we still rely on today. Just expand not cool for me. Yeah, yeah, not cool. Okay. The first thing is that they weren't really allowed to work on the telescopes. Right. Because that was a lady-like thing to do. And the second thing was that even though some of the women in the Harvard Computers were astronomy graduates, they weren't paid very well. In fact, they were paid the same as unskilled clerical workers. Okay, so Edward Pickering has got this room full of incredibly intelligent, supremely qualified women who he is using to underpay and do his grunt work for him. Yeah, that's great. And they're the ones who come up with this big discovery. That's basically, well, what you've described there is basically the history of science, possibly the history of society. But yes, in this specific example, that's pretty much correct. And they do these astonishing calculations. They're looking at hundreds of thousands of images of stars taken from these various observatories. And classifying them, they come up with a Harvard classification system, which we still use to this day. And they come up with loads of different basic techniques that are the foundations for science. And I just think that it's such a marvelous story. Some of their data goes on to contribute to Edwin Hubble. Someone whose name is much better known, not least because of the big wobbly space telescope up in the sky. But it was the work of Henrietta Swanlevert and Annie Jump Cannon. Annie Jump Cannon. And Annie Jump Cannon. That's an amazing name. Well, they all had amazing brilliant Victorian Edwardian names as well as being groundbreaking scientists. So there was Willemina Fleming, there was Antonio Mori and a win-lock Florence Cushman. Just names that even if they weren't some of the most groundbreaking scientists or this or any era should have their names remembered for sounding brilliant. That's all very Victorian, isn't it? And these were the women who worked out a way to link the brightness of a star in the sky to how far away it is. Now it turns out though that that's not the only way that you work out how far away things are because while the Stannec candle is a brilliant tool, it doesn't help you map the entire universe, which is a very tricky thing when you are stuck here on our pale blue dot. And so the way that cosmologists work out how far away things are is they use something called the cosmic distance ladder. Again, physicists with amazing names. But so Stannec candles are one of the tricks, one of the rungs on that ladder. But there are other rungs too for objects that are slightly closer towards us. And one of them for the first rung on that ladder as it were is something called parallax. And Joe Dunkley explained to me how you can do one of these at home. If you want to measure, for example, the length of your arm without actually bothering to measure it, you can hold out your finger at arm's length. Like a thumb with your thumb up. Yeah, thumb up or finger up is true. Yeah, you can use either. And you close one eye and you see where on the wall behind it appears to be. And then you close the other eye. Moves, jumps. Exactly. And that is even better. Bring your thumb closer to your face and do the same thing. Jump further. Exactly. Jump further. So the shorter your arm is or the closer your thumb is to your face, or the closer your thumb is to your face, the more it moves sideways. And then actually, if you can measure the distances between your two eyes, and you measure like this angle that your thumb has appeared to move, you can just use the simple trigonometry that we learn at school to figure out that long length of your arm. It's just a right angle triangle. So hang on. So the two eyes then is that two telescopes at different positions in the world? The early times that was done, yes, that was actually used to measure the distance to Venus to actually get the scale of the whole solar system, where you put telescopes different sides of Earth and you measured the transit of Venus. But having your two eyes be different side of the Earth only gets you so far. If you actually want to get out to the stars, then you make your two eyes be the Earth six months apart in the year. Yeah, as it orbits around the sun. Now I did that in the studio with my thumb in front of my eye, and that is very clever. It absolutely works. But it does make me think that we've got, well, one small cow's in a field to understand the standard candle. And secondly, we've got one thumb up with one eye close. This is how astronomy really works, isn't it? And cosmic ladders don't have to get that. Look, we are halfway through this program. And we're talking about distance and speed and acceleration and that sort of thing, which is all incredibly interesting. But the question from Rafi and Zahana was, when is this all going to end? Okay, A, patience. And B, it's only by understanding what's going on in the universe right now. How far away the stars and the galaxies are, how that distance is changing. Before you can rewind to the beginning, or press fast forward to the end. And have we done that yet? Yes. Okay, so we have various methods of measuring the expansion of the universe. And we track that back in time to give us an origin. The not necessarily very big, not necessarily very bang theory. That was not necessarily the beginning of everything. You're getting it. You know how far away the stars are in the sky, thanks to things like parallax and the standard candle. You know how fast they're moving, thanks to redshift. And that means that you know that the universe is expanding, which means that you can calculate backwards to the moment of the big bang. So it's 13.84 billion years ago I've read my notes. Correct. Now if you go back to that imaginary balloon, you've expanded it so far, what atom can possibly happen next? Love how condescending you are in this. Option one, stop blowing. Let go. Well, surprisingly atom, that is actually one of the options for the end of everything. We're in this interesting situation right now that if you'd asked that question 20 years ago, people always thought that the universe was slowing down. Because actually if you like sprinkle things that are massive throughout space, like stars and galaxies and stuff, you would expect that like the mass and the gravity of all the mass in the universe would actually start to kind of try and pull space back together. So there was this possibility that actually space would stop growing and would reverse and would start shrinking, and then we might have something called like a big crunch for in the future. Okay, now the balloon analogy isn't working for me anymore because if you let it go, it's not a crunch, it's just, it's a wheezy fart. You can't say wheezy fart on radio for. To be honest, I got little else to contribute at this point. Not true, but okay, I accept that the balloon analogy does fall down somewhat. But the idea of the big crunch is that the universe expands out, it slows down and then contracts down to a single point. Which is not ideal. Just waiting to leave here some of the other options here atom. But the big question, you know, when I was studying theoretical physics at uni, this was the big question, what is happening to the rate of expansion of the universe? Is it slowing down? Is it staying steady? And then, well, I'll let Joe pick up the story. This really interesting thing happened in the last 20 years, which is by measuring how these galaxies are moving away from us. Astronomers figured out that this expansion of space is not slowing down at all. It's actually speeding up. And it's really weird. So, you know, we can speculate. We can say I think the universe is going to grow faster and faster and what could we imagine observing from he or her billions of years or more in the future. Well, that, I guess, that was my question really. Because I mean, it's sort of imagining driving in a car and the car continues to accelerate and continues to accelerate. I mean, that's not going to end well, right? I mean, you said surely at some point the car's just going to explode. Is that a potential future for our universe? Well, we're not quite sure. There is a single, the big rip, which would be a case where things would accelerate so fast that like this could have not ideal impacts on this nature of space time itself. This is not the first thing that I don't understand about this programme, but this is, how could this possibly work? How could the expansion of the universe actually be getting faster? I'm kind of with you on this one, actually. It doesn't make a lot of good, intuitive sense, but it doesn't make good, intuitive sense to physicists either, his joke. It's one of the biggest conundrums today in astronomy and cosmology. It's like, why is space speeding up? We have this sort of catch all thing that we introduce to say, it's okay, which is called dark energy, which may just be the energy of empty space itself. So if you just don't have anything visible in space, it's possible that space has its own energy. You physicist, but I was saying. Well, you know it's Einstein's fault. He put it in at the beginning. When he actually first came up with the theory of general relativity, which said, yeah, space responds to mass and mass responds to a deformed space, he had this thing called the cosmological constant, which did say, you know, even in the absence of apparent mass, that space itself has this energy of its own. So he did actually put it in, and then it got taken out for a number of years, roughly until this more recent measurement was made. So now this one was to put it back in again, but we're not really sure what is. It's in the equations. It's, again, we say, yeah, it's the energy of empty space, but do we really understand that? No, we don't. Now I think I heard you being exasperated by impossible made-up physics system. No, not at all. It's just that we just don't totally know the answer yet. And dark energy is totally theoretical at this point to explain the very real observations. Yeah, theoretical or in layperson's terms completely made up. Okay, so you know what? You don't own the end of the universe. I asked Andrew Ponson for my very own brand of the theoretical answer to facing the final curtain. The reality seems to be that things are being pushed apart faster and faster. So what does that mean for the end? If you make the maximally boring assumption, it will be that everything just continues like that. So stuff gets yanked apart faster and faster over time by this mysterious force, but nothing else much happens. We sometimes call it the heat death. It's sort of slowly grind to a halt. So that's one possibility, but there are many others. So I think everyone could do it a bit of boring these days. What's the time scale for the universal heat death? Oh, and the time scale is incredibly long. It's hard to put an exact time scale on it because, well, it's just a sort of slow process. I mean, you're talking about probably at least a thousand times the current age of the universe before it really becomes a problem. Okay, so no need to panic. Now, so we've had the big crunch, the big freeze, any other big endings to time and space. Oh, there are so many other possibilities. I mean, I think one of my favourite is something called vacuum decay. And it's the idea that the laws of physics might not be the same everywhere. It's actually something that is normally invoked in this sort of multiverse picture where maybe you have one universe over here with laws like ours, but another universe somewhere else which has completely different physical laws. And if that's the case, if it's actually possible to have different laws of physics in one part of space from another, then unfortunately, there's also a chance that the laws of physics in our universe will spontaneously change. And that's something called vacuum decay. And if that happens, it's absolutely catastrophic because obviously if the laws of physics change overnight, then everything just sort of ceases to exist. There's no way that you can continue to operate. And you'd get no warning either. The way this would actually happen would be a sort of a little bubble would form somewhere in our universe and it would expand out at the speed of light, so you wouldn't be able to see it coming and everything within it would have different laws of physics. But it's not likely to happen any time soon. Stop. I have had enough of this, bubble universes, the big freeze. You and that bunch of physicists, you really, I mean, this is making stuff up. I don't think this is science. Give me data or give me death. Universal heat debt. You're just making stuff up. This is pub conversations, right? These are unanswerable questions that no one knows the answer to. Well, in which case, you're probably not going to like the next bit. No, no. Hey, did you ask Andrew about the Boltzmann brain paradox like I asked you to. Yes, I did. Ah, yeah, trust Hannah to come up with it. That is the most philosophical point you could have asked about. And in fact, it's sort of a killi's heel in cosmology right now. Because if you ask what seems like a fairly reasonable question, which is where in space and time are typical conscious people located? So it's a sort of question about where does life arise? Where could consciousness arise? And you make a stab at answering, obviously it's a very difficult question to answer, but you make a stab at answering that. You get completely nonsensical answers. And one of the nonsensical answers you get is actually in the far future of the universe. There's so much of it, there's so much space, there's so much time still to come. That there'll be plenty of time for just random events to take place. And randomly a brain just appears out of nothing. That this is due to something called quantum mechanics and the effect in quantum mechanics that anything can appear out of nothing and then disappear again. Obviously it's incredibly rare for a brain to appear out of nothing and disappear. We'd notice if these things get popping up around us. But there is so much time in the future that occasionally one of these things will pop into existence and then disappear. And because there is so much of that time available, it's possible that the Boltzmann brains, that's what they're called, outnumber the real biological brains. And it gets worse, it gets worse. Because then you say, well, I'm probably typical. I mean, I should probably be a sort of typical person in the history of the whole cosmos. Therefore, I should expect myself to be one of those brains. And the fact that I think I'm talking to you about cosmology now, I think I have a day-to-day life. It's probably just the result of random fluctuations that led to the neurons firing in a particular way to give me the illusion of a normal life. You can see why nobody takes this therapy seriously. But it's kind of worrying for cosmology because we don't really know what the way out of that is. We can see it's nonsensical, but we don't really know exactly what is wrong with the arguments that lead to that conclusion. We get that not everyone is taking this seriously, and it's more like a pub conversation. It doesn't feel like it has a natural place in science as I understand it, though. How is it progressing the narrative of understanding the universe? Please, one idea, though, isn't it? I mean, if you really think about it scientifically, you can't tell the difference between your brain, you right there, Adam Rutherford sitting there with all of your history and everything that you know, and assimilated Boltzmann brain that just popped into existence with the belief, the feeling of all of that history. You cannot tell the difference between reality and non-reality, and that's fun. I, God, I wish the universe were dating quite soon based on this conversation. I just don't understand why that's helping us, because, and maybe this is the difference between our subjects. In that, if I started speculating about the origins of humankind, to a similar degree as the Boltzmann brain paradox, then we'd be talking about spirits and pixies and origin myths and Norse gods and cosmic eggs and... Cosmic eggs, though? Oh, yeah. That's the whole, how the Big Bang story started. I think that's the point, right? You just don't know where this stuff's going to end up, because there are lots of occasions where scientists have imagined something, either in an equation or philosophically, like special relativity, for example, which in the end ends up holding true and being verifiable by experiment. You just don't know where you're going. I mean, I did ask Andrew if he was planning to introduce any actual evidence into this process of understanding the structure of the early universe. And he told me what types of things they should be looking for. There are multiple different ways that you might go looking for evidence, but probably one of the best things you can do is go after gravitational waves from the early universe. But you can't use the detectors here on Earth. You need to think bigger than that, because they would be on massive scales. So one thing you can do is actually look at the light in the cosmic microwave background and look for tell-tale signs that that's been affected. And if you have any kind of extreme processes going on, that can generate gravitational waves. And creating entire new universes is nothing if not extreme. And I know I've been fixated on looking for actual observational evidence, but it turns out that there are other ways that you can study the structure of the universe. You don't do it in a way that would actually change the laws of physics in the actual universe. Of course, you do it by using what we call a simulator, a quantum simulator. And this is based on quantum technologies that have been built over the last few years. But you can basically create systems in the lab that are analogs, if you like, for the actual properties of space and time. And then study how things like that came to K take place in those systems. So, Doctor Fry, when it comes to how the universe will end, can we say K solved? No, Doctor Rutherford, we can't. But we've got an idea of how it began. But that might not be right. We know that it's expanding, but we don't know why it's accelerating. It might rip apart or deflate like a balloon. Or it might just run out of steam. But none of this will happen for billions of years. So, no need to panic just yet. Exactly. Okay, there you go, done. We never ever have to cover the topic of the Big Bang, the Big Crunch, the Big Rip, the Big Made Up Physics. We never have to do that ever again. That door is now closed. Thank you very much. You think we've answered everyone's questions on it, do you? I think not only have we answered all the questions that listeners might have, I think physicists need to stop now, because there isn't really nothing more to say on the matter. Is that? Is there? The very least, it's a very long way off into the future, so it's probably not worth worrying about. Yeah. I'm really unconcerned with this. I'm more concerned with stuffing my brain back into my head. We will come to that in a minute, because I think there's a couple of things we have to do. To say housekeeping, we're in my garden, so forgive us if you can hear what my family, having a lunch, airplanes going over, people next door. There was some hammering and some drilling going on, a couple of doors down a minute ago. Yeah, there's that. And also, my new puppy, Jesse, is asleep currently behind Hannah, but I can't guarantee that that situation will continue, especially as she keeps poking in. I don't know if you call it poking, whereas tickling. How's Jesse doing? How's he settling in? He's very, very hot today. He's a wippit. He's 10 weeks old, as we record this. Like me, he doesn't deal with the heat very well, and wants to just lie, and not do anything at all. How is his training going? The training is good. I can get him to leave stuff very well for eight seconds. Okay, well that's quite good. Is the idea that you build that up? We are having some training lessons from an amazing dog trainer over Skype, and she wants us to get it to a minute. And yesterday I did this. I tried to do this with Jesse, and what I claimed was a minute, and my wife was timing it. Georgia pointed out, was 12 seconds. So a little way to go. But, you know, Jesse's only a part. Molly is, how old is Molly now? Eight. And pretty well trained? No. She wanted me to go puppy training when she was a baby, and she failed. She failed the game. It's not an exam, is it? No, but the thing is, I think the whole experience was quite traumatic for everyone involved. So the puppy trainer, I had this attitude, there was one point where I was sat there tickly Molly behind the ears. No, she's a puppy, she's absolutely gorgeous, because she wanted a tickler. And the trainer was like, why are you rewarding your dog? They haven't done anything to deserve me. It's funny. But also, I just think that me and the dog trainer weren't really on the same wavelength, because there was one way she was a part-time dog trainer for the rest of her life. She was a butcher. So I asked her if her dog was really fit. It stands. It's good. It's just like, no, not really. Right. At that point, I knew it wasn't going to go well. Not really getting anything from this. So we just decided to have an incredibly unruly dog. She's not that bad. No, she doesn't still feed, and that's the most important thing. That's because you mostly feed a prosciutto ham. We've been through this several times. It doesn't still feed, though. It's a fair point. Anyway, we weren't here to talk about dog training. That'll be another episode to send us a question about dog training. And because we both got dogs. Or perceptions of time. Can you time 12 seconds in your head? Either we'll do. We could do a question on that, because that's called inter-reception, and it's a really good thing. Anyway, let's just reflect on our conclusive never needs to be repeated conversations about the beginning and the ends of time. I'm surprised I thought you would have loved this stuff. Boltzmann Brains. I mean, that is so up your street. Isn't it? Surely. Just a bit of drilling in the back. The drilling really is the answer to that question in many ways. I feel like it's good for pump conversations, and that is what Andrew said. But it does fry my noodle because I don't think it's science. What? Because it's not very fireball and testable. As that drilling working out for you, it's finished right genuinely, and semi-seriously. I do have an issue with some aspects of the most attractive bits of science. The ones that we talk about a lot. And the ones that we see on TV a lot with our friends like Brian and Jim Alkalili. Because actually some of the concepts which are attractive are so close to being philosophy and not science. Like string theory. I don't really understand string theory. But I'm pretty sure it's not science. Yeah, but I also think that the only reason why they feel like they're not science on the surface is because you're trying to describe them. You're trying to talk about them using words. Whereas if you start, if we were having these conversations in equations, then actually it would feel a lot more like science. So for example, you know the twin paradox. That's another great example of, so the idea is that you have two twins that are born on Earth. One goes off on a spaceship that travels close to the speed of light, accelerates away from Earth, accelerates back to Earth. And then when it returns, the two twins are no longer the same age. One has a different rate than the other. It's general relativity. And that kind of stuff, you know, in the early days of general relativity, I mean, it's similar, right? It's like pure conversation. And they have tested that successfully, you know, haven't they? They have, yeah. Even with twins. Did they do a twin? Yeah, they did, because I think the first time it was tested was using atomic clocks or cesium clocks, and one spun around on the, I'm making this up and readers were right into correct me, on the International Space Station, and it was synced to one on the Earth. And when they brought it back, it was out by, you know, 0.0 femtoseconds. But it did demonstrate it was right. I think that there are two identical twins, astronauts, whose names I have temporarily forgotten. But we wouldn't be able to hear it over that truck that just pulled up anyway. That's a bin lorry at the back of the house. Thanks, thanks guys. Kelly, Jim Kelly and the other Kelly. And it's one of them went up on the ISS for several months, and the other came back and low and behold. One was older than the other. Well, yes, probably. Something like that. Anyway, you're right, you're right. It's speculation born of maths initially, and then we test it. Sometimes you just find really beautiful maths and then goes on to be true physics in these public conversations, though. I mean, I'm thinking of a, remember Feynman, he got obsessed with wise spaghetti, breaks into three bits. When you break spaghetti in half, a third bit shoots out. And you know the reason why a call to mind being in your house? I think I, this is a slightly passive aggressive public shaming that is about to happen, isn't it? In a previous pandemic times when I came over to Adam and other of his house, he kicked dinner for me and his family. It was very lovely dinner. Everything was absolutely delicious. But while I was watching him prepare the meal, he took a big handful of spaghetti, a boiling pan of water, and he broke the entire bundle of spaghetti in half before she'd having it into the bag. I can't believe you're doing this. Honestly, thought was, I was going, I had respect for you before I had done. The worst thing about it was that my wife ganged up on me as well. She took your side in this matter. I do it because I'm going to have to cut the spaghetti and my littlest plate anyway. It's your decision. You're welcome to do that on your own plate on your own terms. Oh no, this is going to be like the scone thing again, isn't it? So, vote one for broken spaghetti in the pan. No one is going to vote for broken spaghetti. I bet, I bet people will. And the reason I bet this is because I have a lot of faith in the listeners. And the reason I think that is because the feedback we've had from the last episode on wasps in which you displayed your hatred and contempt for these wonderful beings. And I sang their praises and gave tons of evidence for it. We've had hundreds of thousands of emails. You were not hundreds of thousands. About ten. She's not bad. And almost all of them are on my side saying wasps are awesome. And I'm going to go through a few of them or a couple of them because some of them are really interesting things. But I think that the listeners are on my side. Wasps are awesome. No, I think that that is a classic example by a sample. But there was one thing in those emails that I did think was interesting. Because we had an email come in from Dyer and Simmy, age 12 and 8, who told us about a trick that they granddad uses to make sure that they have wasp free picnics. And this is the reason why we are in Adam and mother's garden. Which is that they take a brown paper bag like this one. Blow it up. So that it's almost balloon shaped. Yeah. Tie not in it. And it's brown. I see. So that it sort of looks like a wasps nest. And then apparently other wasps get scared and don't come nearby. Now I have noticed that you've got a few wasps. Oh, there's one over there. Go up to it with the bag. You know what, I'm not going to do that. Just leave my loans. They're fine. They're not bothering you. You're going to leave that there and see if we get full. This is the worst sign of the experiment of all time. Because basically if no wasps attack you, you're going to conclude that this works. Should we go with that? Yeah, I think so. I think so. So that's a point. Another point to me before we get to my Curio of the Week, which I'm unilaterally imposing upon us this week. So deal with that. Do you remember I mentioned the Alcon Blue, which is a butterfly. It has a specific life cycle which involves it cuckoing into an ants nest. And I didn't have many of the details because I just remembered it when we were recording. Well, Jane and Liston from St Andrews wrote in with a long detailed excellent email pointing out some of the aspects of the Blue's life. Because there is a wasp connection. This is just one of those amazing examples of how nature is absolutely metal, doesn't it? It's just really, really hardcore. There is a wasp species which predates upon the Alcon Blue lava in the ants nest. So you got three. Wait, sorry, say that sentence again. So when we talked about the parasitoid wasps, which lay their eggs inside the grub of an insect and then they burst out like the film alien. And we all thought that was somewhere between metal and grotesque. I know which end of the spectrum I'm on. I'm definitely on the hardcore end. And I was giving you that story about the Alcon Blue and the ants. Well, it turns out there is a wasp which does exactly this to the caterpillars of the Alcon Blue in the ants nest. There's a chain. What? No way. Okay, okay, wait, wait, wait. You've got this evil caterpillar spitting out honeydew, tricking ants into drag and into its nest, believing it's one of its own. And then when it becomes its butterfly, it scales all over the place as the ants try and grab onto it. But inside that caterpillar, a wasp lays its own eggs. And then before the butterfly has a chance to burst out giving hell a surprise to the ants. Instead, these ants who think that they've adopted one of their own see wasp larva emerging from the carcass of what they believe to be their brother. Yeah, at which point in the ants just go, oh mate, I'm out. This is ridiculous. So who's getting curial the week then? Is that the caterpillar, the ant, or the wasp? Or Jane who sent that in? No, it's none of those and let's find out why. Rather for the price, curial of the week. Okay, so as I said, I'm imposing you lateral curial of the week. You can have this one. It just means that I get my own one later. Fine, fine. You've already dismised spaghetti making techniques. I'm claiming this one. This one comes from someone whose name I'm not going to mention to the end for a specific reason. And it goes, dear Jen and Drs. Rutherford and Fry, Dr. Fry with respect, you are completely wrong about wasps. Disagree, carry on. Dr. Rutherford with respect, you are completely right about wasps. They go on to say wasps are amazingly, awesomely amazing. Correct. They're almost as amazing as spiders. They're so amazing I've got a tattoo of a pepsis-grosa aka tarantula hawk on my upper thigh. As a 45th birthday present to myself. And it's picture of it here. Tarantula hawk, what's that? What do you know? That's awesome. I mean not the tattoo that insides. And it's referring to the picture of the tarantula hawk rather than the tattoo. No, the tattoo is very pretty. You've got some leaves, some green in the background, and then the most hideous bug I've ever seen. But painted very beautifully with these nicely shaded red wings. That I'm cool with. That hideous beast. Absolutely hard-nosed. That is revolting. I just think it's... So we've got a picture of it sitting in someone's hand. It's bigger than the palm of their hand. And the bum, what's that bit called? Abdomen. Okay, that is about the size of an adult human thumb. Where do these things live? I don't actually know. Our curio says they don't get them in Minnesota, which is where they're writing from. I'm just looking up. Oh, do you know where they're indigenous to? Tell me. Greenage. That's a hana lives. It's like the size of a drone and it's horrendous. But okay, for a good tattoo, they can have a curio of the wet badge. Right, and the curio of the week, therefore goes to Lane Waza. Oh, yeah. And... You're really proud of yourself. I am. And there's a reason for this, because in brackets after this her name, it says extra-respect if you can pronounce my last name correctly, and I think I did. And the reason I think I did is because Waza 1 is a very, very famous Neanderthal skeleton. Oh. Yes. And I got super excited when I read that. And I've got a picture of it right here. So it's one of the most important Neanderthal ancestors and it comes from Romania, from a place called Peszeracu o Azu, which means the cave with bones in it. Oh, that's cool. I know. So I don't know whether our curio is from Romania. I'm going to go back and tell us whether you've got Romania and ancestry in there. So hang on, wait, is the skull named after the place? Yeah, they always do that. Okay. So the cave is called Oazza or cave of bones. There's loads of them like Adapueca and Apidema. And that's what the name of the location is. And so we just name the bones after that place. So for example, you know the Denisovans, that we've talked about before. So this new species of humans that was discovered and we've talked about a lot of things. Just going in 2010 and it's from a cave called Denisovar. Sounds cool, yes? The reason it's called Denisovar is because in the 19th century there was a hermit called Denis who lived there. And that is absolutely true. And so we've got a whole species of humans named after Denis, the 19th century Russian Eromite. Is what he was. Isn't that ridiculous? I enjoy that a lot. Yeah. Couldn't we talk about species soon? Oh, wait. Yes, I'm super excited about the next episode. The next episode of that is, you know, one for next week. But in the meantime, if you have any questions, please send them into curiouscases at bbc.co.uk Also just send us an emails if you want to berate Adam for his horrendous cooking techniques. Until next week.
