Welcome to episode five of the QS cases of Rutherford and Fry, the lost producer. Yes indeed. So this is a program that we made that was sent in by our producer. As it turns out, our producer just, I think that she just didn't want to make a program and got lost in the corridor and left it all to us. Yes. We did have the honor, the privilege of actually being producers and various elements of these show. And doing the experiments on her rather than having them done to us. Yes. So we have to apologise in advance because some of the sound recording, particularly by me, is a bit shaking. It turns out producers know exactly what they're doing. And that's the specialist expert job. I know. I know. Rather than us just fooling around in front of the microphones for hours on end. Our job is actually, as it looks though, let's do the informational bits. Send us your QS cases to curiouscases at BBC.co.uk. Every day, silence mysteries, things you've always wondered about. I don't know why I'm putting that voice on, doesn't it? I like that voice. That's your really serious BBC 4 presenter voice. It's the one I put on when I try and pretend to be clever than I am. It's pretty clever already. Anyway, we've got a special treat because this is the end of the series. I don't know if a treat is the right word to describe it. I'm quite anxious about this. What is it? A blooper's real. Yes. It turns out, dear podcast listeners. That the process of making this programme is somewhat littered with mistakes. Yes, it's not optimised for efficiency. And Michelle, our brilliant producer. Who's the only professional person of this tree? It holds the whole thing together, basically. But she has collected some of the bloopers from the last few series and as a special treat, if you listen to the end, you'll hear them after our lawyers have cleared them. We haven't heard them yet. And I'm generally quite nervous. A mysterious one today because we have had a letter in from Anonymous from W1A London. Interesting. It says, dear doctors, rather than fry, I'm forever getting lost. Is there something wrong with my brain and how can I improve my sense of direction? Then they go on to say, I work in a large public broadcasting organisation. And it doesn't matter whether I'm going to the studio or the canteen. I'll hold on a minute here. This is all beginning to sound a bit familiar. If I press this button here, I can speak to our producer, Michelle. Michelle, did you write this question? Might have done. Michelle, have you written in to ask your own presenters to cure your inability to find the studio? Yes. All right, then, challenge accepted. After all, she's put us through. Remember, she forced me to faint. Made me have singing lessons. And she made me get waxed. Have you still got that extra fairy patch on your back? Oh, man, it's like the Wolverine. Well, okay, I think that Adam and I can definitely testify that Michelle is atrocious at finding her way around. So I think that we need to subject her to some rigorous testing. Indeed. And I know just the guy, I think it's time, Hannah, that we took back control. Right, this is pretty exciting for me because not only are we in the lab of Dr Hugo Spears here at University College London, but I'm being the producer. And I'm actually holding the microphones because we're doing the experiment on our normal producer, Michelle, who is looking really, really nervous. Can I introduce Hugo Spears? Hello. And what are you going to do to Michelle today? Michelle is going to take part in our experiment, which taps into spatial navigation skills. You're excited about this, Michelle. Very nervous about everything that's going to happen now. It's so exciting to me. Okay, so Hugo, explain how it works. So what you've got in front of you is a tablet device that's got our video game Seahure quest on it. And in this game she's going to play a boat. You can see it's giving you some instructions. Okay, it says find the flare and shoot it back. Right, to play. So this boat is going around the corner. I'm trying not to make it crash. Okay, I'll crash into the ice. You actually go backwards now. Now, dear listeners, I won't put you through the entire Tordry affair with crashes and screams and general disasters, but this is how it all ended. Oh gosh, I've got to shoot a flare back to where I've come from. And I have no idea where I've just been. But you've got three options there. Right, I think it might be C to the right, possibly. Oh no, it's in the ocean. Not quite as painful an experiment as I'd hoped for. I've got to be honest. No, it was pretty excruciating to watch though. I'm afraid let's we'll come back to the results in just a minute and see how she compares to the other 2.4 million people who've played that game and done this experiment. Spoiler alert, she didn't do brilliantly. Okay, my turn now. I are psychologist Katherine Love Day from the University of Westminster. To try and find out where Michelle is going wrong. Well, I guess the first thing I'd be wanting to know is under what conditions does she get lost. So is it finding a place for the first time or finding her way back from somewhere? Or is it actually learning and remembering a route that you use on a regular basis? I suspect it may be all of the other show. I definitely the first two. So it's finding somewhere for the first time, nightmare. Finding my way back from somewhere, also nightmare. How are you with the car with losing the car? I remember once I lost a car in a field and it literally took me about three hours to find it. It was a big field. I can learn a route though. I'm okay at the last one. Okay. So once it's in your memory, you're okay. Yeah. And what happens then if there would be a road closed or something changed on that route? Would that throw you again? Well, the thing is I will try to skirt around it, but then I'll often just get someone. I won't know whether I should be going right or left because I've just lost my whole sense of direction. Okay. So our questioner who is actually our producer, Michelle, today also asked, is there something wrong with my brain? Neuroscientist Hugo Spears, well, he's a man who knows his way around our skulls. So we know there are certain bits of the brain that provide something like a map. There's bits of the brain that provide a compass. And there are other bits that provide a kind of autopilot, you know, tell you which way to turn. So within a bit of the brain called the hippocampus, there are cells called play cells and they do what the name says. They activate whenever you enter a particular place. So if you take your bedroom, for example, there'll be a unique combination of play cells to represent the bit by your bed and other set of cells by the door to the bedroom. Everywhere in fact you ever go, each space will have this unique combination of play cells. So it is like a sort of internal map, but that must be learned. That's not inherent, is it? Well, from the moment you're born, these things start to come online. As soon as animals start to move, they start to form these play cells. Just before they start to build that map, another system in the brain kicks in, and that's the kind of compass-like cells. These are known to scientists as head direction cells. When I get out of my chair at my desk, certain set of cells will turn on. He turned to face, say, north. A different set of cells will come on. Now these cells don't care about north in a sort of magnetic sense. They care about what you think of as a kind of north. But they track that as like a compass inside your head. Maybe Michelle doesn't have that compass. Honour me. Michelle. Hi. Could you point to the direction north, please? Over there? Oh my gosh. Michelle, you can see the VT Tower out of the window. Okay, well, the human brain is pretty amazing, most of them anyway. But when it comes to navigating, we are not as amazing as other animals. During the summer months, 1.7 million blue will debase. Migrate hundreds of miles from Tanzania to Kenya, to search for better pastures. Up to 1 billion monarch butterflies travel from across North America to home in on around a dozen mountain tops just outside of Mexico City. It's an epic round trip which takes four generations to complete. But my absolute favorite migrating animal is the Dung Beetle. Why am I not surprised? So at night, Dung Beetles use the bright strip of the Milky Way to find their way home. So what Dung Beetles do? The males make giant balls of Dung. And they give it to their girlfriends as presents for them to lay their eggs in. And they say romance is dead, huh? Quite. And just before they wheel the Dung Ball back, they stand on top of it and do a little dance on the top. And it turns out that during this jig, they're actually memorizing the stars as landmarks in order that they can use it as a map for the way home. That is amazing. How on earth do we know that? Well, I am very glad you asked that, Dr. Fry. So the researchers tested the Dung Beetles by making tiny cardboard hats that block their view of the sky. And the beetles with hats on took six times longer to get home because they couldn't see the Milky Way. Science. That is science. It's impressive science. Thing is, Michelle doesn't actually wear a hat, so no excuse. Exactly right. So back at Hugo Spears' lab, Michelle was about to get a results for C-Hero Quest. So you've been gathering data from all around the world. Yes. How do I compare to other people? What we can see here in this graph is we're plotting on the Y-axis, the probability of success. And along the bottom X-axis, we can see age and years. So you were down here on the graph. So you can see that's a bit further down. So you used to probably somewhere below the average for that particular age group. So Hugo, is it that some people are just naturally good at navigation and others, such as producer Michelle, are just a little bit rubbish? It seems a bit like heights, you know, some people are very tall, some people are shorter. There is just natural variation in how good people are at navigating. Probably there is a strong component of genetics. Some people are just given the right genes. Okay, and if we want to break it down into different between gender? Yes, it's been an interesting one for many years. People have looked at that. Some tasks in navigation. Men do better than women. On other tasks, women do better than men. Tests that rely on trying to imagine something moving in your head in 3D. Men tend to find that a bit easier. Women tend to find a memorise in the layout of a picture, let's say, a bit easier than men. But another big factor we're beginning to look into is where you're born on the planet Earth. And we're starting to see differences between countries around the world. How does it distribute across the world? You're saying some countries are better at navigating than others? So at the top of the sort of lead table, we're finding the Nordic countries. So Finland, Sweden, Denmark, Norway tend to have the best navigators. Well, that is fascinating and a little bit baffling. Have you got any ideas as to why that might be? Well, it's probably something to do with lifestyle or something in the makeup of these countries, but that's for future research. We only just discovered this. Really? So people from Scandinavia have the best sense of direction? Why is that? Well, they don't really know yet. This is very early data. And also people from Madagascar seem to do particularly well. So not an obvious pattern. Okay, but if you do not have the homies girls of a savvy Scandinavian, here is Katherine Love Day with some navigating tips. So I guess my first tip is to try and reduce the level of anxiety. Because if you get very anxious, then that actually stops you being able to use your brain properly. Anyway, the second thing is sometimes trying to hold too much in mind at once can be a problem. Because if you're trying to hold a set of directions in your mind, that can be quite a big cognitive load. Michelle, is it worse if you're a bit late or if you're running to a studio and you've got stuff in your mind already? Yeah, definitely. If, say for example, you know, the script's been written a bit late. No, that, you know, some of the presenters are like, never happens. It's been running a little bit over time. Probably makes it worse. I think I am often thinking about other things, like, you know, many of the universe. Definitely deep thoughts. Okay. Well, the only thing is that I would say that can be helpful when it comes to retracing your steps. So although it may not be helpful when you're concentrating and trying to find a direction for the first time, if you're then going back and trying to look for the car, actually being able to go back through what you were thinking can provide really excellent cues. And then it really is about trying to be as engaged with the process as possible. So if you're outside, then you can usually locate a tall landmark and trying to kind of keep that insight all the time and make a really conscious effort to think, where is that in relation to where I am now? So that's certainly something that I try and do. If I have to find my way back from somewhere on the way through sort of the forward journey, if you like, at any time I come to a junction that I'm slightly worried I might not remember, I stop, turn around and make a mental note of what it looks like from the opposite direction. Well, it's funny, should say that because it's something that very few people do, but turning and looking behind us, those people that seem to do that automatically are much better. So Dr. Fry, when it comes to the lost producer, can we say, case salt? Well, Michelle hasn't found her way back from the lab yet, so we are on her own here. Okay, we do know that there are particular brain cells that are home to help us navigate. And that taking the time to make mental notes can help those who get lost easily. But some people do genuinely find navigating more difficult than others. Are we still on? I think I was talking about... Right, how do you turn this thing off? There's a talk button. That one. Of course. Okay, that's definitely it. That was the final episode in series four of the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry. Michelle did come back after all, she found her way back. We tied a piece of string to her ankle and to the studio. And she'll never get lost again now. Never like, like, theses in the minor tors, labyrinth. So we have a new series coming up in the new year, which we need your curious cases for. So please do send us them into curiouscasesatbbc.co.uk. And now, as a special treat, four series worth of outtakes, bloopers and Hannah and I generally just being terribly unprofessional. Here you go. Okay. What? Yeah. Wish bit. Yeah. Oh, it's me. Luckily, one of the results of fainting is that it makes you horizontal so the blood rushes back to your brain. And it will happen to almost half of us at some point in our lives. Hang on, I hear you cry. Humans aren't the only ones with their brains at the top of their bodies. What about giraffes? No, wait, that was terrible. Badger ass! Hey, Josh! I ain't got the heads out there! What are you going to do? While we're in space, so the sun, big fiery ball in the centre of our solar system. We have the moon big cheesy ball. Sphere, say sphere. Just go from big cheesy sphere. You said big cheesy ball. Okay. The moon. Oh, my God. The moon. Hey. Okay. I'll eat it. I'll eat it. So, the sun, big fiery ball in the centre of our solar system. Yeah, the moon, big rock. Jupiter, big gassy ball. No, it's in a connection here. Yes, I'm getting a lot of spheres in space. A lot of balls. Couldn't resist, could you? You could not resist that. Do we just drop balls? No! You've dropped the balls. You've dropped the balls. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. So, Michelle, but, Michelle, but, but, me. Hrrr. Hrrr. Hrrr. Actual words. I'm ruined. Hang on, I hear you cry. Humans aren't the only ones with their brains aloft. What about giraffes? Why on Mayponters' Feeding? Oh, giraffes. Oh, sir. Look at this. Well, the giraffe was a dead man. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm getting old. I don't know. What about giraffes? Sorry. What about giraffes? Hrrr. Ha ha. Well, that was horrible. Oh, and now some noise. And some noise. But you wouldn't be so kind. If I be so kind. I'm making a few. Right. Horse impressions take one. Clever hands. Hrrr. Hrrr. Niii. Niii. It's a camp horse. Niii. Oh, oh, no. Okay. Bop, bop, bop. Ha. Bop, bop, bop. I wonder about giraffes. What about giraffes? How about giraffes? How about giraffes? Good. What is the line? What is the line? You're saying so, don't fry case solve. So, doctor, what's your name again? Ha ha ha. It's going to say don't a case. Your fry solved. Now do a name. Niii. Rare metron. Why do all my horse impressions sound like I'm in a carry-on film?
