I'm going through HR. Welcome to Episode 2 of The Curious Cases of Brotherhood and Fry and today we bring you the curious case of the world that turned. Yes and don't forget to send us your curious cases, BBC.Curiouscases.com, man that was the all over the place, CuriousCases.com. It's really not that hard it's really not that hard. I find it hard. He's written on the piece of paper that's immediately in front of you as well. There it is. Anyway, when we do these, often at the beginning of the programmes, we have a sort of nice gentle introduction to the topic at the end. Sometimes it is. Sometimes it's a bit of a chat, sometimes it's a bit of a setup in order to get to the question. We struggled a little on this one. So this time the programme just starts. Today we tackle this very simple question sent in to curiouscases at BBC.co.uk by Joe Willes. What causes the earth to rotate? Yes, quite a big question this. Can we take on the entire world? I think we can take on the whole universe. I like your ambition there, Docs Fry. So where do we start? At the very beginning. It's a very good place to start. Indeed it is, Maria Von Drak. Well, for this one, I'm going to enlist the help of our regular space guru, Andrew Ponson. So how did the earth start spinning? Well, you have to go all the way back to where on earth did the earth come from. And we think it came from a big spinning cloud of dust and gas that gave birth both to the sun and all the planets. And because that cloud was spinning around, that actually is what ultimately gives rise to the fact that the earth itself is spinning as well. Over millions of years, this gigantic cloud of interstellar dust and hydrogen gas began to shrink and condense under the force of its own gravity. The cloud grew hotter and denser in the middle until a nuclear reaction ignited in the center, which gave birth to the sun. Away from our star, the leftovers formed a giant disk from which grew our planets. But what caused everything to spin in the first place? It's what we call turbulence, which is a fancy name for saying things are already moving around quite randomly. So if you think about any old cloud of gas, you'll probably find stuff is just moving around in pretty much random directions. If you then take some little sub chunk of that and look at it on average, then on average, it'll have some slight sense of spin and that's where it comes from. So has that cloud collapses in on itself? Does the speed of the spin change then? Yeah, so if you can start with something that's barely spinning at all really, and as it gets smaller and smaller, it gets faster and faster and you can actually see this effect in day-to-day life. The sort of famous example is a spinning ice skater. If they draw in their arms, they get faster in order to conserve something that we call angular momentum. Conservation of angular momentum relates the mass and speed of rotation to the radius of a spinning body. If that body isn't ice skater, the speed their turning is proportional to the size of the circle they make with their arms. As the skater pulls in their arms, they reduce their radius and increase their spin velocity. Extend them out again and they will slow down and eventually stop. All right, so that's the basic physics, but let's bring it back to earth. The fact that we're spinning has a very important consequence for us as meteorologist and weatherman John Hammond explains. It's absolutely fundamental, Adam. It is fundamental because our weather system is determined by something called the Coriolis parameter. Now, the Coriolis effect which you may have heard of before is how fluids around the earth be they air or liquid respond to the change in the proportion of spinneries from the equator to the poles. If you imagine you're sitting on the equator, the earth is moving around very quickly isn't it because it's got to get round a big circle to accomplish one circuit. Whereas at the poles, it hasn't got to go round far at all. What that means is that rather than air blowing straight from high to low, it is apparently deflected to the right in the northern hemisphere and it's deflected to the left in the southern hemisphere. All right, so we've got this gradient of air and atmosphere moving around the planet. Does that translate directly into winds? Yes, it does, absolutely fundamentally. So if looking simply at the planet, most of the sunlight is down on the tropics, that's what heats up most. So on a broad scale, air is rising at the tropics due to the heating of the land and the sea and the air above it and warm air, less dense, it tends to rise. That sucks in air from the surrounding latitude to the north and to the south. Now that air because of the Coriolis effect is deflected so that what you end up at the tropics is a net easterly wind. Whereas further north and to the south to compensate, you've got a westilly wind so that the thing is kept in balance. And just to get this out of the way, quickly, the Coriolis effect, I think most people have heard of it in reference to the direction in which water flows through a plug hole. A bit of a myth. Is it? Yes. Due to fairly complex maths, the Coriolis effect only really comes into effect over larger scales of time and space. You know, so you're talking hours and days rather than, you know, the five seconds it takes to swirly water down the plug hole. That's more down to actually local effects such as the tilt of the basin. It's not down to the Coriolis effect. It's the design of sinks basically rather than earth sized physics. So the Coriolis effect is too weak to have an impact at the scale of your sink, but strong enough at the size of our earth right. Thankfully for us in the UK, it means that our climate is much milder than it should be for our northerly position. The westilly winds that pass over the north Atlantic bring up warm air from the tropics. And that means that we never really get too cold. Sadly for our comrades in Moscow, which is a similar latitude to Edinburgh, land doesn't retain heat as well as the sea, which is why it's much chillier in winter. Okay, so that is plug holes and the planet. What about even bigger though? Let's get back to the universe here. Does everything in space spin? I put this question to Andrew Ponson. Well, pretty much because most things that we see in space have collapsed down from something bigger because space is absolutely huge compared to the objects that live within it. So even if you take something like a galaxy, that's a collection of maybe a hundred billion stars and we live in the galaxy that we call the Milky Way, that spinning because that collapsed down from a region of space that was vastly, vastly bigger. So it only needed just the slightest, tiny amount of spin to start with. And then by the time it collapses down to today's relatively small size, it's going so fast that in fact it's something like 200 kilometers per second that we're spinning around the centre of the galaxy. So you can get very, very rapid spins from really not very much. So by that logic, is there anything in space that doesn't spin then? Well, what about space itself? Because if you look at Einstein's equations that tell us how space and time fit together and how the universe evolves, they do just allow for space to spin. And we've been looking into this recently actually trying to figure out does the whole of space spin mainly from the cosmic microwave background sort of left over radiation from the big bang. And looking at that, then the answer we think is probably no. So if you want there to be something that isn't spinning, you probably have to go all the way to the whole of space. Although there will be objects, individual objects that you can find in space that are barely spinning. There are some classes of star, for instance, that don't seem to be spinning very much. But probably if you looked in enough detail, you would find they have a tiny amount of spin. So in terms of the whole universe spinning or not spinning, spinning relative to what? That is a very deep question. When you say relative to what, it's not really relative to anything. It's just that if you're spinning round, there are particular effects that you start to notice. So if you take a bucket of water, for instance, and swing it over your head, you'll find that the water doesn't fall out. If you're swinging it fast enough, don't do it slowly, because then it will fall out. If you swing it around fast enough, the water does not fall out, despite the fact that gravity is pulling it down. That is an actual effect just of spinning in a very abstract sense. So if all of space were spinning, we'd start to see things move around in rather strange ways. We can go and look for that. As far as we can see, it's not there. So space doesn't seem to be spinning relative to anything. We don't even know what the anything would be if it was spinning relative to it anyway. Let me just get this clear. We can tell that the universe isn't spinning. It's not spinning relative to something that may or may not exist. Exactly. Well, thank you very much, Astero physics. Would you mind, hopefully, if we brought this back to the Earth, because that's what the question was about? All right. Well, what would happen then if the Earth span in the opposite direction? Oh, nice. Nice. Now we're talking. Okay. Well, this brings us on to the mystery of Venus. Oh, if I haven't said... The Earth spins anticlockwise around the North Pole, and that is the same direction as the Sun, and most of the other planets. But Venus spins in the opposite direction, and nobody is quite sure why. Some astronomers think that Venus flipped upside down as a result of a gigantic collision. Others have argued that Venus started off revolving in the same direction as the rest of the planets, but gradually slowed down until it stopped and then started turning the other way. Okay. So that is pretty interesting. But what would happen to the Earth to our weather? If we started spinning in the opposite direction too? Why in space? No, no, no more space. I've had enough. I'm asking Earth-based weatherman John Hammond. We've run simulations, I haven't run simulations, but scientists have run simulations to actually see how the atmosphere responds to the opposite spin. And it's some interesting effects. For example, the Sahara looks like it would become a lot of wetter. Parts of the southwest of the USA, which are desert virtually at the moment, will become very hot and humid and moist, whereas the Florida coast, which is swampland, would become much drier as well. So an entirely different planet if four and a half billion years ago, we were spinning in the other direction. Yes, but of course the procession of the Earth around the Sun would remain the same. So the seasons would be the same as they are now. Of course, if the procession of the Earth around the Sun was reversed, then our seasons would go into reverse as well. That's for another programme, I think. As is, what would happen if the Earth stopped spinning entirely? Of course, one side of the Earth would be exposed to the Sun all the time. It would get hotter and hotter and hotter. The other side, the dark side of the Earth would just get colder and colder and colder. So thank goodness we have a spinning Earth. So, Dr. Fry in answer to the question, what makes the Earth rotate? Can we say, case solved? Yes, clouds of gas and dust in the early universe were gradually set together by gravity to create the Sun and the planet. On the Earth, though. All of this material was pulled together by the law of conservation of angular momentum and the growing planets began to spin faster and faster. The Earth, the question was about the Earth. On Earth, this spin creates the distinctive weather patterns that we see today. Finally, thank you. That's all very interesting, but let me tell you some more stuff about space. Would it be okay if you didn't? Space is pretty cool there. I know it's completely awesome, but I have to say, I struggled with this episode a little bit. I found the science quite hard. I think this is one of those perfect examples where you really find yourself at the limits of normal language, whereas if I could just show you the equation here, actually, it would make a lot more sense. But I wouldn't be able to read it though, would I? I mean, it would take me three or four years to walk you through the very basic vector calculus. Where is we have 12 minutes? In this programme, don't we? But I do think that. I do think that. Sometimes it's really difficult to put this stuff into words. I absolutely approve of the complexity of the science, because part of the thing that we do hear is about saying that things are complex and science isn't straightforward and we don't always come up with straightforward answers. It's just it's not my area at all. And when you start talking about convection currents and vectors and in terms of complex systems, I glaze over a bit. It was complex systems, but that's okay. So where does a complex system, isn't it? Well, no, it's a chaotic system. That's different, isn't it? It's slightly different. Is it? Anyway, please do send us your curious cases. Two, curious cases that BBC.com at UK. Hey, one of the fun things about doing that programme was that Michelle R. Producer gave us a number of options of versions of Baleiro by River Elf. He only sang catchy and our own dingy. Yeah. And these are the ones that didn't make it. A Marriotti version of Baleiro. There was a trumpet version. Oh, there was a swing version as well. There was prog rock as well. That was absolutely terrible. And the one we settled on was the Japanese electronic version, which I have in my notes in front of me was by Isau Tomita, who is a sort of synth god who actually died last year. So I consider this a little bit of a tribute. He's amazing pioneering electronic of Baleiro work, which deserves more exposure on Radio 4. Yes, I quite agree. And I think we should sing it out. Okay. These are the last thing I'm going to say. You know that I can't sing. So that's why. But don't forget to send us your curious cases to curiouscases at BBC.com at UK. And don't forget that there are lots of extra stuff about the series that you can find on BBC.com forward slash future. It's only received four Grammys here. For his 1974 classic album, Snowflakes are dancing. How about that? Well, it's devoured.
