I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. Hello, Curios. We are back. We're back. Hello, Curios. So nice to be back. This is the eighth series of Curios cases. Every time we get a new series, I'm even more astounded than the last. It's surprised, pleasantly surprised, but mostly just shocks. Shocks. We've got quite a few good curious cases coming up for you in this series. We are going to be looking at whether anything can go faster than the speed of light. Yes. And we're going to be asking why children don't appear to like vegetables. Yes. A frustrating process for everyone. It was. It was. But this week, this week, I'm super excited about this one because it's about too excited. Some people might be. Possibly. But we're telling bat detective. This week's episode is all about bats and why they don't get confused by the echolocation of other bats around them. Yeah. Now at the end of the podcast, there's quite a lot of bat chat. So if you're really interested in listening to me and Hannah, but mostly you're talking about bats, then I've had eight hours of bat chat today. I'm really. It's 11 minutes past five. We're in a studio in the BBC and I've had four, eight hours of bat chat. I'm just going to cue you up with some extra bat fats just to get your bat sensors going. French name for bat. Chevereurie. That means hang on. No, we're. So he is mouse. Yes. Is it something to do with hair? Balls. Is it? Bold mouse. Yes. That's quite cute. German. It's flader mouse, which means flying mouse. Yes. And then in fact, there's a bit of the flader mouse by Strouse in the programme itself. Now, you know, Michelle does a lot of the research for this programme. Oh, yes. She's got this written down here. Scotland, apparently, bats are sometimes known as Gorky Birds. I've never heard that. I don't know. I think if you are Scottish Curie, you can confirm, or deny, these spurious bat facts that Michelle has gathered. So on Twitter, hashtag Curie's cases, or you can always email us. Curie's case set BBC.co.uk. But in the meantime, on with the show. Welcome back to the new series coming up. We have five more extremely curious cases. Yes. You send your questions to Curie's cases at BBC.co.uk. And here are the answers about to win their way into your earholes. Now, today, an unusual inquiry involving some small furry creatures of the night. Okay, Vincent Brise, enough from you, I think. Right. Well, this question comes from Tim Beard from Hamburg in Germany, and he asks, why don't thousands of bats in a cave get confused? How do they differentiate their own location echoes from those of other bats? Now, I am super excited about this because I absolutely love bats. They're the second largest order of mammals after rodents. Hey, rodents. And they make up a fifth of all classified mammal types. That is more than 1,240 different species of bats. That is some good fact. I've got more bat facts. Sorry to disappoint Dracula fans, but only three species of bats are blood sucking vampire bats. Actually, bats are totally the unsung heroes of our ecosystem. They control insects. They pollinate plants, like cocoa, which produces chocolate, and the agarvy cactus, which is used to make tequila. You are really into bats, I really am. You know what, they are. I don't think I've ever actually seen a real bat in real life. That is a tragedy that we must immediately correct. I think at its time that you met my favourite curapitologist, bat fact that is a person that studies bats, Kate Jones. It's just after dusk and Adam has sent me to meet with Kate at the London Aquatic Centre in the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park in East London. Arguably a rather unusual location to search for wild bats. Here it is, look. It's just a sensor. They're on the other side, right? Ah, it's like a bean-eye of a speaker. So I mean, it's pretty inconspicuous, really. You wouldn't necessarily be testing the world's first open-source network of smart bat monitors around the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park. Look at that. Fixed to a lamp post is an unassuming white plastic box, one of 15 sensors in the park. They listen for bats and relay this information live to the bats London website for anyone to look at. And we can see this particular sensor is really buzzing. This is really cool sensor because it's right by a bat roost over there. That's right. That one is so busy this one. So we put it out, we didn't know that at all. And there were like thousands and thousands and thousands of calls. So if we can't see them, we can't hear them. Yeah, but the bat! That's the secret of science. I want to see a bat. Yes, bats only reveal themselves to the worthy. I'm afraid, Dr. Fry. Well, Kate told me that last time she went on a bat walk with you, you mistook a dog for a bat. So... Yeah, well, that might have happened. But that and your bat facts. Anyway, here is some bat facts history. In a series of quite horrific experiments, Catholic priest and part-time biologist Lazaro Spaladazzi investigated the sensory powers of bats in the late 1700s. He blinded them using a series of incredibly gruesome methods, putting wires through their cornyers and pouring hot wax into their eyes. But mysteriously, the poor old bat still managed to fly skilfully between obstacles. How did they do it? Time for some more really not-okay experiments. He painted them with varnish to test a common theory that bats use a delicate sense of touch in their wings. But still, the plucky bats avoided crashing. And after ruling out smell and taste. Don't even ask how he did those experiments. Spaladazzi concluded that bats must possess a sixth sense beyond human perception. But it wasn't until 1938 that 18-year-old Donald Griffin, a mere undergraduate at Harvard, devised a set of much more ethical experiments, really not that hard, to test this hypothesis. Echolocation expert John Ratcliffe from the University of Toronto takes out the story. He approached a professor at Harvard who recently developed a microphone able to hear sounds well above our hearing range. And what Griffith did was he tested a hypothesis that bats were producing sounds well above our hearing range and using the echoes from those sounds to figure out where objects were in their environment, how big those objects were, whether they're moving or not, and even the texture or shapes of those objects. Griffith concluded that bats use supersonic notes to help them fly and feed. So how do they calculate the position of insects or obstacles? Luckily, John does mean impression of a hungry bat. Okay, so I'm out there flying about as a bat. And then I detect something in my air space, something that's roughly the size of an insect I might eat. And so then I would start to call it a fast array. And so now I'm on course for interception. And of course, this target, if I'm going to be chasing it at all, it's going to be changing. It's possession of three-dimensional space. And then as I'm closing into that target, I'm less than a meter away from it. I'll start to produce sounds more like this. And that's a buzz. And at that stage of bats producing calls, it has many as 200 times a second. So it's an incredible feat of vocalization. Like, auctioneers have nothing on bats. That was an amazing that impression. Yeah, what you should hear is whale. Now, since the first discovery of echolocation, today's question has perplexed biologists. How on earth can they separate their own calls from their furry friends? Back at the Olympic Park, Kate Jones has brought out a back detector to turn these high frequency calls into audible sound so I can appreciate the scale of this problem. I'm hoping to tap into the secret world of bats and maybe even spot one. That clicking, you can hear that's the bat echolocating and trying to find insects. And then when it finds an insect, it speeds up and it sounds like a raspberry like that at the end. Oh, thank you. Amazing. How do they make the sound? It's just a vocal signature that they're using in their mouth or their nose. The same way as we talk. Yeah, yeah. How many bats do you get in a colony? It can really depend. So some colonies are just one individual up to there's a colony in Bracken Cave in Texas that's got about 10 million. 10 million? 10 million individuals in it. And could they all be sort of moving or could a lot of them be moving around at the same time? Oh, yeah. So I've stood outside Bracken Cave and watched them come out and it's like a circle of smoke coming out. So there's so many of them and it's like they circle around, circle around, circle around and they go, fly off. Absolutely incredible. So there could be millions individuals in the same kind of space. Oh, there's one flash right? You didn't see it to do. I didn't see it. I heard it. All right, let's keep going. Come back, little guy. I see you, Hannah, might have a rare case of a curious condition known as bat blindness. Bat fact. That is not a bat fact. No, it's not. I just made it up. So here's where we get to the crux of the question. Ultrasonic sound waves just like audible sound occupy a certain range of frequencies. Now Adam has calls for concern in the artist. Just like analogue radio, if you start broadcasting at similar frequencies, the result please interference. Take a leave into a TV prep and I'll school to eight o'clock. Hello, Adams. Jim, help your morning constitutional. Now bats face a similar problem with millions of signals competing on the same frequency channels. It can be tricky to hear your own signal amongst noisy neighbors. Quad bikes are useful on a large acreage, I'd imagine. Indeed. I always use a quad bike to reverse myelage, a grudge. That is not surprising at all. Okay, but how do bats get around this problem? A brilliant idea came along in the 1960s, not from the sky, but from under the sea. Two Japanese scientists, Akira Watanabe and Kimi Hisa Takeda, were studying a group of tropical fish that navigate via a special organ, one that generates an electric field. They discovered that when the fish are in a group, they change the frequency of their own electrical signal to avoid interference. Well, these fishy findings caused great excitement in the bat community. Could bats alter the frequency of their calls to find a clear channel? His echolocation expert and bat impressionist John Ratcliffe again. And so I think what bat people thought is, hey, that's a really neat idea. And folks, for a while, thought that this is a way of these bats kind of, you know, getting their own radio channels a little more separated from one another. The issue that your listener brings up though, is that once you add 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 200, a thousand bats to this problem, you just don't have that many radio channels to use. So what's our best guess today then? How do bats identify their own signal? Right now, the idea is I think more online, so this is happening at level the auditory system rather than at the vocal system. And that the bats able to identify Akira's own calls and filter out the sounds of other bats much the same way as you'd be able to, were you at a cocktail party? So last week, he was in the club with her, huh? No. And you're able to attend to her words despite the fact that there's lots of other voices in the room. No way. And despite the fact that some of those voices in the room might even be louder than hers, that you're able to attend to what she's saying and everything else kind of becomes background noise. So I think there's something like that going on there. Okay, but that's not quite the full story. It turns out that bats are pretty good at maths. Wait a minute, I do the bat facts. Well, you missed one. Batts are masters at measuring angles. So their calls are quite directional for some species anyway. And they know what to expect. So they would just filter out all of the echoes which weren't helpful in that situation or wrong. Or taking a glancing blow almost. Yeah, exactly. So some evidence that they filter out all of the other noises that are coming back. And there's kind of a dampening effect which might mean that you're insensitive to other frequencies which are coming in. So it's quite a few other theories which are suggesting that they actually can isolate their own cool and recognise it. But there's something wrong. He's really close. I think that's him. Wow, I think that's quite a few bats. Oh, sorry, sorry. Finally, Hannah, was it everything that you dreamed it would be? Well, it was very small and furry and fast. Yes, that is the general format of bats. So, Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to how bats echo locate, can we say case solve? Well, Dr. Fried, we think they can filter out their own calls from millions of others much like tuning into some juicy gossip in a noisy room. And they can calculate the direction and speed of the echo to identify it as their own. And that's all the bat facts. That's not the end of your bat facts, is it Adam? No, it's not. I've got loads of what I'm a bit over excited to be honest about. It's quite nice there. I mean, bats are pretty cool. I'm not being down on bats. Bats are cool. They're amazingly cool. And also Kate Jones, she's one of my all-time favourite sprinkles of all-time. That dog thing did actually happen. I went on a bat walk with her in Amsterdam and I went, what was that? Thinking it was my first bat. Did you see it? Oh, you're just hearing it. I was looking at the monitor which translates the ultrasonic into audio and she cut me off by responding. Yeah, that was a dog. I thought, you know, actually, this is not quite as silly as I imagined it in my mind. I thought that maybe like, you know, you were on the heath and sort of something brown and fluffy like ran past and you were like, oh, that was a bat flying past, but actually it was a dog. Okay, this is, I mean, looking on a spectrogram and seeing a bark. That's not so bad. Well, it was a little bit embarrassing and and that was for Inside Science and my editor at the time who I think was also Michelle decided to include that in the nation's broadcaster. So, you know, a low point. She makes great decisions that women. A low point in my professional media interaction with bat. Actually, though, that my other significant media interaction with bats is a Twitter-based thing. You'll know that I'm quite prolific on Twitter. I can't say I've noticed, actually. No. And I, you know, amongst all of the interesting science and, you know, alerting people to radio programs or, you know, things, interesting things about science, the single most retweeted tweet that I've ever put on Twitter was a picture of some fruit bats, which I rotated by 180 degrees and pointed out that fruit bats upside down look quite a lot like a 1990s emo boy band. I think I remember this. But it sort of went viral and then Buzzfeed picked it up. And whilst I'm saying this with some pride, it's also some disappointment that, you know, all of those really interesting things about genetics. That you worked so hard for so many years to study. Yeah. It's his golf bat. That's just your known book. A really cool little bit of the infraரty joke about bats looking like an emo band. So, yeah, bats big part of my social media as well. Now, there's, as you know, I'm a comic book fan. I had noticed that too. Yeah. And of course, that means I've been really... Is the corner stains of your character here? Prolific on Twitter, comic book fan. I'm not tragic as I am. But listen, so, you know, I've been reading Batman all of my life. And there's a couple of really significant, but you're falling asleep in this. I'm just going to keep going. There's a classic graphic novel called Batman Year One released in the 80s. Now, in that, it's a story of how Batman becomes Batman his first year. And a lot of it was adapted into the famous Christopher Nolan Batman films. In it, there's a scene where Bruce Wayne, Batman, pulls out this little gadget from the heel of his boot, presses a button on it, and what it does, it attracts a massive crowd flock. What about it's coming? Swarm of bats from the Batcave, which cloak him and allow him to escape from a police heist. That's quite cool. I had this in my head since the mid 80s, and it happens in the film. Which film does it happen? It happens with Batman McGins. Okay. He actually does that. And as part of this programme, we spoke to John Ratcliffe, who was about expert. And after the interview has finished, I decided to use precious curious cases and Michelle's time to bring up something that you've been curious about for 30 odd years. And I asked John Ratcliffe this very question. It's kind of freakishly possible. Yes. So what actually happens with bats is that, and we can go down your comic book route together. So let's say you and I are out there, both bats together. And as I approach an insect target mid air, I'm going to call something like this. And I call at a faster and faster rate. And once I started calling it a very fast rate, you're actually going to fly toward me often enough. Because you've just discerned that I'm a bat who just took an insect. Because the only reason I'd increase my rate and produce what's called a buzz is because I've just, you know, zoned in on and probably captured an airborne insect. So you might come towards this place in space where you know the insect catching is good. Much like a fisherman is going to like move from space. As soon as he sees some other guy, apologize, salmon out of the river. And so if that man were to walk around playing the feeding buzzes of the local bats species, he may in fact be able to attract a bunch of those bats towards him. Sir, you have made my decade, possibly multiple decades with that answer. That is marvelous. Sharing my excitement. I, you know, actually the thing that I like the most about that is that I'm excited to do. That's the thing that's giving me the most joy. So Curio's out there who share my joy. Yes, bat fans, particularly Frank Miller, year one bat fans, please. Quite specific. Little niche you're going for right now. I bet they're out. I bet you they're out there. Okay, please support me on this. Okay, now since the last series we have had quite a few emails in. And I think we should start something this series that's where we have maybe like a Curio of the week. Yeah, yeah, absolutely. Because we had we did in the last series we talked about that brilliant chap who when he was the satzuma guy. Yes, he was definitely Curio. Yeah, he was Curio of the entire seven series to that point. But if you remember in the same episode, we also had your coffee machine. Of course, the white stripes. Of course. And our other Curio who joined Curio of the week. Yeah, I mean, I mean the stakes have been so raised. So we want to instigate. Yeah, I think we should have Curio of the week. Curio of the week. We need like a jingle. Yeah. Curio of the week. Nice. Robato. Thanks so much. That's amazing. Or he's a better idea. Get the Curio's to come up with a jingle. I think that would win Curio of the week. Yes, certainly. But so this is the first episode of the new series, series eight. So I'm going to propose a couple of correspondence that have written to us. Four Curio of the week. Four Curio of the week. All right. The first. So these came with both an email form. Now the subject heading on the first one had my attention. Adam Rutherford is abused. It says. Let me read this from from Curio Ian Head. It says, nobody likes to hear a familiar friend abused on the radio. Come on. Just wait. Come on. Come on. Can you give me some space here? Ian needs to be heard. I heard the last episode of Curio's cases where Adam was designated uncool. Not by me. Not by me. By another Curio. It was by our Curio's dad, I think. So I decided to write in, as Ian Head again, to say that I enjoy listening to Adam as the voice of the daring risk taker on curious cases and the cool but excitable explorer on inside science. That's my other programme. Stop interrupting. This is important. I have to admire the willingness of the true scientists to take risks and get dirty in the pursuit of knowledge. Not everyone is able to take personal risks, not naming names. I love this guy. Say my name, man. Say it. Just say it. It's me. He goes on. This said, in spite of my personal preference for maths and physics rather than the study of squishy stuff and bodily fluid, oh come on Ian, you were doing so well then. So well. Well, there we go. Do you think I do abuse you? I think it's you quite like it, they don't you? I mean really, a lot of the time Michelle comes in with a slightly bonkers idea like who wants to poo into a cup. Yeah, we did do that. And you are up and out of your seat grabbing that blooming package before I even had chance to speak. Wait, I haven't finished it letter yet anyway. Anyway, says Ian Head, great to hear another series of Curio's cases on its way. That's this series and I'm looking forward to hearing Adam's cool fluid delivery. Once again, full stop and Hannah obviously. So I'm proposing in-head. An abit part. You're an excitable explorer series. So I'm proposing in-head as Curio of the week. Come on. Can we know? We can't. I think I haven't got another email to that. But I do. I've got a second one. Dear doctors writes, no a maths person from Hazelcroftstock gets gets that another maths person. I'm writing to come to the aid of poor defenseless doctor, Robert Fitt, who very good natively takes the many and very gypes. He gets sent on dangerous hairy missions while Hannah gets to burn stuff. He has to endure secret witterings from Michelle to hate phones, not his own. And he has two cats. Okay, that's fair. That last one is one which you do need some people. It's factually accurate. And one of the cats is lovely and the other cat is a total jerk. You women need to be nicer to him. And he signs it off, not an uncle of Adam because my uncle wrote him, or an imaginary movie star friend of Adam. See, he's bullying you himself. Well, like Tom Cruise phoned me up to tell me about his holiday. Yeah, no, I'm a maths person from Hazelcroft. PS on second thoughts, don't change your thing. Cheers. So teams is over there. Well, both no and me. Yeah, this is what you're suggesting. Yeah, they were given joint curio of the week. You know what, next episode, I am going to be nothing but nice to you Adam and you're going to hate it. Yeah, that sounds quite sinister. I look forward to that. See you next time. This is the BBC. If you like listening to the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry, then you will like you, right? I've got to say will. Yeah, I thought it was a probabilistic universe. Now, in this case, it's certain that if you like that, then really you are going to like this much more. And this is the infinite monkey cage. All right, so wherever you are on the universe that you're listening to right now, just have a little search for it and then hit subscribe.
