I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. You know what's annoying about that sting thing at the beginning? Is it everything to do with it after 15 series? Let's not that, is it? We love it. What's annoying is that when you're listening to this programme on your podcast app, if you just start the programme and skip forward 30 seconds, right, which there's button for, unfortunately, that brings you too far, right? So you can't... So you then got to go back. You can't... Basically, you can't avoid listening to it. You can't avoid listening to it. Or you cut into the really good juicy... This kind of insightful, erudite discussion that is really our hallmark. Between two professional V4. You just keep going, Alfred. Aging. No, look, this is part two of the nominally determined two-parter on colds, which are slightly connected. There are only connected in the sense that one word with two different definitions. So here it is. This is the burr cold. Yeah, being chilly. Enjoy. It's another cold case for you this week, but this one is decidedly chillier. Yes, a couple of questions sent in to curiouscases at BBC.co.uk about being cold. First up, this one from Jennifer Langston from Ontario in Canada. My husband is 58 and has just taken up cold water swimming without a wet suit. I worry that it's too cold for him, but he claims that swimming in cold water is good for you, which drives me bonkers. Can you tell us if there is any scientific proof behind this? Well, regular listeners will know that we like to get out and about on curious cases. Yeah. We like to do some experiments. And sometimes the producer, Michelle and I like to talk about where are you going with this. Well, seeing as how it's winter out there, I've got a special swimming assignment for today's cold case. Oh, no. Because Hannah thinks she's trick me into doing something that I would absolutely hate. But I have persuaded Michelle to come to Brockwell Lido, which is got a 50 meter swimming pool, which is outside. And I do this every week because I absolutely love outdoor swimming. There's one big difference which I need to confess to. I am one of the minority of swimmers here who wears a full wet suit. And looking out the pool now there's two men in full wet suits. All of the rest of the people here are women wearing small swimming costumes. I'm just going to again ask some of them why they do this mad pursuit. What's your name? Ursula. Ursula. So do you do this regularly? I don't want to week. Once a week? I do this once a week, but I wear this. Ah. The full suit. Does that somehow make me a lesser cold water swimmer than...? Definitely. Oh, really? Yeah, definitely. No, it doesn't. It's a very non-competitive activity. And what about the temperature? How does that make you feel when you're in afterwards? Ah, great. I mean, people talk about a sort of euphoria afterwards. Hi, what's your name? Derinda. You're in the pool at the moment. I am in the pool. You can't stop for too long. How's the temperature today? Because you're just wearing a swimming cosy in both. Just a swimming cosy, but I've got gloves and I've got socks on. And that makes all the difference. How long does the buzz last when you come out? All day until you do it again. It's addictive. I didn't know why people didn't appeal to me. And then I tried this winter and I get it now. Amazing. Go and finish your laps. Go, go, go, go, keep warm. You cheated. I didn't cheat more on wet suits. That is not cheating. We're going to come back to the Lido later and answer Jennifer's cold water question with a wet suit. But first, let's talk to someone who doesn't actually just winp out from any side of the cold, shall we? Adam? Because I arranged to call up meteorologist Richard Warron, stationed on the Halle 5 base in Antarctica, on his seventh research trip for the British Antarctic Survey. Hello. Hello. Is that Richard? Hi, yeah, this is Richard. Hey, Richard, how you doing? You're in the Antarctic at the moment, right? Yes, I'm a Halle research station. Now, I guess if we're talking about the cold, it doesn't really get much colder than a research base in Antarctica. What are the coldest temperatures that you guys have ever experienced? When I was wundering in 2014, I recorded minus 55.4. It can be surprisingly comfortable down to about minus 20, as long as I was in the wind. But when you hit about minus 35 or so, it's just a different beast, really, like breathing starts to hurt. When you get even colder down to minus 50, then that's when your skin starts to hurt, if it's exposed. So you weigh these big face masks just to cover your cheeks and your chin and your mouth. It's only breath just instantly freezes. And then you're outside for an hour, you're trying back inside and start to be close, and in your haste, you just grab your buff and pull it off. And if you haven't warmed it up first, it will just take a big chunk of food, beard with it. I think we'll probably have to build that for someone more into it, or you just ripped it off off a bit too far. Extreme waxing. I wouldn't recommend it. How about your psychological state? Do you have to watch out for certain things if you're out in extreme cold? Between getting mild hypothermia and moderate hypothermia, which is where it starts to become dangerous, and you get something called the umbles. Umbles, did you say it was cold? Yeah, the umbles, sort of, fumbling, mumbling, fumbling. You don't really care what's going on anymore. In the winter as well, it's also pitch black. You have about 105 days with no sun rise. So in those conditions, you wouldn't be going outside for too long anyway. And you're wearing a lot of clothes, and you've got a lot of training to make sure that doesn't happen. Well, amazing. Thank you so much for that. It was really safe and interesting. Thank you. Not too much, but it's a pleasure. Thank you very much. Thanks very much. Right, there is a lot to unpick, and also be utterly terrified by there. Extreme beard waxing. Yeah, I think Richard's beard's grown back by now. Yeah, the umbles, the fact they've got a name for it. Yeah, I'm pretty sure I've seen you suffer from that actually. Just extreme cold wasn't the cold. No, that's a fair point. But on the subject of chilly extremities, that brings us on to today's next question. Yeah, Sarah Dudley says, I almost got cold feet roasting this, but every night, as I get into bed, my feet get really cold like ice blocks. Desperate attempts to warm them on my husband, may result in a slight warming. I'm sure he enjoys it. But generally, they stay cold until I fall asleep. Why does it happen? OK, so our men really hotter in bed, and why the cold feet? I asked thermal physiologist Dr Heather Massey. We hear this a lot that ladies complain that they always have cold feet. And in general, what happens is men and women differ in their body size, so men tend to be heavier. And as a consequence, they cool more slowly than women because women are smaller in size. And so women, because of that smaller size, tend to be more sensitive to cooling. And so they may end up having what we call a vasoconstrictor response in their fingers and toes more quickly than men, purely because of their body size, rather than anything else. And that is the same effect. That's why our hands and feet get cold first, is it? Yeah, our hands and feet are tiny cylinders. And they are the furthest part of the body. And so those smaller cylinders are going to lose heat more quickly, but also we reduce the blood supply to those areas when we start to feel the cold, purely to prevent any further heat loss as well. So there you go, women do feel the cold more. Yeah, this all relates to the concept of vasoconstriction, which is where our blood vessels shrink to retain heat when it's chilly, which makes your extremities colder to conserve heat in your core. So further on in her email, Sarah also asks about penguins, as you do, and why their feet don't freeze. Right, well this is an extremely cool adaptation. The lot of Arctic creatures actually have, which is that there are arteries which are pumping warm blood from the heart around their bodies. The arteries actually wrap around the veins, which are bringing cold blood back from their feet, standing on the ice, so they keep the blood at a pretty constant temperature. That's very clever. Yes, it is. You know, of course, the real kings, though, of cold living, they have found the other pole of the planet. As David Attebrough described in his BBC series, Frozen Planet. The male polar bear spends winter out on the frozen ocean. If he's lucky, he will find a carcass that could provide a little food. This is a time to scrape by to wait. So how do polar bears survive in such extremes? According to Catherine Jeffs, who produced and directed this episode, again, we find that when it comes to the cold, size really does matter. Polar bears are obviously our largest land conifer in Earth, and they are a really, really good example of this theory of Bergman's rule, which is this idea that populations and species of larger animals are more generally found towards the poles. And similar species are much smaller when they're found closer to the tropics, and bears are a really, really good example of that, because you've got the polar bear found up in the Arctic, and then down closer to the equator in the tropics, you've got the sunbear found in Borneo, which is the smallest bear in the world. They're coping with temperatures they're heading towards, 40 degrees over. So you've got this great disparity in the sizes of the two species, both bears, but incredibly different. And the whole idea of being big in areas that are very, very cold is that you have this smaller surface area to volume ratio. So there's a lot less heat loss, and then there are other theories as well that it means the bigger your body is, the more fat you can carry and store through your winter. So polar bears can carry up to as much as 11 centimeters of this really thick insulating blubber. Small bears wear its hot big pudgy round bears wear its cold. Got it. Exactly, and where does Paddington come from? Oh, yeah. Deepest darkest Peru. Exactly. That is biological proof. And on the subject of polar bears, even though they're covered in this really thick layer of fur, that hair is actually transparent, and it allows sunlight to travel down to the skin, which is actually black, so it can absorb the maximum amount of light and heat from the sun. Which means that if you shaved a polar bear, it would be black. Yes, but really don't do that. It's really not going to work out for either party involved. No, true. But okay, talking about lumbering bears, isn't it about time we've got you back to your cold, water swimming, Adam? Okay, I'm going to put my stupid hats on, which means I can't hear anything. I'm going to get in before I actually do get too cold. See on the other side. Let's go. So while I was talking to physiologist Heather Massey, I put Jennifer's question to her, is there any scientific evidence as to whether cold water swimming is good or bad for our bodies? There's two sides to immersion or swimming in cold water. There's the arguments in the scientific evidence that cold water can have a negative impact on your health. And what do you mean by negative impacts? I'm concerned if I'm doing this once a week. Is this actually damaging me? Well, we know that when you go into cold water, we develop this thing called the cold shock response, an increase in heart rate and blood pressure, and your breathing also increases as well. Now, in someone like yourself who's healthy, that shouldn't be too much of a problem. And we know that after the first minute it peaks and then you can swim quite easily. But in someone that might have an underlying condition, such as the cardiac condition, this might be quite detrimental to their health, having this extra stressor. Well, I feel really truly vindicated in choosing to wear a wetsuit. Thank you very much, Hannah. But you said that there were two sides to the argument, are there any benefits from cold water swimming? Because certainly the people I speak to at the Lido, especially the older crowd in their tiny, tiny swimming costumes and wooly hats, they're completely evangelical about it. Well, we're starting to hear more and more, and there's quite a groundswell of opinion from the cold swimming community, that actually some people are finding some benefits to their mental health, from swimming in colder or open water environments. Now, at the moment, this evidence is of an anecdotal level. But there's quite a lot of that information currently available. And what about safety tips that if people do this, should be aware of? One of the rules that I've been taught is you should only stay in the water for twice as many minutes as the temperature. Yeah, again, that's reasonable advice. I would also add to that, go swimming with people that have experience of the environment that they're swimming in and also the temperatures that they're swimming in. A lot of the older generation of swum for the majority of their life. It's not a new phenomenon for them, and they're quite bemused by this recent increase in open water swimming, because they've done it all their lives. Oh, as they refer to it, swimming. Yes. It's quite enough of that. Ah, it's cold. It's actually really cold. I think we feel the cold running down. The trousers on the wetsuit trousers and running down the back of your neck. It feels good, but I'm going to go and have a hot shower now. See you later. So, Dr. Fry, when it comes to feeling cold, can we say, case salt? Yes, women often feel the cold more than men, because they lose heat faster. In other animals, Bergman's rule states that populations and species of larger size are found in colder environment. And small versions of the same species are found in warmer regions. Getting into cold water can cause a cold shock response. Which increases your heart rate and blood pressure? And that is why Hannah, I am happy to wear a full wetsuit. Unlike some of the much braver women you swam with. Right, so you tried to trick me and torture me as you've done so many times in the past. But I turned the tables. The shoe is on the other foot. Well, not really Adam. You barely got even remotely. You were wearing a wetsuit for goodness sake. No, I'm going cold water when they're wearing a wetsuit. It's still really cold. Not as cold as it would be if you were wearing speedos. Well, there's other reasons why I shouldn't wear speedos. Anyway, a lot of people do wear wetsuits and it's to do with comfort rather than... I mean, it's not meant to be paid. No one's comfortable in a wetsuit. I love wearing a wetsuit. Do you? Yeah, makes me feel like a superhero. I think I've only worn a wetsuit once when I had a totally disastrous surfing lesson. What a dying. And I ripped a nail off as I was trying to put it on. Oh, that's really bad for the wetsuit, too. Is it? Yeah. Do you think about surfing the one and only time I've done it? It was just like repeatedly walking into the ocean and getting smashed in the face. But that's what I absolutely love to do. In fact, my wetsuit is a surfing wetsuit, which is different from a swimming wetsuit because they're much more buoyant. And it makes it more difficult to swim lengths. Because basically you're too high in the water. So I do breaststroke. Most people do breaststroke in cold water swimming because putting your head under the water at that temperature makes your head fall off. And the mostly older women who wear woolly hats keep their heads above the surface. Well, you can't get the woolly hat. No, obviously not. Actually, I was curious about the woman wearing socks. Well, they waterproof socks. So everyone, regardless of what other kit wear you wear, wears wetsuit, near pre-installed socks and gloves, because of what we talked about in the programme, which is the extremities getting cold. So this special socks. Yeah, yeah. Because as soon as your hands and your feet get cold, that's game over. It just hurts when your hands get too cold. Remember in this very studio when we did a pain test? I do remember. Why do you remember that? Was it because I won? I think you won really easily. I would definitely miss the wetsuit. I did it once though, about three or four years ago, I did some filming in Siberia, which was amazing. But the thing about it for starters, it's really dry. You don't expect that. But once you're below a certain temperature, there's no moisture in the air at all. But the thing you have to be so careful about is the end of your nose, the tip of your nose. So I got a frost nip on my nose, which is where it's before you get frostbite. But it looks like candle wax, your skin turned into a little bit of a... Is your actual skin? Yeah, yeah. And it's like, it freezes essentially. But it happens really quickly, doesn't it? Really, like I would say, under, under eight minutes. Now, look, we've got so many things to talk about in the pod. But Michelle has actually provided us with an agenda, which currently has six. But I forgot a feeling there's might be a couple more than that. I think they're all. Tell you what they actually, I mean, you're talking about getting kitted up for going swimming with socks, hats. Look, I'm all about the gear. Wetsuit. I don't even like swimming very much. I just like wearing the kit. You did that for Brockwell Lido. Seven degrees. Other people, you know, slightly more extreme conditions like Catherine Jeff, who you heard in the program. She's from the Natural History Unit. She's a producer. She actually has to go diving near the poles, Adam. Imagine. Have a listen to this. Down in Antarctica, we were filming under the ice there and we were obviously diving. So we've got masses and layers underneath our dry suits. So we were bobbing around, as you can imagine. And having to wear incredible amounts of lead to get us down under the water. You're dealing with sort of almost minus two degrees temperature, which is incredibly cold, especially in the water, whether the water is drawing heat away from your body. And human beings really are very poor at coping with this. I mean, I've had the experience of having a flooded season, having that super cold water, guessing in, close to your skin. And very, very quickly, you become extremely cold and pretty incapable of functioning. And yet, you're surrounded by animals who are absolutely beautifully adapted to this environment. For instance, the ice fish, you know, living amongst the ice crystals all around them. And yet their blood is not freezing. The roof of ice insulates this world from the wild fluctuations above. The temperature down here has barely changed for 25 million years. These boggler vinky fish have antifreeze in their blood, so they're untroubles swimming among the ice crystals. People have fascinated with this. And what they've actually discovered is that it's not just fish that are found in the poles that can produce antifreeze in their blood, but also fish in sort of more temperate areas during winter begin to produce these antifreeze proteins. And during summer, don't bother. And there are even types of insects, you know, we've worked in Hawaii on the top of the mountains, very high mountains in Hawaii. You get extremely cold temperatures. And there there are these tiny little bugs called veku bugs. And they too have these proteins in their blood. And that prevents them from freezing. This is just, I mean, this is the stuff that really, really gets me going. It gets so excited about evolutionary adaptations in the extremes. The ice fish that Kaffir mentioned there is such a weird, interesting organism. It's got so many adaptations in its genome and its physiology to living in extreme cold environments. It is one of very, very few animals I think may be the only one that has completely shared red blood cells, or blood cells that carry oxygen. What does that mean? It means that the oxygen is dissolved directly in the liquid of the blood, rather than carried by molecules in cells floating around the blood. How does that help? It is to do with the fact that they've got these other adaptations which stop the liquid in their blood from freezing in sub-zero temperatures. So they got load of proteins, which like I've proteins mostly, which act as sort of, it's basically de-ice, so antifreeze. They have these molecules which stop the water from freezing. And genetic engineers in the 1990s, I want to say, that someone will write in correct us quite correctly, as seems to be having with alarming frequency. We're here later on this programme. Took those genes from other species and inserted them into tomatoes. Oh, I know about this. Frostproof tomatoes. Exactly. Yeah. And then no one really wanted them, and they didn't really sell very well. At a pinch, if it was very chilly morning, lots of mist in the air. Could you use an icefish to defrost your car window? I'm going to go with yes, and let that be the end of this conversation. No, we should tell you that the natural history unit are currently making a new series of frozen planet, which, guess, everyone in the world is looking forward to. Yeah. Just so exciting when you hear news that the natural history unit is producing another Attenborough mega series, they're just so great. Okay, biology. I've got another question for you. So in that show, we were talking about why women feel colder. And the main answer that we got from my expert was that it's because women are smaller. I am not saying that isn't true, but I have a question. Why do tall women feel cold, too? I think it's a perfectly valid question. I don't think I really know the answer to it. The average man. I am. I'm a giant. I know. It's never as simple as one thing, but on average women are smaller than men, and on average their body temperature is slightly higher. And that accounts for this on average effect that we're seeing. So if your body temperature is higher, then the same temperature outside will feel colder to you. That is my understanding of this situation. I think what's really interesting about this is simple things like that. Become effective in the very real world. And this is something that Caroline Criado-Paris has written about in her book, Invisible Women, which is brilliant. Which one of the early stories in that is that air conditioning in offices tends to be set for average male body size type and temperature. Which means that the women get freezing cold, which is why whenever I've worked in an office, the university, you know, where you'll have all of the women wearing blankets, four jumpers, having to go to the sink to run their hands under hot water, just to stop the freezing hot wish is something I regularly have to do. You actually do that. Honestly, honestly, if I work in the UCL office or too long, then yeah, I have to go and like, run my hands under them. Because I can't type. Because the environment has been set for only 50% of the humans. And yet all of these boys running around in their shorts. Where you shouldn't wear shorts at work, even in academia. Not great. Anyway, she's wetts its. I would wear a wetts its to work if it was. Anyway, socially acceptable. The hat, the hat, Michelle saw me in the hat. I think we've got a photo. As we've discussed before, I've got quite a small head. And the hat is quite snug. I don't think that would look good on anyone, but it definitely didn't look good on you. Thank you. Talking of things, Adam did wrong. Yes. Well, okay. But we've both done wrong. Yes. So last week on the programme, we got to talk about naming conventions. And we referenced the backer in him. Apgar. Apgar. Which is the things that you check when a baby is born to, is it like a alertness? I can't remember them now. Alertness is the G. Grimus, yeah. Other things. Rather things. Purpleness. I think aeration speed and revolveability. Yes. Anyway, the point was that in the discussion, I had suddenly accessed a bit of my random, my, my ROM, which I wasn't, I didn't warn Hannah about. I referred to the fact that this is a background because it's named after a nurse called Apgar. Now this was not correct. Now it's actually named after Virginia Apgar, who was an, an, an East the, an East the, Ah, an East the, it's a hard one. An East the, and East the, and East the, She gave you the anesthetic. Yes. She was a doctor essentially. A really pioneering doctor. So she was Armenian. American. And just an incredible figure in the history of medicine. Yes. So I think that the lessons learnt from that are, lesson number one, doctor out, go from now on. Lesson number two, this really is conclusive proof that, you know, on this podcast, we really are just saying whatever fallout of our mouths. Some of which is based on half understood things that are long forgotten. And Michelle didn't edit it out. So we, so if anything, in many ways, this is her fault. Yes. The responsibility falls to her door. Anyway, that's the end of Apgar. If someone wants to write in and ask a question to which the answer is Apgar, we'll do a whole program on it. Other things that Michelle's fault. Our program away, so are. Yes, we do need to talk about this with some weight. We, we got a lot, a lot, a lot of messages about ASMR. I would say 99% of them were negative. Turns out, right? 98. 98% of them are smiling. One thing I really learned from that episode is just how many listeners we've got. Because when you have close to a hundred thousand people or universally hating something and sending you messages about it, you get a lot, a lot of correspondence. A lot. Yes. So we've got some of that correspondence here that we're going to read out a selection of. Some of them were wonderfully charming. Would you like to go first? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Lizzie Spruce. Lizzie Spruce, okay. Here's what Lizzie Spruce says. She said, I think I have the opposite face, Amar, as the intimate sound of clinking glasses and squelching eyes had the same effect on me as the scene in jaws when Robert Shorr ranks his nails across a blackboard. It was very uncomfortable. The only thing that made it worth was Adam defiling whiskey with a cherry, which simply made me indignant. I enjoyed that one. I mean, you should make your drink your way you like it. I just happen to like a cherry in my old fashioned. Sorry, Lizzie. I'll make you one one day and you'll think it's good, right? Next, Sandra McGuire. She just, wow, this is... In the whole back. She did not hold back. I almost hate you both. I had to stop listening to each of your cocktail making sessions. I literally felt murderous. Wow. All right. If I was unreasonably cross, it put me into the foulest moods, the lips macking, crackling white noise type noise, just drove me mad. Sorry, Sandra. Oh, I'm not. I'm not murderous. Well, I've had quite a few death threats in my time, but that's the only literal one that threatened murder. There were some nice emails to you. There was one from Alistair Thompson. He said, just listen, and I have to say, I enjoyed it a lot. As for your two efforts, neither gave me tingles, but both gave me giggles. Dr. Fry, you sounded like no jealous, and does cocktails. Dr. Rutherford, you sounded like Gardner's question time, does cocktails. Hard to choose, all the less, Alisa. I'll tell you that. I'll tell you that. I'm not disappointed by that at all. Now, when it came to the cocktail challenge, we had two separate downloads, and this was officially a challenger competition. The more downloads would be the winner, who was better at ASMR. They get a cocktail with a cherry on top. Which is how you serve it all. Fashioned, by the way. But we're not going to know the results for that for weeks, months, possibly we might forget about it, and not come back to this at all. But we did have some people on either side supporting both of us. Simon Mowls wrote, to the cocktail battle, both attempts were really good. I was surprised that Adams actually produced a glimmer of a tingle for me, whereas Hannah's attempt was so technically good, but lacks the love. Or should I even say lust, that Adams so obviously had for his old-fashioned Adam Wins? You can have that one. You can have that one. It was 11 o'clock in the morning. Yeah. Should we go back to correspondence with listeners where they actually like us, and we like them. It's time for you, either way. Rather for the price, Curio of the week. Now, I don't have any notes for this section. So, Curio of the Week. No. Oh, no. It's okay, actually, because I've got it right here. This makes me suspicious. This is a parcel that came in from Kevin McCarthy. I'm going to say this. Dimash L. and Hannah. Please find enclosed a copy of Will It Snow? No. Broght on the 7th of November, 2007. Oh, no. Starring in inverted commas. Adam Rutherford and the lovely Kate Humbert. Oh, no. Look a little CD here. I think it is. I'm a CD. You know what this means? You know what this means? I think you watch this. Oh, we haven't just watched it. We've got clips. Have a listen. Oh, God. Right, Robert, I'm pretty sure this is the biggest pile of grit I've ever stood on. How much have we got here? We've got 6,000 tonnes in this barn and we've got 22,000 tonnes held in Glasgow. So the simplest question I can ask is, well, what is it? Well, that's a mixture of rock salt and molasses or sugar. So this is salt with sugar on it. That seems like quite a complex thing for grit. I mean, I know these people just think it's dead. That mixture allows us to melt ice and snow down as low as at minus 10 degrees. Whereas rock saltness, all in, all in, would stop working at temperatures by around minus 6 degrees. So it actually gives us a material that's better in combat than the severe weather that we can get up here in Scotland and elsewhere. Yeah. This is the biggest pile of grit I've ever stood on. It's also the only pile of grit I've ever stood on. I mean, look, that was top quality salt, Joe. I like that. What I like about it is quite sweet. It's just how desperately you're trying to make it sound interesting. Robert, I don't, I mean, he seemed like a nice guy. And, you know, he was in charge of the grit for Glasgow, which is an important job. I am... Well, wait, though. There's an important point when he's come to you and all this, because I mean, there was a question in the title of the programme. This is cruel. This is the cruelest thing you've ever done to me. No question. The grand conclusion at him. Will it snow? So you're saying what? Do you think it's going to snow? Do you think it's going to be a white Christmas? No, it's definitely not. Look, it's a scientist. He's hedging his bed. It's not you. Believe it. If I knew it was going to snow, then I'd make a bet. That's what science does. Is that what was broadcast? Because I didn't ever watch it. In fact, on the night that it was broadcast, it was on a Sunday night. It was a very quick turnaround programme, because it was... Rubbish. Because it was... had to go out before it snowed. I went to the cinema. I was... I was on a high. I... yeah. It wasn't a programme that I'd include on my CV. Ironically, it was the programme I've made that has the highest-fueering figures. Does it? How many people watched it? I think it was like over three million. Oh my god, you're not going to get that now. All of the things that I'm most proud of, you know, like documentaries about history, biology, about genetic engineering, horizons I've made, all way, way less than that. Will it snow? Knocks it out of the park. Never saw it. How times have changed? How times have changed? How times have changed? Thank you very much to Kevin Macarby. I think for that, for just giving me... Just, I mean, an unimaginable level of joy. And Michelle too, we... We've... I really enjoyed that hour that you gave us. Kevin Macarby, here with the week, Adam is it going to snow, though? That's what we want to know. Well, the conclusion of the programme is yes, but we don't know where or when would it be in a much shorter programme if we'd just done that? And I wouldn't have had stood in a giant pile of grit. No, no indeed. See you next week for the final episode in the current series of the curious cases of rather than a fry. Hi everyone, Russell Kane here. I've got just a few seconds to tell you about evil genius. Our hit podcast to 1.5 million downloads in 2019, Top 10, where we take people from history, Gandhi, Margaret Thatcher, John Lennon, and detonate fact bombs around their reputations. It's stuff you don't want to know, but you really do want to know. At the end of a lively debate, my panel of esteemed guests read banging comedians, all have to vote evil or genius. There's no grey area. This is cancel culture turned into an innovative format. Subscribe to evil genius on BBC Sounds now.
