I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science. Science. I like it. And mathematics. Yeah. And mathematics. Science and mathematics. Because today is a super-mathmo edition. I haven't worked out the ratio of maths programmes we get to do. Yes, we're definitely recommend that. You can work out the ratio in your own private time. But that's why I get a double episode. Yes, it's true, as a sort of catch-up. Now, this is super-fun, mostly because of the enthusiasm that Hannah has displayed for the next, however many minutes of audio, you're going to listen to. And I adopt almost all the way through this process my absolutely baffled face, which goes like this. Early on today, I tried to explain to Adam what an uncountable infinity was. You were here a brief explanation in the programme, but in our office, in advance, over a quarter of this programme, it... I mean, we were talking about it for, I would say, at least 90 minutes, at least 90 minutes. And mostly I was saying, but that doesn't make any sense. Also, you're saying a lot that you didn't agree, which I thought was an interesting start to take on centuries of maths that I can contest with those. Yeah, anyway, this is some chewy stuff, and I feel like I've really made some progress and I'm studying infinities here. Sometimes you want a bit of boggle there, don't you? Uh-huh. Yeah, well, there's a lot of that. So, prepared to be boggled, here comes part one of the curious case of infinity and beyond. Welcome back to curious cases, the series that answers your questions using the power of science. And also, more importantly, mathematics. Which, as I understand it, is a subdomain of science. Now, Hannah, this episode is definitely for you, where we'll be tackling our biggest case yet. And it all starts with this question from Father and Son duo in Edinburgh, sorely aged 10 and Tom aged adults. Right. Is anything truly infinite, or is infinity something that exists only in abstract stuff like mathematics? Well, I am obviously very excited. Ben, this one. I am somewhat scared. But don't be. You're going to absolutely love it. And for that very reason, we are going to devote the next two episodes to our eternal quest to understand infinity. Today's never ending tale of infinity begins with mathematics, music, and murder. It's caused paradoxes. It's caused controversy. There have been moments when people have been murdered about it. And yet, it's turned out to be one of the most powerful ideas in mathematics. And it has given us all the wonders of the modern world in science and technology. Wow, who knew masks would be so dangerous? This is serious stuff, as in, now our fascination with the infinite goes back a very long way. In the six-century BC, the Pythagoreans took a rather extreme angle on the subject, as fellow mathematician C. Strogatz from Cornell University explains. The Pythagoreans are a cult who followed Pythagoras who himself was seen as a almost a religious figure. There are descriptions of him as being able to talk to animals, being able to do superhuman things. So it wasn't just maths they were focused on. This was a whole way of life, almost. It was very secretive. And they had secret knowledge about many things, which included concerns about numbers and shapes and infinity. The Pythagorean world was very black and white. According to Aristotle, writing three centuries later, some cult members developed a table of opposites to separate everything that was good from all that was evil and infinity, which they called the unlimited, was firmly in the bad books, along with some quite strange bedfellows. Members of the Pythagorean school declared that there are principles arranged in parallel columns, thus. Limited and unlimited. Right and left. Male and female. Light and darkness. Good and bad. Square and oblong. So let me get this straight. Females were in the bad column together with infinity. And oblongs. I think I'm beginning to go off the Pythagoreans a little bit here. But where did this extreme aversion to infinity come from? They had a philosophy that everything in the universe was made of whole numbers. The idea seems to have come from the study of music, where it was discovered that if you took two strings, like imagine strings on a guitar or in their day, probably an instrument called the liar, and if you had two strings at the same tension and made of the same material, but say one was twice as long as the other, then when plucked, they would make a harmonious sound, one would be exactly one octave higher than the other. So then they discovered that other musical harmonies that they were interested in, like the interval that we call a fourth or a fifth, those also corresponded to small whole number ratios of the length of the strings, four to three or three to two. These would make these magnificent harmonies. The idea that whole numbers were somehow related to harmony seems to have affected them very profoundly, and that's where they came up with the idea that all things in the universe, including the orbits of the planets were governed by whole numbers. So when it was discovered that some numbers couldn't be expressed as a ratio of whole numbers, this was caused for murder. So what ruins their neat harmonious lifestyles? Well, it turns out that the deadly error in their sums involves the following discovery. Now we all remember Pythagoras' theorem from school, right? Yes, even I can do that. In a right angle triangle, the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the square of the other two sides. Full marks! Full marks! Very good! Okay, now if the two shorter sides have length one, then Pythagoras' theorem tells you that the hypotenuse is the square root of two. I was literally about to say that where are you going with this maths? Because the square root of two, my friend, is what is known as an irrational number, and those are what cause the murder. An irrational number has infinitely many digits after the decimal point, and they never repeat, and never show any pattern at all. And this came as a great source of unhappiness to the Pythagoreans, the discovery of irrational numbers, which is usually attributed to one of their members, a person named Hepassus, who, according to legend, was taken out to sea and thrown overboard and drowned because of his discovery that some numbers could not be expressed as a ratio of two whole numbers. He's quite an extreme reaction. Well, you know, we take our mathematics seriously. You mathematicians are really ruthless. Let's get mess with the maths, okay? Believe me, I have new found respect for you guys. Now over the next centuries, mathematicians continued to wrestle with the idea of infinity and argue violently about it, until it reached a crescendo with the somewhat mind-boggling work of Gail Cantor. Here's mathematician Eugenia Cheng, author of Beyond Infinity. Cantor was a mathematician in the late 19th century and early 20th century, and he, through doubt, on many of the things that mathematicians took for granted. And of course, whenever you do that, then you meet resistance, and he met tons of resistance from the leading mathematicians of the day, who were outraged at his suggestions. Okay, and one of his ideas, as I understand it, is the totally mind-bending idea that some infinities are bigger than others. So be gentle with me. What can be bigger than infinity? First of all, it is very mind-bending and it's supposed to be mind-bending. So if you feel like your brain is contorting out of your skull, that's probably right. And that's what maths can do sometimes, and it's sometimes it makes people afraid. So don't be afraid if you feel like your brain is contorting out of your skull. The idea is that you might think that infinity is the biggest possible thing, but it is possible to make a hierarchy of bigger and bigger infinities. Small children sometimes have this kind of argument where they go, I'm right, no, I'm right, no, I'm right times 10. Well, I'm right times 100. And then if you have a particular kind of small child, they'll go, well, I'm right times infinity. And then the other child might try and go, I'm right times infinity plus one, which might actually be the same as infinity. And then the other one might try going, I'm right times two infinity. But that also might be the same as infinity. So the thing you have to do to get to an actual bigger infinity is to take two to the power of infinity. And so if the other small child can say, I'm right times two to the power of infinity, then they really will have got themselves a bigger infinity. I'm pretty sure I've had that argument, and now I know how to win it, and I'm going to have it with my 10-year-old son tonight. Well, of course, you can't win it, because then they can just go, well, I'm right times two to the power of two to the power of infinity. Damn it. Okay, one of the very key things to notice here is that whether you can write your numbers in a list, right? So the counting numbers, one, two, three, four, five, that is one example where you definitely can write a list. And the even numbers, two, four, six, eight, or the square numbers, four, nine, sixteen, twenty-five, all of those lists, they might go on forever, but you always know what the very next number is going to be, right? Agreed, with you so far. So if you can write a neat list without leaving any gaps, that is going to be one kind of infinity. Following me? Like a panther. Okay. But now, let's try and write another list for the numbers between zero and one. Right, I'm going to kick off the list with the number zero. What do you want to be the second number in your list? Okay, between 0 and what, I'll go with 0.1. Hang on a second, you've missed out 0.09. Okay, 0.09 then. Well, no, sorry, you've missed out 0.086549 there. Fine, okay, 0.86, whatever you just said. Now, you've just missed out 0.074683924185. I was going to do that one next. What the point is, however you try and write your list of numbers between 0 and 1, I can always come along and I can point out a number that you've missed off your list. So even if your list is infinitely long, there are going to be an infinite number of gaps in your list, with an infinite number of numbers between those gaps that you'll have missed off. And that means that the number of numbers between 0 and 1 is a bigger infinity than the number of whole numbers between 1 and infinity. Huh, and my brain has definitely contorted out of my skull. It is supposed to, to be fair. It is supposed to. I am not the only one because this idea was so out there in Cantor's time that he really caught some flak for it. Poincaré, the famous mathematician Poincaré, declared that this was a grave disease. And Chronica said that that Cantor was a corruptor of youth because he didn't just have these these terrible ideas, but he had the nerve and audacity to teach them to young people. Imagine that. And I understand that Christians objected to it because they thought that it contradicted the idea of God because God is the absolute infinity. Whereas if you have a hierarchy of infinities, where does that leave God? Well, pretty confused too, I'd imagine. But eventually mathematicians accepted the idea of infinity and it has led to some amazing discoveries. It has allowed us to imagine not just things that are immensely big, but also things that are infinitesimally small. And from there, we come to one of my favorite bits of maths. Is it calculus? It certainly is. Calculus is probably one of the greatest ideas of all time. Right up there with evolution, with relativity, with quantum theory. These ideas have changed the world, have changed the course of civilization. If you want to get grips with the theory of calculus and the maths are very, very small, let's start by thinking about something very, very fast, lightning bolt fast. Imagine watching the Beijing Olympics when you say in bulk broke the world record in the 100 meter dash. I don't know if you can remember that sprint. He was almost in last place coming out of the starting blocks. He eventually caught up at about 30 meters. And then as he was finishing the race at the 80 meter mark, he was so far ahead that he put his arms down and just coasted across the finish line and slapped his chest. It was an unbelievable performance. The reason I bring up U-Sane Bolt is that it's a natural question to ask how fast did he run at his fastest? You know, just exactly how fast was he going? And what's interesting about that question is you have to define speed at an instant. We're not asking what's his average speed over the race. I'd like to know when was he running his fastest? Like if he were wearing a speedometer, when would it show the largest number? And to define that, you'd have to somehow think of what speed means over a very short time interval, like over a millisecond or over even a fraction of a millisecond. What I'm getting at is that this idea of defining speed over shorter and shorter time intervals gives us calculus. Well, I didn't think that was possible, but I think Steve loves calculus even more than you. We're joint top. Now, calculus is essentially the study of change, and it is all predicated on the very simple, very clever idea of cutting things like time or distance into an infinite number of chunks. Right, and this isn't some niche-old bit of boring textbook nonsense. No, it's not. Because what calculus has allowed us to create is genuinely amazing. Once we have those notions, then we can start to invent things like CT scanners that help us see brain tumors inside of people's skulls. You know, if unfortunately they happen to have brain cancer, in the old days you had to open a person's skull to do invasive surgery, exploratory surgery, just to find where the tumor was. Today, thanks to calculus, we can do non-invasive imaging. We were able to put astronauts on the moon. We can use cell phones because of the knowledge that we've gained from calculus combined with physics. The modern world wouldn't be possible without calculus, and calculus is predicated on the use of infinity. So, Dr. Fry, when it comes to whether infinity exists, can we say case sols? Well, Dr. Rutherford, infinity has been a dangerous but invaluable idea in mathematics. There's the bizarre concept that some infinites are bigger than others, and it's allowed us to develop calculus, which we've used to look deep inside our brains and travel out into space. But the big problem with infinity is trying to find it. And in the next episode, we'll be asking whether anything, including the universe itself, is actually infinite. Okay, so two parts on this, that's the end of part one, absolutely straight. I feel like we've nailed the pure theoretical maths of infinity. Wow, that was hard work for me. You know what they are? So some mathematicians are going to get annoyed at me if you're not giving a proper proof, a full and complete proof of why some infinite sets are uncountable. We did try, actually, we did try. We rewrote it. Why we wrote it about 45 times. Turns out 12-minute programs, where you don't have any diagrams. It's not the ideal scenario to explain, actually quite complicated idea. I recommend any mathematician find a relative and just explain it to them without the use of visual aids and they have a race. They have to get the explanation out before the person falls asleep. Yeah, I did struggle with this. I spent quite a lot of the interviews I did for this programme. And the next one, which is with the astrophysicist Sean Carroll, we hear that next week. Andrew Poncell as well. And Andrew Ponce, and yes, but. Famously Cosmology is nice, man. Both of the interviews I did weren't face to face, which I think is probably a good thing, because if Eugenia Cheng and Sean Carroll could see my face when I was asking these questions, it was mostly this face sort of expressing, oh, God help me, this is really hard. Don't you think, though? I sort of think that there's definitely nothing harder about infinity than there is about some stuff in quantum mechanics or general relativity, my goodness. Like it's proper mind-boggling stuff. But somehow I think that people are generally just slightly more comfortable with the ideas of having their mind stretched, because it's something physical. I do. And also I think it's not experiential in the sense that we can all count. All right, and we can keep counting. And we sort of, you know, when you're a kid, you do that game where you go, well, infinity plus one. Infinity plus one, you keep going. So it becomes a sort of just a numerical one-upmanship. And so when you begin to introduce concepts like there are different types of infinity, and like we said at the beginning, we spend, you know, pretty much the best part of two hours with Hannah trying various different methods to explain this to me. And I think it did click eventually, which is some of what you heard in the program itself. But I feel like I've made progress here. I think the thing that I was struggling with is it's more to do with the set of numbers you're talking about rather than the actual numbers themselves. Is that right? You're making that face at me again. It's my loving face. The loving sort of, I need to put you out of your misery face. Sort of loving faces, you seal a Hessian sack and throw it off a bridge for your favourite cats. I wouldn't do it that way with you. I'd choose a much more cozy method. Anyway, was that not it? The numbers between 0 and 1 are uncountable because there's an infinite number of bits, there's an infinite number of fractions between each of those numbers, which means that is a far greater set of numbers than the integers, which you can just keep adding on. No, so it's not about the fractions. Because the fractions actually, you can count the fractions. There's a very clever trick if you want to count up the fractions. There is a way to count up the fractions. It's the irrational numbers. It's things like the square root of two. Numbers that go on forever, numbers that continually keep changing with no discerning pattern that you will ever find hidden within them. Those are the numbers that really screw you up, basically. Those are the things that make it uncountable. You can't write a list of those numbers. That, okay, I think I understood it. I think it was my crappy explanation, which made- Which made- Which made- Yes. The other thing that I'm really liked about having this chat with Adam earlier was that he's clearly a very well read man. So he would drop in words like original and cardinal. And what was the other word that you kept on saying? Alif not. I think it's used for 10 minutes before that. You kept dropping them in and using them invagely the right way. It was very lovely. I enjoyed it, great. I think this must be exactly what happens whenever you try and talk to me about genetics. Well, yeah, I think there is a semantic problem here because we use word. You guys, physicists and mathematicians often use words which appear to have normal meanings as well as your freakish technical jargony meanings. Whereas in genetics, for some reason, which I absolutely hate, we adopted a load of absolutely incomprehensible jargon which has the opposite effects. It makes things incomprehensible and jargony when actually they're things that would be much more easy to understand. Although I do really like it, when you spend a lot of time around one group of people, so you know, a group of mathematicians are all friends with each other, or I imagine the same with the group of biologists or being friends with each other, that language starts to seep through into every day conversation. I remember I once had a chat with a maths professor and he was talking about how he'd found his teaching career and he said, you know, my relationship with my students has been sinusoidal in time. And I'm sure there's a cream for that. He means up and down, basically. Well, I think there was someone else who was describing the wedding that they'd just been to as isomorphic to another. Wow. Was it isomorphic? Yeah. What does that mean? It was quite dull. You know, I can't remember. Let's cut that. Look, I think it means the same. Look, we've got, there was a, I think we made a pretty decent fist of trying to understand the concept. We clearly find very easy, but I think normal humans find a little bit baffling. Not easy, not easy to be fair, not easy, but I am comfortable with the fact that it bends my mind. Yeah, that's right. And that's why we've got two episodes on it. We've had loads of questions in from the curious about infinity. Jean-François Aéon from Canada, Alan Coxen, David Glickman, Lydia Blummer, and her son Sebastian, all asked questions about infinity. Yes, and we also had this one in from a Nayscale, which I really like. She's, she's a seven from Beres and Edmunds. It was sent in by her dad Josh. And she asked, is infinity an even number? Well, here is Steve Strogatz with the answer. Well, I've had people ask me questions, is infinity an even number or an odd number, or do odd and even not apply? Is it even a number at all? And you know, we'd have to conclude that it's not really a number in the usual sense, because the normal rule for an odd number would be that if you add one to it, it becomes an even number. But with infinity, if you add one to it, it's still infinity. So, so can't really be even or odd. And mathematicians would say that it's not really a number. It's a property. It's a property of a collection of items. You know, that you can say all whole numbers form a set, which has infinitely many numbers in it. But, but infinity itself is not a number. It's a property of the set of all numbers, or the set of all points on a line or whatever. This is a bit like the type of question that sounds quite childlike and simplistic, and actually generates some of the most sophisticated answers. What's the tiniest dinosaur? I love it. That was a favorite of that. Yeah, it's true. I really love those questions. And you know what, though, actually, one slightly childlike thing that we did to coincide with the first episode of the series, which was about Vikings, was Michelle Borsch, a very silly Viking house. And I noticed that while wearing my moustache, which we used for the original photoshoot of the series, and wearing a Viking hat, I looked quite a lot like Obelix. I hadn't picked up on it at the time, but when I looked at the photos, you do have ginger plats. I did. I deliberately put it in plat. I mean, I was playing up to it. A lot of people wanted to point it out as though we weren't aware, and it was like, this is kind of a point. But I didn't realise it was so clearly Obelix. Thing is though, there were a lot of other people on Twitter who were upset with us for wearing a fake plastic Viking hat, because it had horns on it. And in fact, Jeanine Ramirez, who was on the programme, and was our Viking expert, she did actually say in the course of the programme that Viking helmets never had horns on them. So you have to listen. I know, but I look. I'm not going to let facts get in the way of a good silly photo. Yes. I, for one, stand by my Obelix colleague. I do have to acknowledge that I did make an error. Did you? I did. What did you do wrong? Well, we were calling a section of that in the London Eye, and I referred to the first Viking to set foot in the Americas. So the first European to set foot in the Americas, I said, was Eric the Red. Now, of course, it wasn't Eric the Red. It was Eric the Red Sun, leaf Ericsson. Yes. So sorry about that. People, I'm misinformed you, but anyway, there you go, leaf Ericsson, we try not to make mistakes, but we do put our hands up on emotions. Yeah, and we do. That we do. That we do. You know what else we put our hands up at Anneg knowledge? The Curios of the Week. There it is. The amazing jingle by Jeff Perkins, Curios of the Week. Right. So on our new webpage, we're going through a bit of a sort of renaissance on curious cases. We've got Leabsey Sounds, and we've got Curios Corner. Now, a gallery of the favourite pictures that you have sent in. We certainly do. And in that gallery, you will find the designs that have been sent in from Curios of the Week badges. We've got those badges printed, Jeppe Michelle. We've got the old ones, but not the new ones, yeah. Michelle. Oh, Michelle. One job. I mean, what one job on top of all the other jobs that she does for this programme? One extra job. Yeah, sorry, Curios. We don't have the badges printed yet. We've also got some of the photos that have been sent in from Curios Bay in New Zealand. We've got lots of hello to all the Kiwis out there. Weird how many New Zealand listeners we have, but we love you all. It's good. It's about half their population, I think. But we also, in Curio Corner, we have got some very beautiful drawings by today's Curio of the Week Mark Hipwell. Yes. Mark is a bridge engineer from Birmingham, and he's also an amazing sketch artist, and he's drawn a few things for us, including the name for the Curios. The final vote was it came down to Curios versus Gerard. I don't know whether you remember the whole thing about Gerard, but Mark has depicted this dilemma for our age as a sketch, and it's now on the Radio 4 website. It is indeed. It's that dilemma through the medium of drawing. I heard the tape model, we're particularly interested in acquiring the original. Yes, but it will remain in the public ownership for us. Yes, absolutely. We're absolutely... Of course. ...strident about that, I mean. For the new listeners, we ought to explain what they were talking about. Yeah, why there was the dilemma between the Curios and the Gerarfs. Curios is pretty self-expansary. I mean, it's sort of based on the name of our show. Yes, but what about Gerarfs? What? Indeed. So, as many I very serious people, but every now and then stuff doesn't quite go to plan. And the Gerarfs thing, as you will know here, came from this blooper reel. Okay. What? Go. Wish bit. Yeah, oh, it's me. Luckily, one of the results of fainting is that it makes you horizontal, so the blood rushes back to your brain. And it will happen to almost half of us at some point in our lives. Hang on, I hear you cry. Humans aren't the only ones with their brains at the top of their bodies. What about Gerarfs? No, wait, that was terrible. Vegetable. Yes! Hey, Jess! Are you going to hit somebody? What are you going to do? While we're in space, so the sun, big fiery ball in the centre of our solar system. We have the moon, big cheesy ball. In the centre of our solar system. Spear, say sphere. Just go from big cheesy sphere. You're not so big cheesy, bro. You say big cheesy ball. Okay. The moon. The moon. Hey. I'm sorry. Okay. I'll lead it. I'll lead it. No. So the sun, big fiery ball in the centre of our solar system. Yeah, the moon, big rock. Okay, so the sun, it's a big fiery ball in the centre of our solar system. Yeah, the moon, big rocky ball, Jupiter, big gasy ball. Noticeing a connection here? Yes, I'm getting a lot of spheres in space. A lot of balls. You couldn't resist, could you? You could not resist that. So Michelle, but Michelle, but but me. Actual words. Hang on. I hear you cry. Humans aren't the only ones with their brains aloft. What about giraffes? Why are mainpontas feuding? Well, giraffes. Well, giraffes are dead. I'm sorry. I think you can get going. I don't know. What about giraffes? What about giraffes? Well, that was horrible. Oh, and now some nose. If you wouldn't be so kind. If I'd be so kind. Right, horse impressions, take one. Clever hands. Ney. It's a camp horse. A ney. Oh, no. Okay. I want to talk about giraffes. What about giraffes? I want to talk about giraffes. I want to talk about giraffes. Go ahead, do it right. What is the line? You're saying so. You don't fry a case of. So, doctor, what's your name again? It's going to say don't a case. You're fry solved. And I do a name. Ney. My bedroom. Why do all my horse impressions sound like I'm in a carry-on film? We're very, very serious people. I don't know how this happens. I think it's surprisingly hard to read words from a script. No, no. I don't make mistakes. Especially ones that we've actually typed out using our own fingers and minds. Presumably, Michelle has a colossal archile that she's one day going to blackmail us with all of the other in appropriate moments from the curious cases. Yes. Which there are many. Many. Let's hope that doesn't happen. Anyway, Mark it well, you are Curia of the Week. Badge will be going out in the post-to-earth as soon as Michelle gets off her ass. And that actually makes them. Okay, that is it for part one of Infinity and Beyond. Don't forget to send us your entries for Curia of the Week. Two. Curious cases at BBC.co.uk. And next episode, as we've mentioned, is going to be hunting for Infinity where we look to see if we can find something in the universe that is actually infinite. Hello, it's me, May Martin. I hope you enjoyed the podcast you just listened to. Can I recommend another podcast that you might enjoy? It's called Grown Up Land. And it's a podcast for people who find the adult world a bit much. Every week, me, Bishakai Ali and Ned Sedgewick and tons of other guests try to get our heads around stuff that confuses us, like sex. Very confused by sex, fear, food and friendship. I'm running out of time for this ad. Ned, how would you sum up the podcast? I'd say it's like a guidebook for people who don't really know where they're going or where they've been. Great, thanks Ned. That's Grown Up Land and you can find it on BBC Sounds.
