I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC Hello, curious. This is part two of one of our epic two pauses. Last week, Gravity, this week, Dark Matter. Enjoy. MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC MUSIC Last week, we got heavy. This week, we're going dark. Yes, today we're continuing our two-part investigation to understand gravity, prompted by the question sent into curious cases at bbt.co.uk. By listener Emma, she asked, how does gravity pull us? OK, first let's do a quick recap. So anyone who's ever let go of a hammer if you send to meters above their foot, will know that we have got a pretty good understanding of the effect of gravity. Yes, ow. Its underlying cause, however, is a different matter. Newton and Einstein did an admirable job at filling in the picture at the scale of humans and planets and the universe. But it's down at the very small where we are still searching for the gravity particle to complete the theory, known as the graviton. But for today's curious case, there's another puzzle at the other end of the size spectrum, which is that according to the way that gravity behaves, spinning galaxies should fly apart, but mercifully they don't. Mercifully indeed. And the best possible explanation for why they don't is that almost all of the universe is missing. Yes, with everything that we can detect, with the best telescopes in the solar system, we can see around about 4% of the universe. Which is basically none of this. And that came as a bit of a surprise. There's a whole hunk of matter missing. So we gave it a name, dark matter. The trouble is there's a few fairly basic outstanding questions. What is it? Where is it? Why is it? And who is it? Maybe we'll never know. So we did actually have a specific question on this very matter. Peter Fraser wrote in to ask us, if dark matter is a proper theory, or just a fudge to make sense of all of the bits about gravity gravity that we just can't explain. That is indeed the question. And in situations like this, there's only one man we turn to. Indeed there is. The man who puts small into cosmology, it's Professor Andrew Ponson from University College London. There's a hypothesis that there's just extra stuff that's really hard to see using traditional methods where you try and pick up light from it. And for that reason, we call it dark matter. But dark matter is just a name that's given to this extra stuff that we think has to be there to account for the extra force of gravity that we know is out there. Hold on, so what's actually happened is you've got how your telescope, you've had little look, you've tottered up some equations, and then you've been like, hang on a second, there's something missing. Let's invent something that we can't see or detect that we reckon must be there to make our sums work. Yeah, I mean, I think that's a fair characterization. But that is actually science. That's my argument anyway. Okay, so this is one of those situations that we occasionally, quite frequently have on this programme, where I get a little bit cynical. When something has to exist, when it's required to exist, but we haven't any evidence for it, that seems like a bit of a problem. What is in maybe the equation that told you this thing has to exist isn't the thing that's right. Yeah, I mean, have you done your sums right, basically? Okay, but this stuff has to be right. Einstein's view of the universe, Einstein's view of gravity, every time that you try and test it, every time that you try and bend it and break it and use it to make predictions, it stands up. So we know that that's got to be the right view of gravity. And if that is, then that means there has to be loads of extra stuff creating this extra character in space and time. Yes, and it's a bold move to go up against Einstein anyway. I mean, we're friends, but in a head to head, I don't know. I will concede at that point. But, you know, how do we know, though? Okay, because scientists don't just make this stuff up and then shrug their shoulders, they make this stuff up, and then they test the hell out of it. You can say, well, what should it be doing in the early universe? We don't just have to look at the universe today. We have this cunning trick that light only travels at a certain speed. So if it's had to travel a long distance to reach us, it just takes a long time to get to us. So we can effectively look back in time by looking over large distances. So you can ask if dark matter is a real thing, and we think it is just because of looking at the nearby universe, what would it have been doing in the very opening moments of our universe? Then look back to that time, just a few hundred thousand years after the Big Bang, something called the cosmic microwave background. It's essentially light left over from the Big Bang. And the mind-blowing thing is that people made predictions for that in the 80s, based on the idea that dark matter must be right. And those predictions have turned out to be true when we've developed the technology to measure that cosmic microwave background. So for me, that's the thing that makes dark matter a really scientific proposition. You make a prediction, you go and test it, turns out to be right. Well, maybe there's something in it. Okay, fair enough. So there's a big galaxy sized hole and physicists have coloured it in, they didn't go over the edges, and if you squint really hard, it looks like the universe should do. I mean, basically, yes. Do you remember that this is cosmology and not a bodged restoration? Yes, it's not exactly pretty. I mean, you can see my frustration is that I totally get the fact that it's required to exist. All the models confirm it, but I've got this sort of, I am a mere biologist, and we rely on physical things, mostly, rather than hypothetical things. I've got this weird old-fashioned attachment to find out what stuff is actually made of. What is dark matter made of? Okay, so there's a few different theories, but first, you need to remember that everything that is in the universe is made up of very, very tiny particles. Agreed. So protons and neutrons and electrons, and quarks and bosons and muons. Let's happy with those, but go on. Okay, so basically, there is an entire zoo of particles. Everything we've ever known, everything we've ever seen, everything you've ever loved is made from a combination of the characters in this zoo. This zoo, these characters, they're so universal that they've even made a cuddly toy version of this, and it is amazing. So the photon is like a spooky ghost, the leptons, they've got kind of teenage mutant ninja turtle masters amazing. I, yes, I'm not sure this is helping much, but I now know what I'm getting you for Christmas. It is extremely expensive. I now know what I'm not getting you for Christmas. Okay, so here is where dark matter comes in. One idea, one theory, is that, well, maybe there is another character in this zoo, one that we just haven't found yet. Now, I know you're wondering what this character might look like in the cuddly toy version. I absolutely wasn't wondering that. It's a fluffy black square. I knew you were interested. Okay, well, what is it in the non-furry world? I don't know. Well, okay, back in the real world, this mystery pastoral is actually known as a wimp. Why do we let physicists name anything? Okay, this one's an acronym though, so it stands for weekly interacting, massive pastoral. Okay, well, that's not too bad. I should tell you though, this mystery pastoral, it's not actually the only theory of what a dark matter might be. There is another theory that's dark matter, isn't something small at all, but something really big. Would you like to know what that theory is called? Am I going to like this? Not really. Well, it gets better because in the early days of dark matter, the other hypothesis that held sway was matchos. It's going to be one universe and the other. Matchos or whims, someone's going to win out. Well, somebody got paid a lot of money for coming up with those acronyms. A matcho was a massive compact halo object, so there was originally an idea that maybe dark matter isn't made out of particles at all. Maybe it's really little sort of dim nuggets of stuff out there in the universe. For instance, it could be really dim stars, or perhaps even black holes, sort of swarm of black holes out there in space. But we no longer take that possibility particularly seriously, because there are ways to find out if there are all these sort of little compact objects flying around, they have subtle effects on what you see in telescopes. For instance, they actually sometimes bend the light because of their gravitational field in an effect called micro-lensing, where one of these things comes in between your telescope and a distant star. And there's just a moment where the brightness of that distant star changes. So matchos, no, but whims, whims, we've been really focused on them for quite some time. OK, well let's just rewind back to the mystery particle, the WIMP. So the W stands for weakly, as in not strong. Exactly. And the I stands for interacting. So what is the WIMP weakly interacting with? OK, so do you remember those four fundamental forces? So you've got gravity. Now, OK, we know that dark matter must interact with gravity, because that's where the theory came from in the first place. Yes. Then second force, you've got electromagnetic magnetism, which includes light. Which is why it's dark. Right, exactly. We know that dark matter cannot interact with electromagnetic magnetism. And then that leaves the strong and the weak nuclear forces. And the idea is that the WIMP somehow can feel that weak nuclear force. And that is the way that you can find this mystery particle. OK, got it. And what is the weak nuclear force again, please? OK, well, funny you should ask, because I thought I'd leave that one to Professor of Physics and Dark Matter Detectious, Cham Kuhgag from University College London. It's famously answered this way. And you can Google this. There's little memes of physicists struggling to answer. And it's basically like, well, the weak force is responsible for radioactive decay. Now, let's move on. And that's really how it works. It's basically the nucleus has the strong force, which is holding the nucleons together, or your glue onto all those quarks and constituents. And then you've got the weaker nuclear force that is breaking things apart. So when we do get any kind of radioactive decay, it's the force that allows us to happen. It's also the force that allows something like dark matter to come. So if there is a dark matter particle that is neutral, it's not charged, it would come in, and it would just screen pass the electrons orbiting this atom, because it doesn't feel electromagnetic. But then it would come in, and it would feel a force when it got near the nucleus. And it's that force. It's that weak force that it might feel that we're calling the weak nuclear force. And so there'd be an exchange of particles, fundamental particles, as it got closer to the nucleus. And then it would sort of recoil. So it wouldn't really do anything. It's the force that would allow a dark matter particle to essentially give us sort of glancing blow to an atom. Here's the idea then. You can't see dark matter, you can't detect it. But maybe you can watch a bunch of normal atoms really closely to see if there are any strange glancing blows to their nuclei. And this should happen all the time, because if the idea of dark matter is right, then there's tons of the stuff. What it would be doing now is it would be flying through us all the time. So if you held up your finger, you'd get about 100,000 dark matter particles flying through your fingertip every second at about half a million miles an hour. Now that's great. So we've got lots of dark matter all around us. But to try and detect it, what each of these dark matter particles would be doing is basically nothing. They're just flying through the earth. But here and there, if they do feel the weak nuclear force, then they may just bounce off an atomic nucleus. And what that means is that a single nucleus of a single atom might just move by about 1,000th of a hair's width. And we want to try and detect that. All right, I've got an analogy for you. So imagine that you are at a coconut shy at a fairground. OK, there's better be going somewhere. Yeah, well, yeah, well. Now imagine that there are some ghosts that are chucking loads of walls around. Ghosts, right. I think if your analogy requires ghosts, it's not working. Well, just stay with me for a second. OK, so you can't see the ghosts. You can't detect them. But you can see the coconuts. So if one of those coconuts gets nudged, then you know that there's something interesting going on. So all you've got to do is get loads and loads and loads of coconuts and watch them really, really closely except they're not coconuts. And there are no ghosts. No, it's wimps. And it's a gigantic vat of liquids then on buried in a mountain. We put together giant vats of liquids then on that we've extracted from the atmosphere and condensed down to about minus 110 degrees Celsius. It then turns into a liquid. It's normally a gas in the atmosphere. And once it's a liquid, it's phenomenal. Any kind of interaction, any radiation that enters that detector and hits an electron or hits a nucleus or an atom, it just lights up like a Christmas tree. And so then we can say that, OK, something just happened. And then we've got to do lots of analysis and figure out what just happened. Was that just a gamma ray or a beta particle or just some radiation? Was it somebody walking past our detector with a banana? And you know, potassium 40 just coming out and gamma rays hitting it? Or might it have been dark matter? Whoa, OK, just back up just a second here. OK, there's different types of ghosts. No, it's not the ghosts. And over the ghosts. What Cham just said there was one of the grandest experiments ever devised by humankind could be invalidated by a banana. Yeah, that's true. OK, so bananas, they've got potassium in them and potassium to caves and it chucks out particles. And it could be those particles that are knocking over the coconuts. Oh, you're down with that. You've just made a peanut collarder. Well, they really, that's... Hang on, peanut collarders got pineapple in it. I think you're getting confused to your yellow fruits. That's a fair point. Again, not chosen entirely relevant at this point. But I'm just amazed that these detectors are so sensitive to coconuts go sobrenarnas. They're sensitive to all three and more, in fact. And that is why they have to put these gigantic vats of zen on in the middle of a mountain. It's got to be miles underground preferably. And the reason we drop it down so far is to shield from cosmic rays. They're coming from our atmosphere all the time and streaming through us. And as long as we can beat those down, so that we're only getting about a millionth or maybe a billionth of the number of cosmic rays that you'd get if you were standing on the surface, then we can do our job. And as long as you're not in a uranium mine or something like that, you're OK. I can see that there would be both health and safety and scientific concerns if you were going to build your lab inside a uranium mine. But can we just go as the banana? Yeah, OK, go on in. So unslightly fascinated by the possibility that giant trillion dollar experiments can be severely upset by fruit or other small matters silly things. So you know there's that time at CERN, the Large Hadron Collider in 2009, that was massively halted when a bird dropped a bit of baguette into it. I did not know that. Yeah, it sounds like an unfortunate event. It was unfortunate and expensive. Thank you, bird. Then there was that time, which was also at CERN. In fact, in 2012, when the Large Hadron Collider stopped working cause a stone martin had chewed through a 66,000 volt transformer. What's a stone martin? It's a type of weasel, but I don't think that's the important bit right now. Then there was the time also at CERN, actually when they were building it and they discovered an underground river and so this is really cool. They froze it using liquid nitrogen and then dug it out. What happened to all the fish? Again, I don't think that was the point. Look, I've got one more example. Was it CERN? No, it wasn't. It was actually at Gran Saso in Italy where they were detecting neutrinos. And everyone remembers this. The results came back and the neutrinos had traveled faster than light, but nothing travels faster than light and it turned out that there was a loose cable into the back of a computer. Wow. Where were those neutrinos coming from? They were from CERN. OK, CERN. I mean, wow. I mean, you invented the World Wide Web, but that was a while ago now. Right. Anyway, back to the question. Sorry about that, CERN. Dark matter. Yes, similar on the source of scale to CERN, the experiments that are hunting for these whims. They are not going to be small. The ones that we're waiting to turn on right now are two detectors. One's called Luxeplin, and that's bringing together the Lux Program in South Dakota with the completed Zeplin Program in the UK to make LZ or LZ. We say LZ because they put in more money, the Americans will give them the Z. And so Luxeplin is just about to turn on out in South Dakota. So our team at UCL and lots of others in the UK are working frantically on this as our 13 institutes in the US, plus Korean institutes and some Russian and Portuguese and so yeah, we're hoping to turn that on imminently. And then our direct competitors just as sensitive as the LZ experiment and they're called Zin on Entan and they're under the Grand Sesto mountains in Italy. So rather than having to go down a mine, you can just go under mountains because ultimately what you want is that rock above you to shield you from the cosmic race. And so they're in a really funky laboratory as well in Italy and they're about to turn on as are we. And these detectors are the most sensitive Dark matter detectors ever constructed. So we're hoping that this will be the time that we actually find Dark Matter. I just think this is the most extraordinary example of our collective insanity as humans. I think it's like we have this irrepressible thirst for knowledge, no matter what the cost is. And one day in a room somewhere, someone found a problem with their equation and then a few decades later and we've got a gigantic vat stuck in the middle of a mountain filled with thousands and thousands of liters of liquefied Zin on. I just I think humans really are capable of the most amazing achievements. Yes. Just as long as there aren't any baguettes or weasels involved. You know what though, when it comes to these experiments, they didn't start off this big. They actually started off much, much smaller. My first detector my PhD was like 150 grams. And then we moved into sort of liquid Zin on and that was a few kilograms to tens of kilograms to hundreds of kilograms. And then the world leader at the moment is Zin on one ton, which is out at Grand Sassos. And that's got a ton and LZ will have 10 tons. The reason for that is that the more target you have, the more sensitive you are to the dark matter. There's more chance of it going through and hitting an atom if you've got more atoms ever to hit. And we wanted to get to the tonscale because that's where you start to probe the really interesting theoretical phase space. It's all well and good saying work. We think this is dark matter that to really detect it, you're going to need about a ton. And of course we build a ton and then the theory say, no, no, no, we meant 10 tons and no doubt when we get to 10 tons, oh, we meant 100 tons. And each time you want to go bigger and better, it's like the analogy I tend to use is sort of like deep sea diving. It could have been that that hundreds of grams would have been enough. And it's like, you go swimming and you're looking for a fish, you've no idea how big it is or what depth it lives at. So you just swim around on the surface of the ocean for a bit. Don't see it, come out, get your snorkeling gear come back. Still don't see it, go out, get your screw big gear come back. Still don't see it, now you need to build a submarine. All right, still don't see it. Now we need to build the world's greatest submarine that's going to withstand pressures that no one's ever, okay, and so on and on we go. Okay, so we've got a mountain dungeon super called Zen on Vat. Now this is all a bit bon fillin. Is it, what's the next level up? Okay, well in physics you either go big or you go home. And if this current round of detectives doesn't work, then there's probably only scope for one more round. That's what they're going to call the generation three detectors. And that is about as big as you can go to try and find this dark matter particle, the Wimp. Right, so listen, Peter asked if dark matter is a fudge theory. And I think we're pretty satisfied that we don't think that it is. Yeah, I think it just holds up way too well to be a fudge. But hold on though, because this is not the first, well questionable sounding theory that physics has come up with. So I asked Chan, will dark matter go the same way as another invented phenomenon used to explain something that we didn't really understand, the ether? No, that's an easy one. However, the question, is this a fudge to fit available data? Yes, absolutely. That part is spot on. We have theories and we test them and we test them, we test them like gravity, like a standard model of particle physics. And then we look out at the cosmos and then we see something that just doesn't fit. And we say, all right, we'll leave away wrong with these other theories. And for some reason it's fitting all this data, but it doesn't fit this. Let's try and figure that out. Oh, there's just something else there. And the easiest thing we can think of is dark matter. And that's not just because it's just one sort of fudge to one set of data. It shows galaxy spinning around, you know, star spinning around too fast. It's a cosmic microwave background that we get from 300,000 years after the big banks. So you know, evidence from 14 billion years ago, evidence from today, evidence from galaxy clusters, a colliding and ghosting through one another in this mysterious way that can only really be explained with the existence of dark matter. So we've got all this evidence that comes in and says, look, there's something going on here, but that it's going to be confined to the bin like ether was or something like that. I don't think so. The eth is one of those things that I vaguely know of, but only in passing. Why actually was it? It was basically first suggested by Plato in them olden days, but it was a really core part of Newton's theory of the universe. And it was a sort of space substructure that was invented to allow the propagation of gravity and also light, specifically a type of ether called the Lumeniferate-seether. And Newton suggested that there was this structure to space that condensed around planets and that explain gravity, and it condensed in certain ways that allowed light to travel through it. And so on. And this becomes the sort of dominant theory of gravity and light's propagation in the universe right up until the end of the 19th century. It sounds quite like space time, but just maybe a bit more magical. I don't think it was magical at the time, but I think that that's a good analogy. And in fact, when the ether gets debunked, which happens at the end of the 19th century, it's only a few years later that Einstein comes up with space time. And he actually cites it. He cites the experiments of Michelson and Morley as part of his work in developing space time, which we now consider to be how the universe is structured. These are the experiments where they debunked the ether. It was the first one. The Michelson-Morley experiment towards the end of the 19th century. And you got this giant slab of rock and a huge vat of liquid mercury. What is it with a rock and vats of liquid? It's physicists. They just really like giant vats of really hard to find liquids. Anyway, no, the reason is at a buffer to stop vibrations, to stop bananas ruining your experiment. But the idea was the luminiferous ether. It had a direction to it in space. And that's how light from the sun got to the earth as the earth moves around it. And the idea was that if it had direction and the speed of light would be different if you went in one direction compared to perpendicular at right angles to it. So that's what Michelson-Morley did on their stone mercury floating craziness. Try it, try it again, show the two speeds were the same. Exactly the same. Speed of light was unaffected by the direction of travel. So that was the first experiment that said, the ether, you know, it's been around for a couple of thousand years and... Nah. OK, you can disprove the ether. But it turns out that ruling out dark matter is proving to be quite electricier. To rule out the existence of dark matter is a broader question that we'd have to get into. To rule out this particular model, you know, the weekly interacting massive particle, we intend to 15 years, we'll either have found it and know that it is WIMPS. Or it's not that. And now if it's not that, we're into an interesting space, let's say. Because what solves dark matter? What kind of candidates would fit the bill for dark matter? So I've told you about these weekly interacting massive particles, they do it. But you can also get particles that go down to a fraction of the mass of the proton. And by a fraction, I mean a billionth of the mass. WIMPS are a few hundreds of protons in mass. But you can also get up to black holes. So there's sort of 30 to 40 orders of magnitude of mass that fit the bill for dark matter. It really could be anything. It's ridiculous. And that's what makes it so hard. If the scientists don't find any WIMPS, that is going to be interesting in and of itself. But if they do, it won't be the first time that they've managed to prove the existence of some hypothetical particle using an experiment with distinctly James Bond villainy undertones. Very true. They've definitely done this before. Successfully, the neutrino was dreamt up in 1930, but it wasn't actually found until years later. Neutrinos are really hard to detect particles. They were made up to make sense of nuclear reactions. And then it took decades before anyone could actually detect one of them. But they're there. We now know they're there. We can build detectors to find these things. It's just really, really hard because nature can make little particles that are just intrinsically really hard to detect. So there is a precedent for just making things up and then going and looking for them. So in effect, there is a fine line between making stuff up and theoretical physics. Here's Dr. Katie Kluft who studies gravity at the University of Oxford. It is almost philosophical, if you like. I mean, I think scientists have to admit that we can't say what reality is. What we can say is, if I do this experiment, what should happen? The ultimate proof of dark matter is, can we do an experiment that predicts a certain outcome that would only be the case if dark matter was this kind of invisible particle? And that's exactly what people are trying to do. But as I say, at some point, it could be some other theory that we just haven't thought of that looks very like this kind of particle, but actually something very different. But then for that other thing, we need to work out a prediction and go and do an experiment that confirms it. Gravity in particular suffers from this problem that people think you are sitting in your office, thinking about things as Einstein did, and suddenly you're hit with this magical idea, and you're going right to paper on it, and someone goes and checks it, and suddenly we understand the whole of the universe perfectly. Unfortunately, we don't live in that kind of era anymore, and maybe we've never lived in that kind of era. We have this perception because we see back through history how things were discovered. But science is always incremental. Science is always a little bit at a time. Someone understands one little piece of the puzzle here, and someone puts another piece of the puzzle in here, and suddenly becomes easy to finish the jigsaw, because we've got enough pieces in and we see what it's going to be. So whether it's the ether or neutrinos or dark matter, they are made up theories, but they're not just plucked out of nowhere. This is the scientific process, and it works. I'm not ashamed of making things up. At its heart, physics and science is an act of creation. You have to be creative. You have to make leaps. And then you just have to follow them up and check whether they're right, because otherwise, obviously, you just go off into Cloud Cookooland. But there's no way around it. At some point, you have to step into that unknown and make something up. So, Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to the curiousness of gravity and dark matter, can we say case solved? Yes, Dr. Fry. And no. Dark matter was invented to fill in a huge gap in the universe. But it's not a fudge. We just don't know what it is yet. All where it is. But it definitely exists, probably. And the hunt goes on, using the most magnificent creations that humankind has ever built. And their experiments. I love it. I love these ones. And I know I'm meant to be the cynical one saying I don't get it. That's because I don't really understand the maths. But actually, it's wonderful. I just have a lot of fun with those ideas. OK, so for start of the idea that it's like a freaking Bond film is just amazing. Well, we went in one of them. We went in one. When we went to Sir. That was a neutrino detector there. It was, but it was straight out of... Actually, we say it was straight out of a Bond film, but in fact, looking back now, it looks much like the inside of the futuristic, but probabilistic machine that was in the series devs. Oh, yeah. That's true, actually, if you haven't seen that paneling. Yes. OK. So we should probably start the story from the beginning. So the people actually understand what we're talking about. Maybe. We went to go and visit Senn. This is a couple of years ago. It was for a special anniversary of maybe us or maybe Senn. I can't remember. It's completely gone from my memory as well as fun, though. We had a great time. Geneva, lovely. Anyway, while we were there, there was like rumors on the campus, whispering in the corridors between the physicists that the new neutrino detector was up and ready, but yet to be filled with liquid argon. And so John Butterworth, Professor John Butterworth, who we know very well, we spotted him in the canteen, and he sneakily got us passes and snuck us in. And we stood inside this new neutrino detector, and it was the most incredible thing. Yeah. All of the walls were gold. Panelled gold scooped out shells. It's a cube, what's it in the square? It's not as a cube. And what I can't remember, the dimensions maybe 20 meters high. I would say it was a three bedroom flat. Maybe bigger than that. But any duplex. When they told us about it, I mean, there were a couple of questions. We had questions. Yes, we did. As is our jobs. I can't remember the answers to any of them. Well, the first was, it wasn't so much a question, but the guy showing us around said this was a prototype for one that was going to be built in, I think, Utah. That sounds right. Which was also going to be in a mountain. And three times bigger, so rather than a Brazilian tons of liquid argon, it was not zen on. But the main thing I remember, actually, was the liquid argon itself apparently costs the same as Coca-Cola. That's right. That's right, because you think, my God, how do you get hold of a hundred billion gallons of argon? That's going to cost all of it. Say you know a beer bottle. That's about it. Could I have a liter of argon, please? If you start zelling it. Yeah, don't. Change for pounds. Not bad at all. I'll ask who it places. No, it places. But seriously, though, it is, again, that sentiment that we talked about on this series before, that humankind's reach should exceed its grasp. And we think up these things, we dream them, and then we build these ridiculous contraptions to test them. Tell you what else is ridiculous about humanity? We talk quite a lot about bananas in the show. Yes. We did. You know that sort of joke about bananas and falling on bananas? I mean, everyone always thinks that it's a joke, right? Of course it doesn't happen for real. Surely it's no one's ever slipped on a banana skin. I have slipped on a banana skin. I know you haven't. I really have, and I took a photo of it because I was amazed in astonished. I didn't even know that they were really slippy, but they really are. Was it split out? It was split out, then. You know what? The perfect comedy. The perfect comedy picture. Did it go? RIP? There was a fruit theme, wasn't there? It was your analogy, which actually is quite good, but I mercilessly mocks because it didn't. What about my pinnacle? It doesn't matter. Well, it included ghosts and coconuts and bananas. That's not a pinnacle, is it? No. What's that? Pineapple you need for pinnacle. Which brings us in a perfect radio full segue? Oh, well done. I see where you're going. Two. Two very important results of a poll. One of our curious cases polls. A few weeks ago, the episode on the ultimate pizza. Yes. Okay, so after the argument on the episode about whether pineapple was an acceptable addition to pizza or not, we put out a poll. Well, first, Adam put out a poll. I think that's important to say. You did your poll first. I did. I put it out to my Twitter followers. Yeah. Wouldn't exactly say it was an unbiased sample. Not entirely unbiased, but the way I posed the question, I think, also. Wouldn't have necessarily passed the electoral commission. But you know, bouncing off the back of, you know, Skongate that we had and Waspgate that we have, but 1672 people responded in 24 hours. What was the result? 50-50, bang on the nose. As to where the pineapple is an acceptable addition to pizza or not. And it also stirred up some pretty angry responses. It did. It did. Mainly by me, actually, because I'm not willing to accept that as a result. I'm not willing to accept that as a result. And so I put up my own poll. Did you repeat the poll? Surely afterwards. I added a third option. My three options were one absolutely disgusting, two tolerable or three other, please specify. And all boy-did-people specify. Yeah. This one has an open box on a poll. This one, tolerable, came out with 41%, absolute disgusting, 37%. So, Brittany Neckon-Eck, are the 22%. 25,000 people voted on that one. Whoa! And on the others, only responses. There's amazing responses. So, okay, lots of people basically said other delicious, including Greg Jenner, who we've had on the show. Some people got very angry indeed. I quite liked a person who, rather than sending in a photograph of pineapple and pizza, they switched up a bit and put some pizza on a pineapple. Which I enjoyed. You know what though? This is the one that I did, I was actually quite persuaded by. Someone said that your eats a charcootry board with meat, cheese, fruit and crackers, and then get upset on here to say that pineapple doesn't go on a pizza, because why? Meat, cheese, in, sweet, don't go together. I'm shaking with righteous anger, father, forgive them. Wow. That was the treat. Well, we appreciate all of your contributions to this conversation and your voting. And we disagree with half of it. We disagree and we absolutely reject it. And we're almost at the end of this series as well. And there will be no recourse and we will never, ever discuss this. Ever again? Or eat pineapple and pizza ever again. Correct. And now it's time for Curio of the Week. Now, we have to tell you this is going to be the last Curio of the Week, this series. We will explain it in more detail in the next episode as to why this is. But essentially, you're getting 10 proper, proper, proper episodes from us, this series. And two that are repeats of our favorite questions that we have ever been asked. And so this is going to be the last Curio of the Week. And it's a good one. It's a very good one. And it's something that you should keep in your pockets for the next series, I think. Yes. Yes. And this comes from Adam Crowe. So immediately off to a good start by having a splendid first name. Adam Wright soon and says, I've been a Curio since before we were Curios. Wow. He's an OG. Yes, he is. Seriously digging it. Since series 15, I've been wanting to find a way to get the coveted Curio of the Week Badge. And I was listening to the Hamsters Powering London episode. It was a few episodes ago in this series. And hearing the phrase that Anna said, which was, Adam's been go card. Right. Maybe see if I found my chance. This is the idea that Adam Motherford has approximately nine stories or themes that he just puts on repeat. So Adam has made Adam's been go card for us. And it's absolutely brilliant. OK, so here are the nine themes. Oh. And that obviously fits. Yes. Dr. Wasford, ready? OK. A long biology story. Fair. Definitely. And when I am, music reference, maybe in terriban. I agree. In turn, yeah. You missed the one, the music reference in this episode that I scripted for you. What was that? It was a line from Pink Floyd. What was it? Everything we do, everything we see, everything we've ever loved. Oh. I just thought it was really beautifully poetic. So it was beautifully poetic. It was written by Roger Moore and David Gilman. OK. OK. Well, tick for that one. You haven't told a long biology story yet in this one. Did tell quite a long story about the ether, but maybe that doesn't fit. OK. Food, fascism, snaps, spaghetti, non pizza, pineapple, pizza. That's not limited to me, though. That's both of us. That's tick. You're still getting a tick. A Latin phrase. Yes. I think we escaped a Latin phrase today. ETHER, actually, was from Plato. Oh, OK. Sure. I forgot about your old history bit. Sci-fi reference. Oh, well, yeah. Gravity Gravity. How could I have that? Gravity Gravity is actually from a children's book, The Moon's. OK. Next one. Darwin being Darwin. There was no mention of Darwin this programme. Well, there has been now. Correct. There's also Origin of Life, right? Yeah, absolutely. Bats and wasps, you haven't mentioned that yet. And my favourite one. Finding odd things about people hilarious, like Big Thumbs Tesla and Whetlipped Byron. I don't know, I absolutely accept this. Although I do have to say, I think food, fascism and Whetlipped Byron, that Whetlipped Byron was specifically your creation. And when you wrote that and sent it to me in a text, I went, what? And then she sent me a picture. Just Google a picture of Byron. And the only two words you'll think of are wet and lipped. It's inogable. It's on your finger, Card Adam. There's nothing you can do about it. Fine. Well, look, Adam Crowe, you are. I am giving you a cure this week. Because that's superb. However, the challenge is obviously issued for someone out there to come up with the Hanna Frybinger. There's no such thing. I very, yeah. Easily enough. No, I refuse. Anyway, you can play along to the next series with that. But we will see you next week for revisiting a couple of our favourites. But we will see you in earnest in our new series that will be coming back to your earwaves in a few months' time. Yes. And of course, as ever, don't forget to send us your question. And Hanna Fry's Bingo Card. No. For a Curio badge, we have plenty to give out. And as you may have noticed, the stakes aren't that high. Just scribble some rubbish that Adam says on a piece of paper and you get one. Yes, you do. Well, that's all Adam. And send them all in to curiouscases at BBC.co.uk. It's taken me 17 series to get that email address right. Oh, wait, before you go, we should also thank... We have two producers now. I mean, if you double-double sort of minus two. Oh, that's that maths is too complicated for me. Then you obviously need to extremely talented producers, Genwinti and Fianne Roberts and both the marvellous and exceptionally tricky circumstances. We realise the other day that we have now done two series of curious gays with Gen. And never once been in the same room as her. That is correct. Stupid year. That seems to be going on well into the next year. Anyway, thanks to both Fee and Gen. And remember, if you've got any complaints, can you direct them towards Fee and Gen and not us? And anything you want to say about how great we are, direct it either to us or to our iTunes ratings, which really helps. I mean, hate asking for it, but we did it in a roundabout way that time. Anyway, that's it from us for this series and we will see you soon. For the fun and the fun, don't forget to download Junior Mephrie. Me and Fee and Sonnet, they sell Junior Mephrie. And forget to download Was a fun and fun, never miss out on this year. You made me love Fee and Gen.
