I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. It's series 12! Hello! Hello! I am sounding more excited there than I actually feel, because... It gives Adam and I have been forced into a pod on the millennium. Why is it stopping? That's weird. Hang on. It is a little bit wobbly here. You were going to call it the millennium eye. It's now where it's called. It's called the London Eye. Is it? Yeah. Michelle, because she completely doesn't trust us correctly, has earmarked it for us to explain what the London Eye is. Oh. To our overseas listeners. It's an enormous, ginormous wheel in the centre of London. It's like a ferrous wheel. Yeah. It feels slightly freaked out. Hannah is a little bit afraid of heights. It turns out. It's nice bit, but right at the very top of this now, when... Just feel very safe. I love it. We need to explain why. There's a reason why we're on the London Eye. And so we're actually in the BBC sounds pod. They have launched a new app called BBC Sounds. A new place where you can listen to all kinds of audio content from the BBC. So music, radio programmes, podcasts and... Podcasts. And hello. They thought we want to promote podcasts by casting them out of a pod. So we are literally in a pod on the London Eye. In the next pod down there's Steve Lemak. He's just recording his programme. It's a bit wobbly. The whole of the BBC is coming from the London Eye today. So if you are in the UK, you can download this app for free. Or if you're overseas, you can visit the BBC Sounds website at BBC.co.uk forward slash sounds. But onto the subjects of our actual show. Anyway, so it's curious cases series 12. It sure is. What are we doing today? Your favourite thing ever, ever, ever. I know. Bit of genetics for you. Bit of genetics mixed in with a bit of history. My two favourite academic subjects. Enjoy. Music Welcome to the new series of Rutherford and Fry. Yes, we are here to brighten up your day with some science. Because we've asked our listeners to send us in the things they've always been curious about. To curiouscases at BBC.co.uk. Yes, things that we will attempt to answer with the power of science and maybe a bit of history too. Both of which are in today's curious case, which comes from Chloe Mann who lives in Worthy. Right, so Chloe asks, is it true that all British people can trace their ancestry to Vikings? And how do ancestry DNA tests actually work? Okay, Adam, you're a geneticist. Sounds like this question has rife up your streets. Couldn't be more up my street, it was called Rutherford Genetics, Boulevard, yeah. In fact, I've had several of these tests over the last few years. And millions of people have. How do they actually work though? Right, so you buy the kit, when you get this little package in the post, in the kit you get a little test tube. And what you have to do is generate about a cubic centimeter of your own spit. That sounds like quite a lot of saliva. It requires some concentration to generate that amount of froth. But they're not actually interested in your saliva itself, right? It's the DNA that's floating around inside it. Exactly, so it contains some of the cells from the inside of your mouth from the skin cells on the inside of your cheeks. And within those cells is your entire genome. So when you spit in the tube, it contains a load of cells which you then send off to the company and they extract the DNA. And what do they do with it once they've got it? Do they compare it to other people's DNA? Yeah, basically. So almost all of our DNA between all humans is almost identical. The vast majority of our DNA is exactly the same. But there are bits which are different between us, which is the difference between individuals. And some of those differences relate to ancestry. So they're called ancestry informative markers. And what the companies do is they look at those individual bits and they compare what yours is like to what everyone else in their databases likes. So that's all the other paying customers. See whether they're similar, see whether they're different, and then plot those on a map. So you've got your map then of what your DNA looks like. I do. I do indeed know my own... Are you going to tell her? If you ask nicely, I might show you later. Now can all British people trace their ancestry to the Viking? And I quite want to know the answer to this too. Am I a Viking, Adam? Well, Hannah, you certainly got the lurk, you got blue eyes, pale skin, a shock of red hair, which weirdly you've decided to put into two plots today. I know, I actually did that specially for this programme, because Vikings, etc. Although I am very worried, I now look like Oblix. Yeah, Oblix was a ghoul, not a Viking. What's a ghoul? A ghoul, they were the French people, and then they're different to Vikings. And Viking hats? Yeah, there seems to be some confusion here, Hannah. I think we need to find out exactly who the Vikings were. Now, I'm looking down on the site of the busy medieval trading post of Lundvik. In fact, we're in the Lundvik eye. Yes, it's London, I'm in the London eye. And I'm here with historian and broadcaster and all-round top shield maiden, Janina Ramirez. Now, Janina, give us a profile of who the Vikings actually were. Well, we would talk about the Vikings, if we're talking about them as a people, coming from largely three different geographical regions, Sweden, Norway, Denmark, and spanning a good few centuries. That is the time known as the Viking Age, but actually the word Viking isn't a noun, it's a verb, it's the act of going a Viking. It's particularly the male members of the population who would go out trading, trading, settling, and particularly in the north of England, so much of it was settled and administrative directly from Scandinavian territories. Did they make it down this far? They did, they conquered London. And as with so much of England at that point, was under the Daniel, which meant that the Romanian Anglo-Saxons, with their courts in Winchester and Wessex, were paying vast sums of money to stop them getting any further. Nina, the two things, the two words that most people associate with Vikings are rape and pillage. Now, we're here to try and work out how much genetic information has passed down for the last thousand years and has ended up in people like Hannah. So is that accurate? Would they have spread their genes because of their behaviour? I think that if I do one thing in my academic career, it is to bust the basic problems that we have with how we view the Vikings. This idea of horned helmets, of big matted beards, and that's how it is. Wait, they do have horned helmets? No, horned helmets. That was an invention of 19th century German opera. All these things are myths that have built up around them. And I think the rape and pillages are another one. And yes, there would have been quite a lot of violence. But we have to remember that the records that record this violence, this awful behaviour by these Vikings, are written by people who were attacked and destroyed by them. We have this idea of the Viking raids as intermittent. They came, they took what they wanted and they left. That's not true. They came, they stayed, they became us. OK, but who did they become? Did they become me? That is the question I put to Gillesis Mark Thomas. All right, Mark, am I a Viking? No. Oh, am I descended from Vikings? Yes. How do you know? Because if you go back to the time of Vikings, you will have so many ancestors that at least some of them will be Vikings. How can you be reasonably sure they explain it to me? Well, it's the maths. I mean, you have two parents, four grandparents, a grey-ground parent. So you can see easily that that number gets very big very quickly. It doesn't quite double in every generation. And the reason it doesn't quite double is because we're all a little bit inbred. So my mother's father's father's father's mother's mother's mother's father might be the same as my father's father's mother's father's father's mother's father. So they could join up. In fact, they do join up. So how far does this extend then? Is everyone from Britain descended from Vikings? Well, there are obviously people in Britain who are recent migrants from other continents. They may well still have Viking ancestors. We have to remember, for example, that Vikings went as far as North Africa and other parts of the world down into Russia. You can be reasonably confident that every European who's ancestry trace back European over a last few hundred years well have Viking ancestors and a large number. You can think of it as spread in your ancestry net, throwing it back in time as you throw it back in time, it gets wider and wider. And it gets wider very very very quickly as a mathematician you would appreciate. You know, doubling its generation generates big numbers very quickly. Does that mean that even someone like Adam who is definitely not pasty enough to be considered Viking? But actually, given that he has a British father and sort of European ancestry will be a bit Viking. Yes, yes, most definitely he will have Viking ancestors, yeah. Yeah, sorry about that. So my mother is Indian, so there's not a great deal of Viking in that bit of my DNA. But my dad is a son of York and that means that I have Viking ancestry just like you and pretty much just like everyone in Britain, at least everyone who doesn't come from a relatively recent migration in the last couple of centuries. I suddenly feel both simultaneously very special and not special at all. Well, that is genetics for you. I am very sorry. Does your genetic test say that then? What does it actually say? Yeah, completely predictable. It says that 50% of my DNA looks like it's Indian and 50% of my DNA is basically Western European. But what's interesting is within that European chunk, around 2% of it, according to one of these companies, 2% of it is most closely associated with Scandinavia. Oh, so are you saying you're secretly Swedish? I wish, but no. Oh, well no indeed, because hang on a second here, Mark's one must tell me about exactly this. That is not what these genetic tests show. Most of these companies, not all, but most of them, they give you what's called an ethnicity report. Now we can park ethnicity for a moment, but that's a problematic term in itself. But what they're doing is they're not actually telling you about your ancestors. What they're telling you about is where you match some of your ancestors' other descendants. Because they're generally comparing only to people living to die. So when you're getting these reports then, they're comparing you to modern humans. They're not saying that your ancestors came from Sweden, say. They're saying that you are similar to people who currently live in Sweden. Right, so they'll let you think that that means that some proportion of ancestors are from Sweden. Now that may well be true, but they generally don't compare to DNA from people living in the past. I mean, it seems quite bizarre to me because actually we do have lots of DNA data from people living in the past over the last 10, 20,000 years. But unfortunately, if you produce an ancestry report that says you're descended from Bronze Age step people, it doesn't mean a great deal. Whereas if somebody tells you you have ancestors from Scandinavia, you think, oh, good, Viking, the sexy Vikings again. But they're really comparing to modern people, to people living today. So we identify historic groups, which often we think are particularly sexy, like Vikings or Celtic princesses or I don't know, Zulu warriors or something like that. You know, the sexy groups. And then we say, well, I want some ancestry from them. Well, yeah, you've got some ancestry from them, so you can go away quite happy. Yeah, that's right. So that proportion of my genome that is Scandinavian, the 2%, actually could be matching a Scandinavian population that moved there in the last 20 years from somewhere completely different. Just is whoever ends up doing the test? Exactly. The comparative databases made up by who are the paying customers. And it doesn't really say anything about where your ancestry was from in history. What can we say about our ancestry then, given that we're just testing people against modern humans? Well, I think part of the kudos of these types of tests is people want to find out that they've got someone famous or infamous in their ancestry, or a people who are generally regarded as being pretty cool, such as the Vikings. But the truth is that if you go back a thousand years to when the Vikings were around, then everyone in Europe is the ancestor of everyone in Europe today. Does that mean, then, that I have royalty in my bloodline as well as Vikings? Yeah, it definitely does. The king that everyone likes to relate to themselves in their own family trees, too, is Charlemagne, the great European conciliator from the 8th and 9th centuries. And I can tell you exclusively reveal how far you are directly descended, actually unequivocally from Emperor Charlemagne. Yes. I know. And Edward III and William the Conqueror and... Jesus? Jesus didn't have any children. Details. Details. Now, finally, one thing I have to admit as Adam is that I did secretly have a sneaky peak at your genetic test. And there was one slightly surprising thing on it that I discovered that I thought was important than I asked Professor Mark Thomas about. Now, I actually managed to sneak a look at Adam's test results for this. And, you know, what it said, it said that he was 1.6% the Andathole, which means Adam's ancestors were having it away with another species of animals, other species of human. Am I justified in using this against him for the rest of time? It's shameful stuff, but I mean, it is true, I'm afraid. But the thing is, it's also true of your ancestors and every other non-African in the world. So people outside Africa carry a proportion of Nehantosol ancestry. Now, in fact, the actual variation in Nehantos ancestry is really quite small between individuals. It's a matter of a few points of a percent. But the variation in your ancestry estimates you'll get from these genetic testing companies is much, much bigger, much bigger than the actual true variation. Now, I don't think there's anything fundamentally wrong with having one of these personal tests. I just think, take it with a pinch of salt, because if you go to two different companies, there will be some differences in the results. They might tell you you have a Korean ancestor in one test. And there's no Korean ancestor in the other test. And that's telling you just how noisy, how error prone these kind of tests are. So, Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to whether I am a Viking, can we say case solved? Yes, Dr. Fry, you most definitely are not a Viking. But I am descended from Vikings. Yes, Dr. Fry, you most definitely are. Because everyone is. I'm afraid so. Does that mean I have to take this helmet off now? Probably for the best. Alright, so we're still in the pod looking over at Lundvig. Just like my pronunciation. Well, who knows if it's right or not, mate. Nina Ramirez was pretty impressed, I think, with me saying Lundvig, which I think is Anglo-Saxon rather than Viking, but anyway. Anyway, we are on the Lundvig eye. It's the London eye. Yes. What a wife. It's a bit wobbly. You need to see Hannah's ancestor, if you could, because she's got a sort of power stance here. Legs quite wide apart. Looks as though she's going to grip the side at any moment. OK, something that's extremely tall. Why do I have to stand so close to the edge? For the best view, listen, you're claiming your Viking heritage. I don't mind suspect the Vikings were not known for their fear of where anything let alone minor ferris wheels. Yeah, but let's be honest, on how many occasions were they really tested in that regard? I'm sorry, I think if you got a Viking and put them in this pod, they would absolutely themselves. Now, do you know what? I've read some of the Icelandic sagas, in fact, I've read most of them, and almost all of them involve, like, hurling people off cliffs, burying friends in snow drifts. There is so much drinking and vomiting that I don't reckon I'd be scared of anything. Well, OK, hang on, you're changing the rules now. If I was allowed to be drunk at this moment, I'm sure I would handle it a lot better. Now, one of the other things about Vikings is they've got these ridiculously wicked names. So, I asked Nina, why did they have such cool names? When I was doing some minor Viking research, can't help but can't notice the names like, over the boneless and sigored snake in the eye, why did they have such awesome names? They were storytellers. That's the thing that they would do. They were all there's an oral literary tradition, so they're not writing things down in the same way that Christian monks are, but they had a vast capacity of to memorize stories. And they would also come up with little skillful techniques like Kennings, double words that would allow them to remember something famous about the person, or a literary, because if they remembered that it alliterated on S, they'd remember the story of Sigurd Snake in the eye. So, it's part of their tradition of storytelling, but it also makes these people sound epic and heroic. They are celebrating heroic virtues. Their pantheonic set of gods and goddesses are warriors and you think shield maidens who go for eternity to Valhalla, so they give themselves awesome names to relate tales connected to them. Did Sigurd really have a snake in his eye? A lot of these names are echoes of what may have been wrong with them. So, he might have had an astigmatism. Over the boneless, for example, there's been various studies on what disability he had. But he probably couldn't walk. So, in a way, he's one of the heroes of the disability world that he was able to become a conqueror despite having very serious medical conditions. I want a Viking name. What would you like a name be? Be some reference for you to your hair, because there was Eric the Red, who was the first European to touch down on the Americas, and they had a baby out there who was called Schnorri, because they were Icelanders, right? I've got this even called the naming convention, which is that if you're the daughter of an Icelandic man, your surname becomes his first name plus Dottier. Oh, yeah, of course. So, I'd be like Peter Dottier. Yeah, you'd be Hannah Peter Dottier. If you were a guy, it's that and son, isn't it? Yeah, if you were... What's that called? David. David son. David son. David son. So, my sister would be David's Dottier. We now know exactly the genealogy of the Icelanders, because it's an island that was unoccupied until I think 830. That's not a year. That's not a year, ain't it? 13 of the time. They might have been to my Irish monks there before that. But then what happens is, according to the sagas, is you get some men, Vikings from Denmark and Norway, tracking across the North Sea, stopping off on routes in places like the Faroiles, Northern Scotland and Northern Ireland, and picking up a load of women, and then setting up home on Iceland, and they're the first settlers. So, Iceland's only been unoccupied for just over a thousand years. And because of the sagas, which have genealogy in them, we know literally everyone that's ever lived on that island. That is pretty cool. Adam, have you written a book about this? Dear Curios, whenever Hannah makes that face, when I start driveling on about something, it's basically because I'm just quoting my own work here. So, let's get... Let's get moving on. You know what I mean? You have reminded me of something. Because Curios, new and old, there are going to be some people listening to this, who have no idea what we're talking about. And we should probably explain. Hello, new Curios. Ah! What are the Curios? Right, okay. So, a while ago, about 18 years ago, when we first started doing this, that's what it feels like. You guys were writing in with new questions, and you know, listening, and you tend to sort of super cool correspondence. And so, we had this poll, which was to give you a name for our most devoted, most awesome international listeners. And the Curios was, by quite a margin, the winner. Now, okay, as the Curios, you have done lots of things over the years, lots of amazing things, including sending us in a badge, shaped like a question-tash. And as you pointed out, how the question-tash reminded you of the inter-abang. Right, right, right. So, we had a conversation in one of the pod chats in our series that there's this Huntration mark, which is halfway between a question mark and an exclamation mark, and it actually has a proper name, which is the inter-abang. So, it was very anxious. You look a bit pale. Are you perfectly comfortable with the fact that this pod is like rocking? I'm trying to tell the Curios about the inter-abang. Do you want to sit down? No. I'm just widening my stance, like, Lee again. She's doing a power stance. Is that good? Yeah, it's good. Anyway, so, yeah, the inter-abang is this pod is the motivation mark. And I mentioned that the Curio-tash design looked a bit like an inter-abang, and then this happened. Someone called James Cooper, Centres of Tweets, saying, sad that it's the last episode of the series, did you know there is an obscure Danish metal band, more Vikings, called inter-abang, which is pretty, extremely, anyway, here's the album cover. Now, when I saw this tweet, for good 40 seconds, I believe this to be real. Yeah, me too. We'll put this on the website so you can judge for yourself. But basically, it looks like a Danish metal album cover. It's black and white. There's two images, sort of ghostly images on the front cover, in- Mastasio to be honest. Yes, and the word inter-abang at the top. And after about a minute of staring this thinking, my god, that's amazing. I realised it's us. So... And then James followed up with an email, because we were so impressed with it. This is now my new life ambition to start a metal band, called inter-abang. Danish metal band. Well, it just escalates massively from here. That wasn't enough. James emailed us and said, hi, Michelle, Hannah and Adam, I've had a chat with the band, and they very quickly put together a new single of the Curio Jingle, which is attached for your enjoyment. I hope you all like it. You might release it in Javani. And here it is. I mean, what is not to like? Why is not to like? Well, I mean, it's just epically awesome in an awesome leopic way. I don't think it's quite Danish metal. It's more... It's got a much more 80s grungy feel, sort of low-fi American indie, sort of, I don't know, Sonnet Youth. It's a touch of joy division in there, I think, as well. You say, really? Yeah. Really dating me, because you haven't heard of either of those bands, have you? And there's a bit younger than me. She hasn't heard of Sonnet Youth. It's true. It's true. Not my youth. That's what I've said about that. Now, James carries on in his email, he says, no guitars were harmed in the making of this record, as I actually did it on all two of my ukuleles, which I can plug into my computer and make sound weird. It's not a ukulele. You can't be a true metal band if you're playing a ukulele. I mean, that is... That's out there with the great curiosies of the week. I don't know, I don't think that is. You know, it's always... When people make us stuff. Yeah. You're basically guaranteed winning. James, you are a massive curious of the week, maybe top five of all time. I mean, it's close, isn't it? Do you remember possibly the favourite thing that's ever happened in the history of radio was the chap who turned your coffee machine into the white stripes? Yeah. M-M-M-M-M. Anyway, you'll remember that the curios and to new curios, go back and have a listen. But you know where you can listen to those 55 episodes, Adam? I don't. Why don't you tell us? Oh, TV sees sound! Oh, my word. That's amazing. And it has an entire archive on it. Everything that we've ever done. And also, every other radio's one, two, three, four, five... It's six. There's six. There's six as well. Don't forget that. I can actually see Steve LeMack. Yeah. Right LeMack. All of that stuff is on the BBC Sounds app, which you can download. There's also actually front rowers on the BBC Sounds too, which is often presented by the guests that we had on early on the show, Janino Ramirez. Yes. So we'll be seeing you next week to answer more of your questions using the power of... ..dialence. ..and don't forget to send your questions in to curiouscases at bbc.co.uk. Goodbye. See you next week. MUSIC Hello, I'm Matthew Price. And alongside Tina Dahili, I host the Beyond Today podcast from the BBC. Each weekday, we're going to be tackling some of the biggest news stories with help from some of the best and most informed journalists in the BBC. It's the news podcast that jumps right in to give you that little bit more. So make sure you head over to the BBC Sounds app. Search for Beyond Today and subscribe. And if you'd like to join in the chat, use the hashtag BBCBeyond.
