I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. Hello! It's physics day! And science fiction day... ...because I'm not regular at physics. And I'm worth it not regular at science fiction. So, the universe is putting perfect balance. Almost like... ...matter... ...and... ...and teamatter. Let's go with that, shall we? On with the show. MUSIC There's life, the universe, and every tiny, tiny thing in today's curious case. Yes, it's a subatomic mystery that goes to the very heart of why we exist. And it was sent in to curiouscases at BBC.co.uk by Scott Matheson from Utah. He asks, how is antimatter made? Okay, so this is particle physics. It's not immediately clear how that relates to why we exist, but I'm sure we're going to find out. Well, to start with, I think we'd better talk about what antimatter actually is. Yes, the antimatter assembly is what powers all 23rd century federation starships, including of course the enterprise. It's not a real space craft though. Not yet, my friend. Sure. Well, okay, the only way to sort this out properly is with some actual science. I grilled top cosmologists, Professor Andrew Ponson to get to the heart of the antimatter. So, what is it? It's a bit like normal matter, only the opposite. Does that answer the question? But what do you mean by opposite? That's sort of it, isn't it? Well, for example, if you think of something like an electron, that's a component of atoms, the stuff that everything around us is made out of. Electron has an electric charge, as the name suggests. And actually, it's a negative electric charge. And it has an antimatter counterpart, which we call a positron, which has a positive electric charge. So, can you see, Antimatter? Can you hold it? You could see it in principle if we could make enough of it, but if you tried to hold it, you'd be in for a nasty shock, because the moment you try and touch antimatter, the matter that you're made out of, annihilates with the antimatter and turns into energy. So, if you tried to hold hands with an antimatter person, you would both probably die. Less than ideal. Less than ideal. I'm hoping you're not going to suggest a demo here. No, couldn't get the risk assessment past health and safety on that one, unfortunately. Now, but you see, this exploding bit, this is the important bit, because it's the energy release that powers the matter, antimatter assembly in the warp core of the enterprise. Yeah, again, can you stop banging on about Star Trek and address this question with some actual science, please? So, to start my investigation into antimatter, I spoke to actual physicist Frank Close, who rather conveniently wrote a book called, antimatter, and I asked him how this elusive stuff was first discovered. Well, the original idea was due to a Cambridge mathematician called Paul Dirac, around 1928, and his prediction of antimatter is one of these strange things that even today, I feel, leaves me feeling strangely uneasy. He was trying to take the two great theories of the 20th century, the theory of special relativity of Albert Einstein on the one hand, and quantum theory on the other hand, and apply them to make a theory of the electron. And he found that in a strange way, the sums wouldn't balance, unless there was some opposite partner to the electron, what we now call a positron, that mathematics required that electrons cannot exist without there also being this positive antimatter version of them. Okay, so to make the sums work, so Dirac invents this new type of particle, so when was it actually found? Three or four years later, positrons were discovered in cosmic radiation, with being bombarded from outer space all the time by particles, and they hit the upper atmosphere and create showers of particles, and among those showers were found positrons. And what I find eerie is this, that the discovery of the positron confirmed what Dirac had predicted. But it's this strange feeling that somehow the mathematics knew before we did. I'm telling you, Adam, the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics there. It knows where we're going before we do. Which is a good job, because I've got no idea where we are right now. Do you find this stuff here or no? Yes, in fact, we are being bombarded with antimatter from space all the time. Frank close told me how positrons were first detected using cloud chambers, which is essentially a box full of super saturated alcohol vapor. So I'm sort of imagining the stuff that comes out of those smoke machines that were very popular in the 1980s. Yeah, kind of looks like that, a little bit different, and it's in a see-through box. Now, what happens is when the charged ions from the atmosphere zoom through it, they leave a trail with a distinctive pattern depending on what the ion actually is. The positron was first identified because it was behaving exactly like an electron, but with an opposite charge. So it moved in the opposite direction in the cloud chamber. Okay, well then if we're being bombarded all over the time, how much antimatter is there? And how can we find it? This was my next question to Andrew Ponson. It's quite difficult, of course. It's not like looking under your sofa and seeing if you can find some antimatter there. You have to design very careful experiments. In fact, one of the ways to find it is really to manufacture it, rather than to sort of just find it hanging around. Because in general, it's not hanging around because if there was a bit of it hanging around, it would annihilate against a bit of normal matter. Okay, but this is what our question Scott really wanted to know is, how do you actually make antimatter? Basically, it's the same as particle physicists do for anything, which is you just smash stuff together. That is the particle physics answer to any problem. If you smash stuff together hard enough, you create lots and lots of energy, and then a bunch of particles get produced. And in that way, you can produce antimatter. Yeah, never pass you with a particle physicist, always ends up in tears. They love smashing things up, they go. They really do. But how much antimatter have they actually made so far? It's time for a spin through history. Two decades after the positron, the next bit of antimatter to pop up was the anti-proton, as a proton with a negative charge, discovered in 1955 using the first particle accelerator, the bevertron. A year after that, the bevertron spat out an anti-mutron to add to the growing zoo of antimatter. The first whole anti-atom was created at CERN in 1995 by shooting anti-protons at Cumps of Xenon to produce anti-hydrogen. Are you making this stuff up? This sounds like a 1960 science fiction movie, possibly Star Trek. No, no, no, not made up at all. This all really happened, genuinely. Okay, well, if every atom has an antimatter double, how far does this go? How big can antimatter get? As far as we know, you could generate the entire anti-periodic table. It just becomes incredibly challenging technologically, because while you're doing all this, you're going to manipulate all of these little subatomic bits and pieces into the right form, while never touching them. All right, but in theory, if you can have the entire periodic table, you could have an anti-planet or an anti-universe. Yes, absolutely. And that's actually one of the big mysteries. So why, if it's just as possible to build anything out of anti-particles, why is our universe made out of normal particles? And then trying to answer that question, you're led into some of the deepest mysteries in physics, things that are still unsolved. But essentially, what has to be true is that there's got to be some way that the early universe distinguishes between matter and antimatter. Because if they were manufactured in completely equal quantities, then in the early universe, where everything's really close together, basically all of the matter would annihilate with all of the antimatter, and you'd be left with a very boring universe that had nothing except radiation in it. So let me get this right. We don't really know why the universe didn't blow itself up. Right. Why didn't the big bang just end up with another big bang when all of the antimatter met the matter? Are you going to tell me the answer? Well, we don't really know. There has been an experiment running on the International Space Station for the last decade trying to detect any traces of anti-helium left over from the big bang. And? Well, they haven't found any. Because as far as we know, everything within several hundred million light years is made of matter. So no anti-planets? Sadly not. Well, where is all the antimatter gone then? Well, one theory is that matter and antimatter aren't quite perfect mirrors of each other, so over time these imperfections have led to matter winning out over antimatter to create stars and planets and galaxies. And we don't know for sure, but anyone who proves it will get a Nobel Prize. And even more prestigious anti-curio of the week. So there's the challenge for the curios out there. But all this talk about explosions wiping out to everything in the universe, leads me to my next question, very important question, which is about anti-matter bombs. Right. Now the highly plausible science fiction question then, huh? Yeah, it is. So I put this to my very patient physicist, Frank Close. Now I seem to remember a key part of the plot of angels and demons by Dan Brown, author of the Da Vinci code, that stealing, I think it was more, it was about a kilogram of antimatter from Sirn, from the Large Hadron Collider, and detonating that as a bomb to block the Vatican, which at the time seemed to me to be a perfectly plausible and decent plot device. Please comment, Frank Close physicist. You mean whether it was a decent plot device or whether it was a practical possibility? Well, it's a nice idea, but thankfully it is totally an utterly bonkous. If you want to have an antimatter bomb for whatever reason, you've got to make it one anti-atom at a time and build it up. So now you start doing the mass. How quickly is Sirn able to make atoms of anti-hydrogen? Suppose we could do a thousand times better than Sirn can do today. When you do the mass, it turns out it will take you about a thousand times longer than the universe has yet existed, until we've made a kilogram. If you were able to collect together all of the anti-protons and all of the positrons that have ever been made in particle physics laboratories in the five or six decades, since we've known of them all, have been able to do it and brought them together to produce power, you would be able to light one fifty watt light bulb for about three minutes. Yeah, that made quite a different film, wouldn't it? The evil baddie, threatened to turn on a medium wattage light bulb inside the Vatican? It's a different and arguably much better film than the actual angels and demons. Right, well this is all well and good, but if we can't see much of it and it's impossible to store, really, what is the point of antimatter? What has antimatter ever done for us? Yes, frankly. Okay, well there is a very down to earth actual use of antimatter that doesn't involve death and universal destruction. In fact, antimatter has saved lots of lives. Well, it's a PET scan, which is not putting your dog in a scanner, PET stands for positron emission tomography and I've actually had one as a student, as a normal control in an experiment for which I was paid the princely sum of 40 pounds. Quite a lot of money for 40 quid as a student. I think it kept me going for a couple of weeks. So what happened? So what they do is they inject you with a radioactive marker which shoots your angel body in your bloodstream and it degrades to produce a positron, a new line inside this massive tube with a coil inside it. It's best if neuroscientist Sophie Scott explains this. Very very quickly, the positron, like within half a millimeter, meets an electron and annihilates. And then two photons go off in opposite directions and that's what you measure in the detector, you're measuring those coincident events. So the big round coil that you're in detects two photons hitting at exactly the same time and that allows you to zoom in to where that annihilation happened. Exactly. And this matters because there's lots of blood flowing around the brain and if at that time you're using your brain to do a particular task, more blood will be directed to that bit of the brain. So changes in where you're finding these counts tell you something about the brain areas that were actually recruited to do what people were doing. So this is probably the most practical use, the most useful use of anti-matter that we have. Absolutely and of course you can use pet for other just straight down the line medical things so tumors tend to have different blood flow characteristics. So a lot of pet scanning is straightforward looking at tumors or looking at how the heart's working. That kind of thing. So Dr. Fry, when it comes to how to make anti-matter can we say case salt? Yes. In the time on a traditional particle physics you just smash really small stuff together. In a particle accelerator obviously. Now in theory you can make anything from anti-matter like whole anti-planets and anti-gallonixes. But we can't find any of them in the universe and physicists don't really know why. However, anti-matter does have some practical uses back on her. It's used in pet scanners to peer inside our skulls at the inner workings of our brains. Well that's that sorted then. How to make anti-matter and why the universe exists. Very easy. All very easy. Yeah and I understood I'd say about 50%. Is that why you could bang it on that Star Trek? It's a defense mechanism when I come across hard cosmological or quantum physics. I instantly rely on science fiction references to get me by. Do you think that's a common coping strategy that people use? Make it so. That was a quote from Star Trek, a famous one. She didn't know it. Listen as she didn't know that. I did actually because there was a scene in extras where the guy who plays that character. Yes, Patrick Stewart. He says it and I didn't understand it then. And so I wondered why. And that's how I know about it. I feel like you might be losing some of your core audience here. And I'm doing a lot of legwork to make sure that we don't use the sci-fi fans. There's got to be a big Venn diagram overlap of maths nerds and sci-fi nerds, isn't there? Isn't it just one circle? No, no. There's a type they're just ever so slightly perturbed from one to the other. And I lie in that sliver of a disc. We're establishing a sort of pattern here because in a previous show you talked about how in the 90s, instead of going to clubs and the whole earring scenario with the lady who you didn't recognise from college, that you weren't going to clubs you were reading maths books. So you also weren't watching Star Trek? No. Why bother with somebody else's interpretation of equations on screen when you can have those equations play out in your own mind? Yeah, weirdly that's exactly why I bother, so that I don't have to do that at all. Anyway, in the programme I didn't get to do the bit about the matter, anti-matter walk drive of the enterprise. So I had Frank close on the line and I put it to him directly that surely this is absolutely feasible, completely scientifically valid and this is how we'll be traveling in the future. Star Trek is generally regarded as having some decent physics that underwrites it, it's taken seriously by the writers. The enterprise is powered by a matter, anti-matter walk drive. Is there anything in that? Probably not. If we're going to have to make anti-matter in order to use it, first of all, you're not going to be able to do anything other than make a storage device because the amount of energy it takes to make the anti-matter in the first place is even in the most ideal conditions greater than what you will get back afterwards by annihilating it. So there's not a reason at all why that would be a sensible way to proceed. However, the possibility that out in space there might be large ways of, let's suppose there's clouds of positrons out there somewhere in the cosmos, you could imagine that your spacecraft might be able to mine these mines of positrons and then use them to create energy. But I mean, this is science fiction. It's nothing at all like science fact in that sense because we do not know of any such things, even were we able to make a spacecraft to go out there and find them. So it's a great story, yes, but beyond that nothing. And we're going to get loads of emits from Trekkies now. On you call them Trekkies. I mean, that's like super in flammatory anyway. Inflammatory? Oh, Trekkies do not like being called Trekkies. Why were you supposed to call them? Trekkers. But that sounds like they're just going for a high-cover mountain. Listeners, would it be okay if you didn't write in about this? Can we just take it as red that what's just happened should be expunged from the Curio's record? And we just won't talk about it again. I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry. Let's get onto more sensible and intelligent conversation. One that I had with Andrew Ponson. A bit Ponson like Star Trek. A Betty does. Yeah, of course Ponson like Star Trek. That's obvious. But anyway, you might remember that early on in the episode, we were talking about one of the deepest untold mysteries in physics, which is why our universe is made of matter and not of anti-matter. There's a bit on that we should have a rough script for this for this bit. Just very rough and it has, say something about this HF and then it says AR, say something about this. On this bit of the script it says AR and it's complete blank. It contains no letters or words. And that is actually what's going on in my head right now. So you just continue. Well in which case you're following the script accurately, that's perfect. You may not believe that this pod bit is scripted, given how much we were full, but it turns out out of given the game away. Anyway, Andrew said that there has to be a reason why matter won out over anti-matter in the early universe so that we ended up with stars and planets and us all made of matter rather than anti-matter. And the conundrum is that the universe didn't blow itself up because it entirely collided with an equivalent amount of anti-matter. Yeah, right. So there is a theory that maybe matter and anti-matter aren't perfect mirrors of one another, but because there's so much more matter in the universe than anti-matter. And here is some words from someone who actually knows what they're talking about on the subject. We do see hints even in particle physics experiments here on Earth of why there might be some kind of disparity. Why might you get more normal particles as opposed to anti-particles? This comes down to quite a technical thing called CP violation, which is the idea that if you switch the electric charge of all your particles, so you can think of that as being a bit like turning all your electrons into positrons, and you also mirror image the universe. Of course. Of course. Then you end up or you might expect to end up with laws of physics that are indistinguishable, but you don't quite. We know that that process of CP reversal, as we call it, doesn't in fact lead you to perfectly the same laws of physics? There is a slight discrepancy, and it's because of that that we think you probably have a slight asymmetry and you end up with a little bit more matter than than anti-matter. Let me see if I understand this. Okay, so if somehow you manage to change our universe into an anti-matter universe by flipping everything around, it would look the same, but not quite. The laws of physics would work, but just not quite. Exactly. There are some very, very subtle processes that would not quite be the same, and so we think if you rewind the clock, think about it in the early universe, those same slight disparities in these very subtle processes might be accounting for why you end up with more matter than anti-matter. But we don't really know that. That's sort of speculation built on some experimental results. But you only need a tiny difference that can escalate over time to create a universe of matter. That's right. You only need quite a small difference. You might have had huge amounts of matter and anti-matter, and just a tiny imbalance that leaves you with a little bit more matter at the end of these processes in the early universe. And that is what the entire universe has made up. And that is what the entire universe relies on. That's why we're here. That's why the universe is not just a boring old bath of radiation. A bath of radiation. I like that idea. I like that idea that everything we see is the tiny little bit left over. I don't like it, because I feel there should be balance in the universe. I'm sorry Adam. It's massively asymmetrical. The whole universe is basically asymmetrical. Are you angry that we don't live in a platonic ideal? I'm... There is the dark side and the light side, and there needs to be balance to the force. See, I managed to get it back to science fiction again. Yeah, yeah. Okay. Well look, anyway, I actually asked Frank close this question too, because this is one of the most pressing questions in the whole of astrophysics, right? And he told me about the same sort of clues from particle physics experiments that Andrew was just talking about, about how physicists try to get to the bottom of this and work out what the difference between antimatter and matter is. If you can find a difference whoever's small, that could be the signpost that gives you the direction to answer the big question of why is there matter in bulk at the expense of antimatter. And we have actually found some examples, but in rather arcane, unstable varieties of matter known as strange particles and bottom particles. These are particles that were initially discovered in cosmic rays many decades ago, are now made to order in particle physics experiments. And we have found that the way that certain strange particles behave, if you study 10 million strange particles in their decay and compare with 10 million strange antiparticles in the corresponding decays, one in 10 million goes different one way than the other. That was discovered, or 60 odd years ago, it's known as CP violation in the trade. And a theory came up driven by some Japanese that if there was a heavier version of the strange quarks, as we now call them, and indeed in 1970s that heavier version was discovered, it's known as the bottom quark, which makes bottom matter and bottom antimatter. The consequences were, this should be quite significant differences between bottom matter and bottom antimatter. And indeed, that we now know is true. Now as regular listeners are fully aware, we have very, very serious scientists and we take our work very seriously. And this is a pretty hard core subjects that we've got into. What you couldn't hear during that recording, it was just me and Michelle in the studio and Frank was down the line, was that Michelle had to turn her microphones off because mostly her, but both of us just massively cracked up when Frank said bottom particle. And then bottom matter. It worked partly the way he delivered it though. I think you knew exactly what he was doing. He knew who he was talking to. I don't get who you are. You don't find bottoms funny. There's something wrong with you. And bottom matter that can be annihilated by bottom antimatter. I mean, it's just all too easy. We talked about this a bit before. Physicists are very, very good at naming things. Massive whopping telescope. Great big giant, even bigger telescope. Big bang. Bottom, quark, top quark. Strange quark. But biologists are terrible at it. All the technical terms in genetics in my field are just awful. So you know, you know what though? I don't know if that's true. I think it's just that they're just as literal, but they're just having to be in Latin. Right? That's the name of the animal naming. That's that's sort of the name classification. I'm talking about more like the technical equation type stuff that we have to do. What names you give them? Well, stuff like heritability, which is one of the most important concepts, but is nothing to do with inheritance or whether something is heritable or not. Good. It's just incomprehensible what it actually means and everyone gets it wrong all the time because of that. That's what you want from language, isn't it? Something that confuses meaning rather than conveys it. Exactly. The most central concept in genetics is called linkage just disequilibrium. It tells you nothing about what it actually is. All it means is that stuff is inherited in chunks rather than completely separately. What should they've called it? Chunky stuff. Chunky jeans. I remember stuff in Belgium though. What's the name of that? The bit where your spinal cord goes through your head. What is it? It's in Latin, isn't it? The Freyman Magnum. Yeah, what's that in when you translate it? Big hole. Yeah, exactly. There we go. You've all just not above it. Are you? Okay. Onto some feedback from last week's programme. Thank you very much for all of your messages, all your emails on Twitter, following our episode last week Stephen Fry on FaceBlindness. And some of you have messaged to say that you've been having trouble finding that Cambridge FaceMemory test, aka Matt Damon test. So we put a link to it on our website. But others have emailed in, including this excellent message from Adam Lovek. Dear doctors, Rutherford and Fry, love the story about the earring lady. So that was you meeting someone you knew from university in a club and you said she had weird earrings. I ended up describing her to herself. I'm really worried that she might listen to this programme. Well, we're making it worse. Anyway, Adam Lovek says he was reminded of a story of Saddamus Beacham who was approached by a woman at Fort Mammasons Shopping London and she clearly recognised him and he had no clue who she might have been and he managed to bring the conversation around to a question he could ask her and said, so what's your brother doing now? And she replied, well, he's still king. And in a similar vein, Edwin King from Norwich Centre this, I thought you might like a possibly apocryphal story about John Gilgurth who was famously bad at remembering faces. He is supposed to have asked a fellow dinner guest, where are you living now to which the reply was 10 Downing Street. Right, I think it is time for... Rather than a fries curio of the week. Oh yes, oh yes, this curio of the week actually got sent in a little while ago. This is while I was off having a baby, this one got sent in and when I heard it first, I rewound it and played the submission here about four times in a row. It's amazing. This is stunning and we may fall short of the incredibly low broadcasting standards that we've already set ourselves because this is very, very funny. So this came from Jamie Holt in Kyrgyz, which is in New South Wales in Australia. Hello from Down Under, while listening to my third rotation of Curious Cases, I noticed a button on my Apple CarPlay screen that said times one and a half. I hit it and you guys started talking quicker. Nice. The button then said times two and upon pressing it, you sounded like a bad Christmas album by the chipmunks. Funny, but nowhere near as funny as what was about to happen. The two times button once pressed now says times a half. Pressing this led to the funniest thing I had heard in a very long time. Feel free to listen to the attached extract from one of your first episodes, The Scarlet Mark, or try yourself on any other episode. Enjoy! Hello, this is the podcast version of The Curious Cases of Dr's Rutherford and Fry. Dr's is in the title. It is. I'm Dr's. It's just curious case of Rutherford and Fry. I really like the idea that in 20 years time we'll be sitting on a park bench. I can't even speak. I can't even speak. It's a very argument. I'm demanding it. Yeah, it's the way. I think The Scarlet Mark was our very first episode, wasn't it? It was our very first. We can assure you that we were not really exhausted. We used this to the celebrity term for being massively drunk on this job. We were going through some emotional times. I was really nervous there. I remember being so nervous when we did that first recording. I have no memory of last week's show. What did you do? Who are you again? It was the ginger one, wasn't it? Yeah. You grew a beard in adversity. I've actually got a real beard now and I've got him. You can see ginger. No, you had a beard and then you accidentally set your beard rimmers to the wrong setting and shaved it off. This is the round two. The wist theory growth that will eventually turn back into a beard. Yes, well there's elements of truth to that story. I think we should probably wrap it up there, but thank you to Jamie Holt for pointing out how exhausted we sound. Yes, how in need of a break. I'm going to spend some more time with my family. Anyway, next week we have got a delicious episode on where the forecursing to come. In the meantime, if you have any questions or any submissions for Curie of the Week, well done Jamie, Curie of the Week this week, you can send them in to Curie's cases at bbc.co.uk. See you next week. Hi everybody. I'm Caitlin Jenner and I am a guest on Simon Mondes. Don't tell me the score podcast. We talked about everything. The Olympics, trans issues and all the lessons that I have learned along the way. I really enjoyed recording the podcast and I hope you enjoy listening to it. You can hear it on bbc sounds. Just search for Don't Tell Me The Score.
