I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. Hello and Happy New Year everyone. This podcast of the Curious Cases was first released on the 5th of January 2018, hence the Happy New Year in case you've downloaded it at a different time and are confused. Although now your explanation for being confused is taking longer than the wishing of Happy New Year in the first place. But I'm just very polite. Clearly. Anyway, in this episode we feature a question from Electro Khan, as I think he's now uniformly named. Yes, you may remember him from our static shocks episodes. That's right. Karl Vandal, he came onto the pods and we interviewed him because he believed he was generating so much static electricity in his normal everyday life that he would give his wife and kids and whole family shocks during just normal day to day living. I seem to remember him claiming that they have banned him from touching them. Which sounds much worse than it actually is. So let us move on. This question from Karl Vandal is all about our faces. It is. And specifically where their humans can recognise faces better than machines. Hello, today's case is a mystery involving sheep, a car chase and a house that looks like Hitler. All true. And it starts with this question from the excellently named Karl Vandal, we wrote to us at Curious Cases at BBC.co.uk to ask our machines better than humans at identifying faces. This is a classic battle between maths and biology, a face off, if you will. Hold on, where is the maths in this exactly? It's in the machines, obviously. Okay, well, now hang on, not so fast, math mode. We humans are simply wired to detect faces as psychologists Rob Jenkins from the University of York told me. Yeah, we tend to be pretty good at knowing if there's a face there or not. And that kind of makes sense from an evolutionary perspective. Because if there's a face nearby, that means there's a mind nearby, right? Because there's normally a mind behind a face. That's something that can potentially do you a lot of good or a lot of harm. And so it doesn't take much visual evidence for us to say that looks like a face, you know, vaguely a dark patch here and here and another dark patch down here. That will be enough for it to catch our attention and interpret it as a face. So is that why you get people claiming they've seen Jesus in a piece of toast? Yeah, it's a bit odd considering we don't actually know what Jesus looked like. No, we don't. Or houses that look like Hitler or there was a jelly bean, I think, that look like Kate Middleton apparently. Yeah, these are all real news stories, you can look them up. Now this is all an example of what's known as Parodolia, which is spotting familiar patterns in random data. Now when it comes to faces, we do it all the time and it starts very early. Infants that are nine minutes old seem to show a preference for face-like patterns over non-face-like patterns. Now I might be thinking how an earth can this be established? It's done using a very simple method known as preferential looking. The idea is you put up two possible things it can look so these are normally little paddles who are drawings on them and one of them has dot dot dash to be eyes in the mouth and the other has dot dash dot to look like a different pattern. You mean two dots meaning eyes and then below a dash which is basically the mouth and that's the most basic way that we can represent face. That's right. It's like a little smiley emoji and the finding is that even at the few minutes old, the infant will spend more time looking at the face-like pattern than at the non-face-like pattern even though they are made up of the same elements. That does suggest that we are unrellecting to use this terminology but we're hardwired from what possibly from before birth for spotting faces. Yeah, I think it does suggest that we enter the world knowing something about how faces look. I suspect it's a pretty rough idea that it would be then tuned through exposure to the faces around us. Yeah, okay, but we humans aren't that special. Lots of other animals can recognize faces too. Just a couple of months ago, results were announced from a facial recognition study involving Barrako Balma and some sheep. And this is the lead researcher neuroscientist Francisca Noel from the University of Cambridge. One of our sheep would be called in and it would then enter a corridor that leads to two screens and on those two screens two pictures would be coming up. So for example, Barry Gobama. You all look great versus a completely unfamiliar and unrepeated face and the sheep would have to make a decision whether to go to the left screen or to the right screen. The sheep made their choice by touching the screen with their nose and if they chose a celebrity face such as Barrako Balma, the clever sheep would be rewarded with a tasty treat. Yes, we can. At the time where we were designing the study, Obama was always in the news and we really liked him and we really hoped that our sheep would be clever enough to pick him. And they were. Yeah, they were. So we were very pleased with him. How quick were the sheep to recognize Barrako Balma against someone else? They were really quick actually. So they learned it within four days of training. Did this come as a bit of a surprise? Did you expect sheep to be this good at it? Yes, we were definitely surprised that they would pick it up that quickly. Although this group of sheep that we used is a highly trained group of sheep and we've done quite a lot of cognitive tests with them already. So we actually knew that they are really smart and they're really keen to learn new things and honestly speaking they're really greedy and they just want to get the food. And that's why I think they're responding in such large numbers. Hold on a minute, a highly trained group of sheep, what sort of like sheep ninjas? Yes, like sheep ninjas. No, not like sheep ninjas. Normal sheep, all sheep can do this. But stop laughing because there is genuinely a more serious side to this study too because they are looking at diseases like Huntington's in which people lose the ability to recognise familiar faces. And the sheep here are just a good animal for studying the neuroscience of facial recognition. And that's all the sheep news. Now let's get back to the main question in hand. You may stand down everyone. Okay, so sheep recognised faces, I grant you that. But it turns out that even though we humans do have a natural ability to spot faces, we can get it spectacularly wrong. Bristol, 1969. Police are in hot pursuit of a thief seen pilfering from parking metres. After a dramatic car chase, the fugitive pulls a gun and shoots a copper in the arm before making his escape. Months later in a police line up, eight witnesses including five officers pick out Lazlo Virag, an unemployed gambler. He's linked to similar incidents in Liverpool and based solely on eyewitness testimony, he sentenced to ten years in the slammer. However, two years later in an unrelated incident, police break into the house of a George Payton. They discover fingerprint evidence linking Payton to the metafift, along with the gun used in the car chase. Now Adam, I know you haven't seen this picture before, but I have the images of the two men there. So just tell me what you notice. Okay, so well the first thing I noticed about them is they're two completely different human beings. Well one's bald. Yes, the other one has a fine head of hair. How could you possibly mistake those two for each other? I think Payne knows, shorter, stockier, his head's more squashed. Basically they're different humans. Completely different humans. Obviously different human levels. And so Adam, if puny humans are supposed to be so good at recognizing faces, how come they can get it this wrong? Okay fine. Well that is the question that I put to our face perception expert Rob Jenkins. There's a very important distinction between familiar faces and unfamiliar faces. Yes, we're fantastic at recognizing familiar faces, you know friends and family and colleagues and celebrities and all that. We're really really good at that. Even if the images that we're looking at are a very poor quality, it doesn't bother us at all. With unfamiliar faces, we're actually much worse at that than we think. So if you just have a very simple task like, okay here are two face photographs, do you think they show the same person or two different people? In fact, a simple task like that causes a very high number of errors, typically about 20% or so. That is a lot of error right there. Yes, unfortunately when it's a face that we're not familiar with, even subtle differences like lighting or expression or hairstyle or makeup, they can all really throw our powers of recognition well off-kilter. Well that just goes to show you that humans are categorically inferior to the great marvel that is mathematics. Fine maths face, how do computers do it with their algorithms and numbers and all that sort of magic stuff? Okay, so they fall into two main types. The first type aims to pick out distinguishing features in the face, like the shape of your nose or the distance between your eyes. The second kind uses a statistical approach and it tries to build a mathematical description of the patterns of light and dark across the image and then the algorithm learns the best way to do this by training on a vast dataset of faces. Now here is BBC's Technology Correspondent Roy Ketlin Jones who told me that facial recognition software actually goes back a long way. Way back in the 1990s DARPA which started the internet basically this defense association research agency in America started looking at it. It was tried out at the 2002 Super Bowl to try and spot criminals seen as a complete failure there, too many false positives. Facebook in 2010 began to start using it for identifying people's faces in photos and then Google released a whole paper called FaceNet about a system which they claimed had 99.96% accuracy. Since then people have slightly questioned the accuracy of those claims. Because that's better than humans right, 99.96. That would be better than humans. Yeah, and I think those original claims, those startling claims were because they were using relatively small databases, you know, 5000 or so images. The more images you give them, the less accurate they are. Washington University set up this thing called the mega face challenge and it's got a data set of something like 5 million photos from three quarters of a million people and they're producing a leaked table of how various companies are fairing. I think Google's accuracy dropped just around 70%. So, you know, lots more images, lower accuracy. So why is it difficult? Why do computers find it hard? Well, when you think about it, there's an extraordinary amount of variation in the images on which the computers are trained. Some of them may be poorly framed, different lighting. I'm terrible at recognising faces. I've wore Google Glass for a few months. That's like the controversial Google product. They could have put facial recognition in it that they decided not to because they thought it would be controversial. I always thought that would be brilliant at helping me recognise people whose names I always forget. Yeah, that's fair. Bridget. It's actually Hannah. That's fine. See, machines are rubbish too. Yeah, but you know they're getting better all the time. Could you do 5 million faces at them? Possibly not, but I think we need to settle this once and for also. The final call goes to our facial recognition psychologist, Rob Jenkins. All right, Rob, at the beginning of 2018, if you had to choose machine or human to identify faces which pathway would you go down? It depends a bit on the task. So if it's a human who knows the face that they're looking at, bet on the human every time. If it's a face that is unknown, there will be situations now where the machine has the edge, but the exciting part is that the state of technology is changing so rapidly that I suspect it won't be too long before we are outperformed entirely by machines. And mathematics is victorious once again. Massive herumpth. So Dr. Rutherford, we asked whether machines are better than humans when it comes to recognising faces. Can we say case solve? Yes, Dr. Frye humans are better at identifying familiar faces. But we really struggle with strangers, which is where we're outperformed by facial recognition software. However, differences in lighting, age or even hairstyle can really confuse computers too. Okay, there you go. That was Bridget Frye. I wanted to hear what I kept in James actually doesn't know my name. I thought we'd got on well. I thought we'd bonded, you know. No, no, you could be a Bridget. You've got there's a touch of Bridget about a gig. To say, yes. I think I think of people called Bridget as having really excellent cheekbones. Well, you've got good cheekbones. That's a very specific association. You know, it's all like hi, I'm Bridget. Now, on this on this face business, there was a lot more to it that we didn't manage to squeeze into the show, wasn't there? It's true, but if you think about it actually, quite a lot of people's jobs rely on them being able to accurately recognise the faces of strange, it's like passport officers, for instance, if some component of your job is checking people's idea and making sure that the person standing in front of you has the same face as the idea that they're handing you. If humans really are making errors of that kind of rate, featured in the programme, that's quite well. But there are some massive absurdities in that whole process. Anyone who has a small baby, as we know you do, they get a passport when they're six weeks old and that lasts for five years. You've got to be some kind of wizard to identify a five-year-old from a five-week-old baby. It's very strict. And strictness with which you have to pose when you're taking your photo. There was a real test that was done at passport officers just to see how good they were at this, given that they're professionals and they didn't spot 14% of people who were carrying the wrong idea. 14%? That's quite a lot of percent. Quite a hind percent, isn't it? Yes. It was sort of a set-up scenario, if you like it, a simulated environment. It wasn't really a heat throw, letting people in. You kind of think, well, it's hand over to the machines now, shall we? But those machines, those new kind of e-passport gates that you get at airports, you imagine that they're perfect, right? Unfortunately, when they were first installed, there was a case at Manchester Airport where a husband and wife accidentally got their passport swaps around the wrong way in the queue and the husband managed to get through the gate successfully carrying his wife's passport. And then when the wife tried to get through on an husband's passport, it stopped okaying through. Well, at least it worked in that direction, but that's, I'd say, not really, I mean... Not perfect. I mean, even the best algorithms in the world will still make mistakes, will still let people through who are carrying the wrong idea. I mean, sleep soundly at night, it's fine. It's just like crime watch. Don't have nightmares. You can't make a perfect system, it's not possible. No, no, but at this stage, I suppose it's security at Gatwick and at Heathrow, you have both systems in place and people checking as they come through the electronic gates. It's true. It's kind of the theatre of security that's the phrase they use. You are setting yourself up for a really rough time next time you go through Heathrow. I know. Personally, I think they work brilliantly and customs officials are some of the nicest, most attractive people that I've ever, ever come across. Nice. Anyway, one of the other things that we didn't talk about in the programme actually is a bit more on the serious side of that project. Using sheep to recognise back Obama's face. I did get a chance to speak to Francesca no on her research and here's a little clip from our interview. The real point in this study wasn't just to train sheep to recognise back Obama, was it? No, no, no, no, it wasn't. Actually, the reason behind that is quite serious and that is that in quite a big number of neurological disorders and neurodegenerative disorders, phase recognition skills are highly impaired. And so in order to find treatment, we need good animal models to model these diseases and our lab is basically looking into the development of a sheep model for hunting to disease. And hunting to disease is a really devastating disorder and it is often understood as a motor disorder, but what people often neglect is actually that a cognitive decline precedes the onset of the motor symptoms. And the cognitive decline is often more troublesome to the patients because they start to forget things, they start to be unable to recognise people and things like that. And so our experiments basically help to monitor the cognitive decline in our hunting to sheep. And then hopefully in later stages we are able to develop new treatments and interventions. So if you know how well normal sheep can recognise faces and how well hunting to sheep can recognise faces, you can sort of map that almost to what's happening in humans. Exactly, really it's the first model that has been set up and so we actually don't really know how the cognitive decline develops and progresses. So it's really, it's a very exciting, very exciting project. Yes, it's true that and I'm glad we had an opportunity to mention that because Huntington's is a devastating disease. I've got several lectures on it because it's one of the classics of genetics, the first disease gene ever identified in fact in the 19th. Well that and cystic fibrosis ran about the same time in the late 80s. So it is not a lot of the press reported that actually it was about Huntington's disease rather than the ability to sheep to recognise where the fruits. Well, we are not a frivolous media outlet here and rather we are very serious if there's one thing that characterises us together separately and on this programme it is that we are grown-ups. Anyway, the sheep thing, there was another connection because Rob Jenkins, who is our psychologist from York University, he told me something which we also cut out which is that sheep have a bit of an interesting connection to face recognition research. Actually sheep have quite an illustrious past. There's a disorder known as prosopagnosia, otherwise known as face blindness. So this is quite a curious phenomenon and it results in the person having completely intact vision. It's not that they are blind or vision impaired generally, they have no problem with anything really in the visual world apart from identifying familiar faces. So people that they used to know even family members, in some cases even their own reflection, they're no longer able to tell who this person is from the face image. So they can still identify them via other cues, for example, the voice or clothing, but when it comes to identifying a visual image that in some cases can be eliminated very selectively. Now one of the most pure cases of this was the case of a sheep farmer who acquired prosopagnosia following a brain injury. And what was very interesting about this particular case is that they had lost the ability to recognize friends and family other people that they knew, but they could still recognize the faces of the sheep, particular sheep that they knew on the farm. And that indicates that the facility that they lost for human faces was very, very selective. What's a make of that? So that suggests a very literal reading of that would be that suggests that there's an area of the brain, or there are particular neural circuits which are specific for identifying people's faces, but there are also specific neural circuits in your responsible for identifying sheep. That is the surprising implication. Yes. Although I mean it's I think it's fair to say that being a sheep farmer is relevant here, so it's not necessarily the case that you or I would have the same sheep recognition abilities as this particular farmer. It's like taxi drivers acquiring amazing knowledge of the streets of London, right? So Adam, have we all got a little bit of our brains that's just dedicated especially to sheep? If we've got any other animals too, they're like an elephant bit. And I could giraffe bit. Yes, that's how brains work. No, I mean what he meant by this taxi driver bit is that neurological scans of taxi drivers show that they had an enlarge bit of a particular bit of the brain, which was that that was researched on by Hugo Spears who we've had on the program, which was about Michelle not getting lost in the office, not being able to make it to the C.A. Of course, wayfinding it all fits together. Exactly, exactly, but some I don't think Rob Jenkins was suggesting that taxi drivers can identify sheep. So the idea behind that sort of link then is that the more that you practice something, your brain shape actually changes. Well, you form more connections and specific areas of the brain, which you know, the analogy that some people say sometimes is it's like exercising a muscle, right? And the more you use it, the more connections you get in that part of the brain. But I think more than anything, this just shows that the complexities of neuroscience remain largely mysterious to us. It would be lovely if there was a sheep centre of the mind. We might yet have one. We might yet have one. I love it. Okay, before we finish up this podcast, we just have about a half time for... ...Rather for the price, Curio of the Week. I mean, that's almost offensively delicious, isn't it? Yes, for normal thanks again to Jeff Perkins for that. It's a masterpiece, it's a modern classic. We'll probably be releasing it as a Christmas single. I think if we didn't, it would be a real shame. Anyway, I've got... I've got a suggestion for Curio of the Week this week, because we got an email in from Mina O'Day, our questioner for the Dream's episode. She lives in the Panama jungle Adam. It's a long way away, right? Do you want to hear what she has to say? Go on. Hi, remember me. Thank you again for letting my question about dreams be on the radio. Anyway, I just heard the newest episode and the debate about who is better. This is for Hannah. For me, you are my favourite mathematician, and I want to be like you when I grow up. This is for Adam. I think that you're good too. Yours truly me, Lada. I think that you're good too. God. This is a little extra bit on the internet. Well, listen, so a couple of episodes ago, we had a question about taste that came in from Penny Young, and it was about whether young children could... Why they didn't like vegetables and that sort of thing. And you might recall that I included a clip of two out of my three children, so Jake and Juno. But I didn't include a short section of interview I did with my eldest, my 11-year-old, who's called B. But Michelle has decided that we want to play this, but now, so this is me talking to my daughter about who is better out of me and Hannah. You and me, okay. Amazing. Out of me and Hannah, who'd you prefer? And we're like you, Grace. Wait, what? Juno said she didn't know, and you say you like us bones. Well, I like her hair, but you're my dad. So basically you're saying that you like her more, but you're obliged to like me because I'm actually your father. No, because I like her hair, and she's nice, but then you're nice and I like her hair. My hair is equivalent on the scales to your existence as her father. I can't pretend that I wasn't a little bit disappointed by that interaction I had with my first born. That's it. I've announced them both a joint to cure her on the week. Fine, fine. Next week is the final podcast in this current series, and we'll be looking at Goldfingers Moon Laser. I'm just going to leave it there. I'm not going to explain it. Just leave it like that. See you next week. This is the BBC. If you like listening to the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry, then you will like you. Right, I've got to say will. Yeah, I thought it was a probabilistic universe. No, I mean, this case is certain that if you like that, then really you are going to like this much more. And this is the infinite monkey cage. All right, so wherever you are on the universe that you're listening to right now, just have a little search for it and then hit subscribe.
