I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. Another episode of the Curious Cases of Rutherford and Fry for you. Yes, it is. This one is, we got one of our favourite Curious Curious contributors to the Curios. Mark Moldovnik on this programme. We do. Now I interviewed Mark Moldovnik for this programme. And it was, as you will hear, he tells a story of something that happened to him when he was younger. Now, we as regular Curios will know, I happen to be slightly on the screen beside. And wasn't prepped at all for what the story Mark was going to tell me in the interview would be. Now we have cut out a lot of the graphic detail. Michelle has just informed me that you made her cut it out for precisely the reasons that you are now describing. Okay, so Mark told this story and I almost fainted during interview. I actually had to sort of half lie down. You know, you sort of lean so far back in your chair that your head is kind of like lower than your shoulders. I had to do that during the interview just to get through it. Well, let's leave it to the Curios to determine how relaxed you sound in this interview. Here it comes. Hello, a cutting-edge question today. Sent in to CuriousCases at BBC.co.uk by Joshua Schwartz from New York City. What makes things sharp? Why are thin and I've sharper? And what happens on the molecular level when you cut something? Now this is a materials question. Whenever it comes to talking about materials on this program, we often turn to Professor Mark Widovnik for his expertise. And when it comes to sharp objects and knives, especially, Mark has a slightly more personal story to share from back when he was 15. Now I should warn anyone who happens to be a little bit squeamish like me that you might want to put your fingers in your ears for the next minute or so. I was coming home from school, standing on Hammersmith Tube Station waiting for my train. And this guy came up to me with a hoodie on and he backed me against the wall and said, I've got a knife, give me your wallet. It was broad daylight. Mark was alone and there was no one to help him. What should he do? I made a stupid decision. I kind of went, oh, here's my train. Here's this person. I don't quite know how to cope with the situation. I'll just push past him, get on the train. He's not going to follow me. Woody. He certainly wouldn't stab me in broad daylight. Woody? Surely. But he did. On the platform. Just as I got on the train. Yeah. I felt this really stinging pain in my back and I thought, oh no. And do you know what the hilarious thing in a way was? I was more worried about what my mum would say. Because I knew he had now slashed through my school uniform. I could feel the blood. I thought, oh, she's going to think I'm such an idiot for getting into the situation. Wow. I'm guessing that wasn't what his mum said. No, strangely. How bad was it? Well, in many ways, Mark says that he was quite lucky. It wasn't too deep and his parents took him straight to hospital where he got stitched up. And what happened to the criminal? Ah, well, the next place they went out to the hospital was the police station and this is what happened next. The police kind of went, oh, there's some people who usually hang out around the Hammersville station. We'll take you in a van around. You tell us if it's one of these people. So I spotted him and then they took him in and he got banged up in prison. Oh, he did. Yeah. Good. I'm glad. Yeah. The whole system worked. So did you see the weapon at the time? So I was in the police station and the police brought in the blade that the manager used to stab me and I was just, you know, sort of on the one level horrified and the other day I'm absolutely transfixed because I suddenly occurred to me. Oh, my goodness. This thing could have killed me. It's so powerful and I could see the edge. I was thinking it's, you know, it's really incredibly sharp. And that really got me interested. I have to say in what does make things sharp at that moment? I mean, yeah, you know, you've got to remember. I'm sort of that kind of person. Such a material scientist. I would not be thinking about anything like that at all. Yeah, I'm not sure the molecular properties of steel would be going through my mind at exactly that point. No, but you know, weirdly, Mark does actually cite this event as a really pivotal moment in his life because it was when he started to become fascinated with materials. I guess inspiration comes in many forms. Now, of course, knives are almost never used as weapons these days, but the ability to make sharp, bladed instruments has been absolutely essential in human development from making clothes and shelters and chopping food. Exactly. Well, funny. You should mention cooking, I don't know, because in time on and fashion, I have a little demo here that I would like you to try. Now here, I have a tray of different cutting implements. Here we go. I'm going to put it empty. Very careful, please. Mind your fingers. Right. So there is a chopping board with a nice massive meat cleaver and a small kitchen knife, little little pairing knife. Pairing knife there and an old script. Yes, a piece of paper. This is what I want you to cut with it. Here we go. Oh, tomato. A lovely beefy tomato. I want you to cut that piece of tomato with the paper. I feel I know how this is going to end. Yeah, but you know, we've all had paper cuts before. Yes, badly. So we know that it's obviously very sharp and it's definitely thin. Yes. The problem is it needs friction and the problem is that the tomato skin is smooth, so there's no friction to help it cut through and it slides off the surface. Okay, so this is basically the worst game of rock paper scissors ever. Paper doesn't cut tomato. It's true. Now try the meat cleaver. Have you done a health and safety on this? Just try not to cut anything valuable. Right. Okay, here we go. Are you ready? Oh, it's on my face. Okay, I'm not sure I would necessarily place that on a plate in a fine dining restaurant, but what this demonstration tells us other than the fact that you would be a terrible sous chef is that how good an object is at cutting doesn't just depend on the sharpness of the material that you're using, but also on what you're trying to cut and its structure. So where you use a cleaver is essentially by using force to make the cutting edge go through a material and what you're doing is you're initiating a crack in the material using an impact force. You're bringing it down at some speed and that works well for things that are going to fracture. So things like meat and bones that's going to work fine for, but for materials like fruits, soft fruits like a tomato, what is probably going to happen at that point is the fracture is going to become uncontrolled from the moment it's initiated. The skin will burst open unpredictable way, not the sort of thing you want to happen to a tomato unless you're making a spatula. So it's the control of the cut that the normal kitchen knife gives you and that's a soaring action and soaring is fundamentally different way of initiating this crack in a material. It's a more controlled way and also it reduces the force you need because you do what's called a shear that kind of a cross-action and that shear reduces the force you need to crack a material open amazingly. So you can do really fine cuts of meat, prosciutto or thin slice of tomato and add a little bit of basil and delicious. Sounds absolutely delightful. Okay so as Mark said, the cleaver uses a downward impact force which produces a fast uncontrolled fracture and splats the tomato everywhere. Then splats the tomato everywhere. Now if you want to try the other kitchen knife and cut through the tomato with that, this instead is using a shearing type action as you as you saw through it which takes longer but uses a lot less force and it's a lot more controlled. It's not making it lovely little sort of bruschetta here now. Now all of these instruments including the paper have edges that are very thin and one of the things our questioner Joshua asked is why are thinner knives sharper? Well what you're doing is you're initiating a crack in the surface of the material and you're you're pricing apart atomic bonds. So the thinner the edge, the more concentrated the force which makes it easier to chop through and that is why with blunt knives you have to press a lot harder when you're chopping with veg. Okay so if we took that to the extreme Hannah, what do you think might be the sharpest thing in the world? Okay so we're going to be looking for something that's very thin. How about a point? Like a needle? I guess you could call it a needle. Al-Ird Geeks may recognize this soundtrack from a very unusual movie released five years ago by IBM. It was called A Boy and His Atom and this is one of its creators, Chris Lutz. This is a tiny movie and it's made by arranging individual atoms on a surface by positioning them with a sharp needle, one at a time. The boy himself is kind of like a stick figure and he's bouncing this dot around but he himself is made of individual atoms and the ball is an individual atom. There are actually two atoms at a time because we found that a particular tiny molecule was easiest to move around but we're looking at the men on so it's one atom wide and one atom high. You say that so casually we're just moving atoms around. I mean how do you cut an individual atom and arrange it on a surface? The tool we use it's called the scanning tunneling microscope who is invented by IBM scientists and they got the Nobel Prize for it. We call it a microscope because you can get images from it to look at but it's more like an old-fashioned phonograph in that it feels the shape of the surface with this sharp needle. When we move an atom across the surface we're sensing how the atom interacts with the tip in the surface and we take this signal convert it to a sound and play it and hear that we're dragging the atom with a series of squeaks and bumps and from that we learn whether the atom is following the tip. This needle is able to form a chemical bond with atoms on the surface and tug them into a new position and when you say the point this presumably is quite a sharp point? It's a point of a single atom. Now what they're actually trying to do is to work out how they can store data on individual atoms and there's more about that on the podcast with loads of other bonus material too. Okay Adam this is all marvelous but you're talking about a whole complex machine here. How about the sharpest naturally occurring object in the world? Which as paleoarchaeologist Becky Ragh-Syke's told me is called obsidian. Obsidian is a volcanic glass so because it's from lava that comes out and cools really quickly there's no time for crystal structures to form as they normally do in rocks and that means that when you fracture it you get an edge that is super super fine. You can have an edge that is basically the same thickness as a molecule. Now if we look back through different civilizations the aztecs were a wash with obsidian it became central to their whole culture. They would use it for surgery they would use it in ritual activity so there's a deities that are specifically linked to obsidian. They also militarily used obsidian to create the equivalent of broad swords so they would have very large wooden clublike objects that they then put really fine enormously sharp and long obsidian blades all around the perimeter and there are multiple stories that they could slice the head off horses but it's sharp enough to do that it can cut through flesh and bone. That's quite a good weapon to have on your team. It's not bad I think I mean obsidian's extraordinarily sharp but it's also quite brittle so obsidian as a glass will dull on very very hard objects. Okay well it might be very sharp but it's not much use if it's brittle it's just going to go blunt or it's going to break. Well you say that but it's so sharp that it's made a bit of a comeback because it makes such a clean cut. Well in fact people do use obsidian today for scalpals so if you really want a scalpel that's ultra ultra sharp you can get specialist nappers to give you obsidian and surgeons use these. And that will have a smoother cut than a steel blade? Yes because to get steel that sharp you're grinding it and you have all sorts of scratches on it whereas this is being sheared you'll get a much smoother edge. In fact some people say you get much better wound healing with obsidian because it's so fine it goes between the cells. So Dr. Fry when it comes to what makes things sharp can we say case solved? Yes a thin edge means you can concentrate a large force over a small area to break atomic bonds. The sharpest thing on earth is the needle of a scanning tunneling microscope which is one atom thick. But the sharpest natural object is a type of volcanic glass called obsidian beloved of Aztecs and surgeons alike. There you go the sharpest objects. I love the fact that obsidian has been used as a cutting tool spearheads, burin scrapers for more than two million burin scrapers. What of that? They're sort of engraving wood. Oh okay that's not what I wouldn't have been my guess. And of course we heard in the programme there that obsidian was used as a weapon in battles to chop ahead of a horse. But something doesn't quite you know if you're going to pick something sharp for battle there are a few different things that you need to consider. And so to find out what would make a good sharp object for war I spoke to Mark Mordonick. So here's the thing in battle right you have what you think I want the sharpest I want but actually do you because in battle you might have to hit someone in kind of in an impact way and it might hit their bone or their armor and it has to absorb that impact and that means that there might be a shock wave that goes to the material and if it's a brittle material like a ceramic or obsidian it might just shatter so you've got your weapons gone. The thing about steel and metals in general is that not only are they stiff and strong so they can make good cutting edges but they are tough so they'll just dent and that's another reason why steel is so important as a cutting agent. So rocks are hard and strong but they're not tough and so the stone age we had to get out of the stone age because we just didn't have tough materials and that's the material you need for these cutting edges really swords and knives and tools in general. Is it only steel that gets used for knives or are there other materials that can be used to you? There are other materials that can be used and in fact there's quite a lot of different materials out there you can use ceramics and there are ceramic knives and historically that was where knives came from so if you think of the stone age one of the key things we had to do in the stone age was get cutting edges to cut skins to make clothes to make rope to tie things together to make you know rudimentary shelters the cutting edge was key to almost all of the stone age and of course that's flint napping and flints are a brilliant cutting edge and they're a ceramic. Now Mark there mentioned steel being a good or rounder. Mark has in fact contributed an interview entirely about steel in a previous episode that we did the strongest thing. What was that episode called the strongest stuff? I think it was just called the curious case of the strongest thing or strongest stuff but it was steel wasn't it? He voted for steel. Yeah he's very keen on steel. In the end yeah we've just you know in the last couple of months we just pushed back the date of the beginning of the Iron Age to India round about, can't remember how long ago. What they had to iron? Yeah yeah so the beginning of the Iron Age starts probably earliest iron smelting in India. I can't remember the date now so if someone could write in time at the day. Take a bit first. Yeah that's interesting. Yeah yeah so you know the material science and its contribution to the history of our species and the evolution of our species just cannot be underestimated. No indeed. In fact Obsidian tools fit into toolheads fit into the Akulean period which is about more than a million years worth of one specific type of tools that it is the longest standing tool technology that humans have ever had. You may have noticed in recent podcasts that Adam has started just inserting his own random fact. I'll tell you the reason for this. It's because Adam's writing a book and so all day every day he sits there reading stuff that he finds vaguely interesting and has no one to talk to about it and so that is why he comes on this podcast and unleashes his weakst wether facts on you or curious. I wish I could contest that but that's just 100% accurate. Anyway now the other interview he that we had in that program was Chris Lutz from IBM and the amazing little film they did with their stop motion where they were moving individual atoms round to tell a story. Where to Google that one I think. It's really really beautiful and you know the stunning piece of work. One of the things I asked Chris was why they were actually doing this because IBM aren't that into making stop motion cute animations. Not what they're known for. Now look a boy in his atom is the most ridiculously cool and pretty cute film ever. It has this amazing scientific background to it but presumably you didn't invent this technology in order to make a short stop motion animated film did you. Really we're making this technology to study what happens at the smallest scale of ordinary matter and the reason is because many technologies get their benefits from being tiny so storage and computing technologies are shrinking steadily. Every couple years they get cut in half in size through great engineering effort. What we're doing is jumping ahead to the time when we can make things at the scale of individual atoms and that's decades in the future but we want to get ready and practice and get people's imaginations going regarding what we want to build. Are there are there any sort of obvious practical applications that might emerge from this type of technology? Well we hope ultimately it will teach us a lot about what to make and how to make it for storing information and for doing computation and maybe for new materials. So for example we recently learned that we can store one bit of information a zero or one in the magnetism of a single atom on a surface. It holds its north pole still either pointing out or into the surface so it's remembering a little bit of information in just one atom. If we can store information with one bit or atom as we have demonstrated just for two atoms now if we can do that for many atoms we could store all of the music on iTunes on an area the size of a credit card. Which presumably is a sort of unparalleled level of information density. Yes so this is hundreds of times denser than current technologies and it's not a finished technology it's not ready to build a large memory or cell but it shows us the physics that underlies what future technologies might use for storage. It tells us the answer that it is possible for one atom to hold its north pole steadily either one way or the other. I remember when I got my first iPods and it was 128 megabytes right and it was the most incredible thing that that could fit in the palm of your hand and now all of the music in the world on a credit card. I know I know amazing and our children will never know the pleasure of a tape deck no which is probably a good thing. Now this is the penultimate podcast in series nine but it's two this week special treat you get one today and one on Friday which is how do we measure the age of the universe so make sure you look out for that one now of course we started this series with a double sex bill or in fact a sex double bill you know word orders double sex whatever that was fine and as part of that feedback from that episode we were sent in a limbic by I'm going to guess that's Hana from Twitter it's x-a-n-n-a Hana or Hana would reckon I have no idea but she is curious over the week she certainly is. She's sent in this limbic which will come to you in just to say and the story is about a mutant crayfish from Canada and so you you might remember that we talked about Komote where you went to meet a Komodo dragon. There's a cool dude. Really cool dude who was the product of pathogenesis literally a virgin birth and Hana's limbic is about pathogenesis in a crayfish please take it away Hana. The Marmercrab can on its own path and are genetically cloned possessing more features than similar creatures it doesn't need mates or to bone. That's quite rude. It's a fit really don't say. Oh no I didn't read the limbic head. I just did that thing with that people do an auto-cure they just read whatever's put in front of them. Michelle clearly passed it so it's absolutely fine. The context of this story is brilliant it's a new paper from this month about this particular crayfish which is all female so they just clone themselves a little bit like less like the Komodo dragon and more like the rotifers. There's an article that you can go and have a look at it says we do not recommend Canadians to keep these animals as pets. Why do they not recommend that Adam? Well I think because they're so successful at reproducing that the part of the story is that they've expanded from about you know two 20 years ago to basically taking over the world. Crayfish are really really dangerous invasive species so it's probably best not to have them as pets according to the fisheries and oceans. Like rabbits but worse. Much worse yeah I mean they they're coming over here eating our prawns filling our rivers. Anyway that's pod three from the series. Thanks it for this episode we have an extra episode a final part of this series that comes out on Friday. Just you then. This is the BBC. Hello all you curious people I'm Jim Muckleely and I just want to remind you that all the scientists of these curious cases don't just exist to answer your questions they're people they have lives too for the past seven years I've made it my business to find out about the life scientific what makes someone want to become a world authority on fungi sex or quantum gravity and I've cross-examined many of the experts on these curious cases so if you want to find out who these people are and what they do you might like to give the life scientific podcast to listen see what you think.
