Hello, Curios. This is the final episode in series, gazillion that we're up to now. And it's a special, it's a thing that we've never done before because we get a mega mega like overflowing bulging postbag. You can't say bulging postbag on radio. Four. Have we ever actually been sent a letter? Is that... I mean, because what do you mean, a physical letter? Yeah, because we've been sent a lot of kinds of stuff. We've been sent t-shirts, we've been sent drawings, we've been sent stuff that's now hanging on my wall. Yes, yes, yes. You detect it, I crossed my arms when I was listening to you then, because you know what sent me anything. Don't know, there is. Don't you remember that letter where the woman said that she loved you? But that was why she was so upset that you don't enunciate properly. Do you remember? I might take it out. It was amazing. I have deleted that from my RAM. Anyway, the point is that we get lots of emails and lots of little questions that are too short to fill in in our episode that we wanted to put all together in a very special show. Enjoy. I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. Science. I like it. Hello, as it is the last episode in the current series today, we have got a very special Rutherford and Fry for you. Yes, because you, the listener, send us questions to tackle, curiouscasesatbebsy.co.uk, and we do have a rather overflowing postbag. Now, sometimes the questions you send us are, shall we say, not really in our wheelhouse? Yeah, so there's the emails that try to sell us stuff. There's emails telling us about their crazy conspiracy theories. Sometimes we have emails asking for dating advice. And you know, we do obviously have opinions on all of those, but not really what our show is about. But sometimes there, we do get sensible questions that are things that you could just Google. Yeah, such as, why is the sky blue? Ah, now that's really scattering. That's because short wavelength light is diffused by particles in the atmosphere. Did you Google that? Absolutely. Yes. See, you can do that at home. But the questions that we really love are the ones that seem simple or silly on the surface. But I actually want that we can dive deep into to reveal the whole structure of the universe or something equally grand. Yes, so today we're not just tackling one question or two, but loads. As many little questions as we can fit into half an hour, in fact. Now, listeners will know that when we don't know the answers, we called upon the real experts. And today, we've got a couple of brainiac professors in who regularly help us out. There is Galaxy Brain Cosmologist, Professor Andrew Ponson. Say hello, Andrew. Hello. An actual brain cognitive neuroscientist Sophie Scott. Say hello, Sophie. Hi. Okay, Andrew, the first question is going to be for you. This is a question that comes in from listener Will Hoyland. He asks, if the area around the sun is really hot and away from it is really cold, is there a point, Andrew, in space that will heat a burrito perfectly? Well, short answer to the question is, yes, there is a point in space you can send your burrito to it's about 60 million kilometres from Earth or 90 million kilometres from the sun. That's the short answer. So closer to Earth than the sun? Yeah, it's closer to the Earth than to the sun. So you don't have to send it all that far in cosmological terms, but it's still quite a long way. And what would you do just have it sitting there and it will cook perfectly? Is that the idea? I mean, in principle, you might be able to do something like that. It does get complicated as you start to dig into the details, though. And perhaps the most important thing to know is that you don't actually have to travel 60 million kilometres in order to cook your burrito with the sun. You can also cook it with the sun's rays right here on Earth. Because what does the cooking is not so much the exact temperature. It's more about the heat. You need to get enough heat in there to get the burrito up to a particular temperature. But that doesn't mean that the actual surroundings of the burrito have to be at that temperature. So if you have a big enough lens or perhaps something really highly reflective that you can use to focus the rays of the sun onto your burrito, and you can get these, by the way, you can get solar cookers that do exactly that. Then you can pump enough energy into the burrito to get it up to, well, let's say, I don't know, 80 degrees Celsius, maybe, to be safe for the meat inside. And you can do that without really traveling very far at all. 80 degrees, though, Andrew. I mean, that sounds quite a lot colder than a normal oven. Absolutely. It is colder than the oven, but we're talking about the temperature we need to get the centre of the burrito, too. If you stuff something in a normal oven and it's at whatever, 180 degrees Celsius, that's fine, but clearly you don't actually want your burrito to get to 180 degrees Celsius, because all the water would boil away. It would not be a very nice burrito, it would be very dry and chewy. What you're really trying to do by putting it in such a hot oven is kind of bombard it with energy so that its temperature gradually goes up. Well, in the studio, Hannah and I and Sophie Scott all suitably distanced, but Andrew is down the line. And what you can't see is us really concentrating on you doing the maths there and measuring out the temperatures. And then you say, you know, a standard issue burrito. I like the idea of this. I like the idea that's kept in a fridge in Paris and a Paris basement next with a standard kilogram. I like that. Does this work for enchiladas? Is there a standard enchilada? It could be adapted for enchiladas. I mean, I did do a calculation to work out that number that I gave you that you have to travel 60 million kilometers from Earth. And this is actually quite a serious bit of maths that's used to figure out if you look at an exoplanet, that is a planet that is orbiting a star other than ours. Of course, one question you might well want to ask is what temperature are you expecting that planet to be at? And you have to make all sorts of assumptions. I actually started by assuming that this burrito would be spherical, like a planet. Classic physicist, just make everything a sphere. I did go one level better than a sphere. I turned it into a cylinder. It made very, very little difference. Which is the shape of an enchilada or possibly a fajita? I think a burrito is pretty close to being a cylinder. A approximate. I think it's a approximate. Hang on, I don't understand though. Why do you have to go so far away from Earth though? If you can get it done on Earth, you can get out of 80 degrees on Earth. Why do you have to go 63 million miles away to get it cooked in space? If you want to cook it in space without any additional equipment, you would need to send it that 60 million kilometers away. And that's where it's 80 degrees, is it? That's where that particular thing would reach 80 degrees. The actual temperature of the sun is extremely high, but the particular temperature that it heats something else to is all dependent on how energy gets into that thing and how energy gets back out again. So it's a more complicated calculation than just saying a particular place in space is a particular temperature. It really depends on the details of the materials involved and their shape and so on. I think we probably need to be clear here that we are not advocating, launching your own burritos into space. I absolutely am advocating. Doing that, I think we need to do the experiment. I mean generally when you cook a burrito, you pre-cook everything before you put it in anyway. Okay, I think we have reached the end of space burritos. That is a very important question, but we've really nailed it. I want to move on to a question for Sophie Scott, and this is a very radio four type question, which comes in from listener Linda Hillman in Canada. She asks, why is um and are such a problem in the English language? I know we can be trained to reduce or eliminate it, but why do we feel the need to um and are so often anyway? I'm desperately trying not to say um now. First of all, you have to plan what you're going to say and you've got to get that ready, the concepts, the ideas, what you want the message to be in the context of everything that's happening around you, often while you're already speaking. What happens in speech is that a lot of the kind of error correction, and am I going the right way, and what do I want to say next? You actually pick that up at that conceptual level, such that by the time you actually produce speech, there's not that many mistakes. And if there are mistakes, you often don't even notice or correct them because that's not where your attention is. And these ums and ours are often things that are covering up a detection earlier on that there's a mistake and you edit it, but there's a gap coming through and you've got to cover it, or that there's a misdirection and you want to change it, or that you're just a holder, like I am still talking, don't interrupt me, I'm going to continue making noise at the end of this and then you carry on. It's a feature, it's not a bug. You're actually seeing the speech production system, the elements of it that are being put together, you're seeing that working when you hear ums and ours. So a couple of questions, the first is how conscious during that excellent explanation were you of actually umming and arring? Hardly at all. If you look at speech production, people correct about half the mistakes that they make. I once gave a whole talk when I was in the second year of my PhD and I was very excited about studying speech and I was saying there's a really interesting discrepancy between looking at speech waveform and then actually the sound that's contained in that, what's the phonetic side? So you can look at an A, there's no particular anus in there. And then I say, all p. There's no particular penis and um I know it's only the look on everyone's faces and it took me ages to realise what I'd done because I was thinking about well you know there's the sound waveform it tells you nothing about the speech sounds are you know. You don't notice this stuff in yourself but I think you really notice it in other people too until you listen back to a recording of them speaking because as this is a radio show it's pre-recorded our lovely producer Jen has to go through and take out all of our ums and ours. Yes this is a key part of making radio programs we're not really meant to reveal what goes on underneath the bonnet but this is actually it's got a name it's called DMing and a producer and editor such as Jen will go through the recordings and they will D um well us. How much ums do you have to take out Jen? It varies per presenter. Do you really want to know? Yeah go on. I mean Adam loves a double it. Do you do? What? Do I have a double it? You do. Do you know what's the most dangerous fact? We'll all have it though. Everyone does it as Sophie does absolutely everyone does it so it's it's sort of the third thing is that the same as sort of big fat ums? Exactly it's exactly the same thing it's totally totally normal. So I'm confident it's super conscious of everything we say that has any source of one of these verbal tics in it. One to our next question this one I think is one for you Andrew from Ben Clark who was talking about the mysterious case of the umpumba effect. Do you know what that is Andrew? I do it's the idea that apparently it's possible to put warm water inside a freezer and it will freeze faster than it would if you put cold water in. Hmm that sounds like it runs counter to intuition doesn't it? It does sound pretty unlikely yet. Well you know Andrew Adam and I are extremely professional science communicators we are scientific thinkers we are indeed scientists and so what we have done is come up with our own scientific experiment to support your answer here. This was yesterday Adam's house at distance and using cups because he didn't have any ice cube kettle firstly boiled how much do you do two fluid ounces two fluid ounces which is a standard scientific metric you do the cold water kettle's boiler. That's 50 mil right let's do 50 mil do 50 mil go on okay kettle boiling I'm in charge of hot say when stop yeah okay I'm saying it's too much oh if I say no it's okay so that's going in green one and the temperature of the green one is 76 degrees I don't think my kettle works very well. The cold water is 23 degrees okay and they going in the fridge now. Freezer. Freezer sorry and we return it's about what now and a half ish 1024 it was. What was it? Yeah all right and it is now 11 32 and it's open in the fridge which one around one which? Blue was cold. Okay they've got little films on them little ice sheets blue was cold. Yeah they're both frozen I mean this is oh no that's much less frozen. Is it green is much less frozen? No it is isn't it oh yeah it's like that's like a pond with a bit of ice on it whereas this is like you could skate on that. You could skate on that one so wait a minute that was the cold one. The cold one yeah and the other moment is broken so that's the end of that. I mean that's pretty rock solid the cold one isn't it's not sure smashing it up is helping the freezing process though and in comparison it's a bit more of this. Sorry that is the single worst conducted experiment I have ever heard about. Sophie Scott you do experiments admittedly not in the physical sciences. What do you think about I feel like this peer review process is going wrong already. I got very anxious about how you're measuring the temperature when the kettle boiled and then you hadn't measured the temperature yet I was like I got a pressure to be chilly you know and then you have a cutoff point and then oh that was too easy. That was mere seconds after it came out of the kettle. Let's get back to the theory though and what do you think about the impromptu? I mean our experiment inconclusive that maybe showed the opposite that the hot water was still sloshy while the cold water had frozen. What's your take on this? I actually think your experiment despite being terrible has got to the heart of what the problem with this effect is which is that it's very very hard to reproduce. A number of people have reproduced it since it was first noted by a Raston Pumba he was making ice cream I believe and notice it's happening and it has been noted by other people it's been noted under relatively well controlled conditions but it's almost impossible to reproduce reliably. That's like a nightmare of any scientist if you can't reproduce an effect then you really can't get to grips with what's going on but we can speculate. So hang on hang on it is true it does happen but only sometimes. That's about the best summary I can give you I mean it seems like you know there are serious published papers out there that report it actually happening and there are just as many serious published papers out there that report now it doesn't happen. That's mad. The kind of thing that might go on to allow this to happen is imagine that you do this separately so you separately try and freeze some hot water and then on a separate occasion you try and freeze some cold water. If you put the hot water in on its own and maybe the freezer goes oh my goodness there's something really warm in there I've got to get to work I've got to work really hard to pump that heat out of my innermost body otherwise everything's going to melt and so then overall the whole process is really quick whereas if you just put in some nice cool water it doesn't really notice anything is wrong that's one possible explanation for why this might happen on some occasions. Okay this is the curious case's post bag edition. Yes we're plowing through as many questions as we can muster in half an hour with our expert experts professors Sophie Scott and Andrew Ponson. Now the next question definitely for Sophie and this feels like a COVID lockdown special because we've all been in our 78th Zoom or WhatsApp or Microsoft Teams meetings where he's shouting you have to unmute yourself for the 87th time. This question came from Jamie Agis and he says I'm particularly curious why it seems that even contacts via video call does not seem to fill the genuine need for communication in person. Sophie Scott why is that? There are lots of good things about video calls it really does help to be able to hear somebody as well as to see them it's better than nothing much much better than nothing but there's all sorts of other things that you do as soon as you're in a room with someone or in a space with someone and you start communicating you start aligning your behavior in ways that you barely notice so as soon as we started having a conversation we'll have started to breathe together you don't agree to do this we don't count each other in 3 2 1 in and off we go but we do we time it incredibly precisely and that's what makes the flow of conversation possible it's like you're getting on the same time base you start to coordinate things that are much easier to pick up a viewer in the room with someone even down to how you sit and all of that's gone as soon as you are just a face in a box on a screen and that's one of the reasons why we continuously interrupt each other and it's important to bear in mind that the turn taking when we talk to each other it's not just because it's clearly important that a conversation isn't just one person talking and no one else getting to speak but actually the coordination of speech is sort of a line to behavior that is as rewarding to us as other things that we do in a coordinated way like dance together in it'll play musical instruments together you don't think of a conversation like that but that's what it is so one of the bans you get for your buck from a conversation actually is that you did this thing together you coordinated on this act together and again that it's very very hard to do in a video call you mentioned something which I thought was very interesting there which is that the video calls tend to frame yourself which is just their head and now we've talked about nonverbal communication on this program before on the episode about pro-supagnosia which we had Stephen Fry on who has pro-supagnosia which is the inability to recognise people's faces that nonverbal communication which is so important to all human communication what you're saying is there's so much more to it than just our faces yes and even if you've got the face normally I mean right now I can make eye contact with you and we use eye contact in a very careful way in interactions and that falls away as soon as you're on zoom because we're all just staring at the camera or you might look at someone yes I'm sorry you just revealed something about yourself there but it's true though you lose another cue you lose a whole other sort of way of expressing yourself you're stripping conversation down to its bare elements and it's still better as I say than just the phone or just text but it's still very hard work is it better than just the phone though I mean so I personally try and avoid video calls wherever I possibly can especially when talking to close friends like my mum or my sisters or very very good friends I feel like you get more of an emotional connection over the phone it's difficult because there's data suggesting that you get the same kind of kick from having face-to-face screen-based you know visual and auditory links you tend to laugh more and you do a happier afterwards it's affecting you in a way that's similar to face-to-face conversation but I would agree with you there's something freeing about being able to talk to someone without having to see them and to be able to not worry about that channel of communication such that you can just focus on them you're not thinking oh dear god is that a laundry behind me or I forgot to brush my hair all the other things I find myself unavoidably thinking about in a Zoom call and maybe a generational thing you know for a certain generation your main way of talking to friends was on the phone for a previous generation it would have been letter writing I felt like people have forgotten that phones exist I think it is you try and call somebody under the age of 30 on the phone they're like well have you made my phone make that sound what's going on you know but I think the other thing about a phone conversation is that that's something that's evolved for two people so it has a absolutely built-in intimacy that has a different meaning I think that we have now arranged for Zoom between you and 18 other colleagues it's not the same doesn't have that level of intimacy okay onwards so we have a slightly more mind-bending question sent in by Brian Smith who wanted to know how strong would a gravitational wave have to be before we could feel it and what would we feel now for this question I actually know just the woman to speak to about gravitational waves and what causes them semi-an-assanky she is an astrophysicist in the University of Amsterdam where she is the spokesperson for their centre of excellence in gravitation and astroparticle physics she studies pairs of neutron stars and black holes colliding into each other events that emit gravitational waves gravitational waves are the ripples in spacetime fabric itself I'm imagining when you talk about ripples I sort of imagine as though it's like the surface of a pond is that fair thing to hold in my mind and what's happening at the middle what is the pebble in this case that's a really good analogy and indeed actually I think about gravitational waves often like this like ripples on basically a pond and so you can think of essentially maybe two stones that would be whirling around each other and here the stones would be like a neutron star or a black hole whirling around each other getting sort of into tighter orbits with each other and emitting these ripples which are carrying energy away from the event is the point here that when the ripple passes through us it's not like we're on it we are it like the whole earth all of us are squishing and stretching as a result of these events yes that's exactly it it's just the fact that because the effect is just so small it makes it also incredibly challenging to actually detect them how do you detect them then how do these detectors work essentially the idea of LIGO as well as burgo the detector I'm associated with which is located in pisa and italy as well as a new detector that's been built in Japan called they're basically L-shaped interferometers laser interferometers where each of the L-shaped is essentially three or four kilometers long and you're shooting laser lights down these tunnels to measure the fractional change in distances that are caused due to a gravitational wave that is coming from hundreds of millions of light years away we are now capable of basically measuring the distance from our Sun to Alpha Centauri the nearest star to us which is three light years away to an accuracy of the human hair width and this is why you know we don't feel gravitational waves impinging on us as humans we're not experiencing any of these ripples in a physical sense at the moment or a sensation because you know they are so extremely weak and you need these incredibly high precision instruments that we have now built on earth to actually detect these. I'm not holding out that much hope that we're ever going to feel one Andrew what do you reckon? Yeah you are never going to feel a gravitational wave I think we can say that pretty definitely on the other hand it's not that it's impossible to feel them if two black holes collided a few thousand kilometers away or maybe a few tens of thousand kilometers even then you would actually feel that it would be very unpleasant I suspect but we know that there aren't black holes at those kind of distances because if they were there they would have long ago pulled the earth out of its orbit around the Sun. Okay okay but let's just play fantasy for a moment and imagine that you could stand a few thousand kilometers away from some black holes what would that gravitational wave feel like as it rippled through you? It's really hard to try and figure out what that would feel like because it is so unlike the forces we experience here on earth it's what we call a tidal force so it's kind of like stretching this like a part of you is being pulled and another part of you is being pulled in another direction but it's also rapidly changing direction would feel a bit like being whibbled I can't really think of a better way to describe it. Make use of jelly. Gelification I think it would kind of make you feel a bit gelified yeah so that would be gelification to go alongside spaghettification that's when you actually go in the black hole. Exactly okay let's move it on we've got time I think for one more question that has come from pepper Graham her question is why do we get bored do only boring people get bored are there any benefits to boredom? Well we thought that we would put this to the test because there is in fact an official boredom quiz. How easily bored are you take this quiz to find out? So question one it is easy for me to concentrate on my activities. Oh look there's a tiny spider in the corner which is just beating out of the tricking. Question two frequently when I'm working I find myself worrying about other things. At spider looks like it has an alibi on here comes one of my children into the room when I'm recording something you. Time always seem to be passing slowly. Hard to disagree I often find myself at loose ends not knowing what to do that is literally never happened since I was 14. Many things I have to do are repetitive and not an us. I mean certainly in lockdown I have realised just how often children need feeding it's just all the time. In any situation I can usually find something to do or see to keep me interested. This is tricky right because are you allowed to have your mobile phone with you? This website has got lots of other articles down the right hand side definitely going to click on that as soon as I finish this. Number 13 in any situation I can usually find something to do or see to keep me interested. Sometimes when Hannah is talking about infinity my eyes glaze over. In situations where I have to wait such as a line or a cue I get very restless. Yeah I hate it. Now I quite like the piece of a cue. How many questions are there? Unless I'm doing something exciting even dangerous I feel half dead and dull. Definitely disagree with that. Right click see your results. Oh my god I went through all of that and it says you don't get bored easily. Oh it says you don't get bored easily. Hooray! I mean I could have told you that. Now actually that was a legitimate quiz that we took there. That was from a research paper from the Journal of Personality Assessment called the Boredom Pronus Scale. So if you think there's a validity to these kind of quizzes. Well one of the problems with any quiz like that and you know obviously this is something that applies to aspects of my own work as well as you're relying on people's self-report and some things we have a lot of insight into another things we don't. I sometimes wonder with individual differences in boredom how much you're picking up something that's a bit more emotional. You know like one of the best predictors of being happy is having something that you're looking forward to and you know doing things is rewarding and tends to be a way of improving your mood. So actually a lot of the things that make you less bored or so make you happier. It may not be a simple factor operating on its own. This quest for novelty is being fed in this era of social media of Twitter and Facebook more than perhaps any other time in human history. So maybe now humans are less bored than they've ever been. And I do worry about that because I think there is a danger when there is no end to it. When there's no end to scrolling through Twitter and there's no end to scrolling through Facebook and any other social media platform. They are machines for keeping your attention going. That's what the algorithm is doing. The algorithm is very good at keeping you there because it starts to learn the stuff you're interested in and gives you more of it because having you there gets them money. I do worry slightly. It is actually quite useful for us. I think to be a bit bored and a bit left to our own devices. Because the novelty seeking might go away and you'll find some way of curing it. And I think a lot of human creativity has its roots in this novelty seeking tendency. But presumably there is a difference between being bored and being peaceful or just not engaging with something that is constantly pushing your buttons. Absolutely. And I think people call it different things. People meditate a lot of what people get out of exercise is that you get some time when you can't be distracted by other stuff and people can't talk to you. There are other things you can't do. You find different ways of people build this sort of stuff into their day. You need a range of experience. You need points in the day when you're very focused. You need points in the day when you're just letting go. And you need points in the day when there's nothing going on. Well thank you very much, David Scores and Andrew Ponson, for joining us for our very special post bag episode. So Dr. Fry, when it comes to whether we like short questions, can we say K solves? Yes. Dr. Rotherd, we can. We absolutely do. So keep them coming. Curious cases at BBC.co.uk. Until next series. Unless you're still listening to the podcast, the best people of all the curios. You know what actually we did mention the beginning of that part that sometimes the questions that we get sent into our inbox are not really for us, not really for us. And that has actually happened to me quite a lot in real life too. Most of them too as well. But there was one occasion in particular where I was at a conference and I was talking about some of my favourite uses of data. And I've got this great old story that I tell quite often about using data, looking at arguments between couples in long-term relationships and you know why sort of arguments descend into breakdown of a marriage, for example. Anyway at the end of the conference, this guy comes up to me. He's like kind of vices away through, who talks to me and he's like, oh great, I just want to talk to you about that. I thought that was really interesting. I thought that was really interesting. I'm dating a married woman. I want your mathematical advice on how to get to break up with her husband. What did you say? I was, I desperately trying to kind of get out of it and like just back away. But he was sort of, I mean if you're that kind of person who you ask that sort of question, well if you're this kind of person who is like quite happily dating someone in another relationship, I'm willing to announce it. I'm willing to announce it at a conference. And then go up to someone who's got nothing to do with it and ask them that kind of advice. You're not someone who picks up on social cues, I imagine. What is your technique for extracting yourself from those situations where like sometimes I, if I've got my laptop opening, if I've been giving a presentation, I sort of ostentatiously close it. Oh dear. As an unplugged, as though I'm indicating this is my discourse marker, a little bit like Sophie had been talking about the arms and arms. I'm definitely going towards the door. Done now. But the problem, there's one case I remember somewhere abroad, I forget where, but I was doing that and really trying to extract myself from a question that I didn't want to or couldn't answer and needed to go somewhere else. And he just came with me. He just, chap just followed me. Oh, you're coming too. Yeah. Yeah. You know, we should do though. Well, it's sort of business wrap up. End of series, Admin. Good idea. End of series, Admin. Okay. So first off, throughout the series, we've run a couple of online polls about things that have appeared. Poll number one was wasps. Yes or no? Yeah. Conclusive winner on that one. Yeah, it was, I think the majority was, I think it was two to one in favor of nut wasps. No, not wasps. And another poll, which had, I think, 15,000 votes in about an hour and a half was spaghetti to break or not break. I mean, I won that one. I don't like to rub it in. But it was about three to one. But what pleases me about that is that I'm not a complete freak. There are at least a quarter of our sample size of people out there and as making a face, I mean, it's not a good face. Almost all the answers were, yes, because I'm feeding children. You're not feeding children. You're not feeding children. No, it's feeding you. Fine. Fine. Okay. Now, a couple more things before we get to cure of the week. First, what we want to say is that this has been a bit of an experimental series in a lot of ways. We've been making it under lockdown. We have the wonderful new producer, Jenna's you will know. And we've expanded to half an hour. And what we really want to do with this series is to make it your show as much as possible. So if there are things over the course of this last series that you've really liked or things that you think that we can do better, well, then we really want to hear from you. So right into our curious cases at BBC.co.uk with everything you liked and everything you didn't like. We want to hear your thoughts. And now we're going to another one of your contributions to our show, which is the soundtrack to Curie the Week. Now, this is a lovely email. This came in from Patrick in Manchester. And I'm going to read the whole email out because it's mercifully short and brilliant. My Curieau flowered a few days ago. I beg your pardon, Patrick. I want to say a doctor about that. I have attached a couple of photos. I don't know which species it is. Possibly Curieau's Citroe Formis or a hybrid with Curieau Rolianas. Various cultivated forms are commonly grown house plums. What? Curieau's house plums. I did not know that. There's a bit of we've got our Lenea and Latin names from last week's episode. He goes on for more photos and some description of the curiosity value of the plant. Search for some bad photos of plants. And you should find my blog easily. I do not monetize my blog in any way. Yours, Patrick, for Manchester. We didn't know. No, we didn't know. I said Curieau's. Curieau of the week. But actually, let's be clear about this. The Curieau of the week is the plant not Patrick. And so you need to make sure that you give the badge to the plant and pin it onto the plant. Please, Patrick. And if you do that and send us in a photo of that, we may consider giving you one too. I bar these dates, isn't it? I know, but you know, whatever. Okay. All that remains then is to thank our wonderful long suffering producer, Jim Winty, for everything during this series. Our studio managers, everyone who's helped us out, everyone who sent in questions, all of our Curieau's in the week, we will be back with another series in the not too distant future. Bye!
