Today we have the curious case of what is the step so called? The sphere in I can't remember, was it called the sphere in space? Michelle you didn't write it down. A study in the sphere. Yes. A foolish of us. Yeah we spend quite a lot of time trying to get sort of Sherlock Holmes theme. And also I'm pretty sure that I came up with that title so the fact that then forgot it is a bit silly. Yes. Did I come up with that title in the show? Yes I did. Thank you. Thank you. Great title. Great title. Great. Great. Yeah. Nice. It's memorable. What happens in a study in spheres please? It's all about why things seem to tend towards spherical shapes in space. I do love our listeners questions. They do come in with the broadest range of esoteric topics. It's really interesting questions and stuff that actually if it was just you and me and Michelle in the room we'd never come up with interesting content like that. No. No but it is the type of thing that I imagine that we would actually sit in the pub and talk about. Like me and you and Michelle and some of our other. Drunken rambles. Yeah and we'd be like say go on then what is this brown dissing in the universe? Yeah. Yeah you're right that's true that's true. Why the leg hair which is one of the episodes coming up? Why does leg hair not platterable? Yeah or why do we cry? Because sad films are sad. Okay before you start blubbing again I think it's time to get on with the radio programme. Yes the curious cases of what was it called again? Today we bring you a study in spheres. This well rounded question came to our attention via the medium of Facebook from Mr Brian Pasano. Right Brian says he has always wondered why everything in space tends to be either circular or spherical. Yeah so we're talking planets, moon, stars that kind of thing. So I think I know this one gravity. Gravity pulls everything right into the centre and that is because it's the most energy efficient shape. The thing is though not everything in space is round so think about meteors, asteroids and comets none of those are spherical and that's because they're not big enough for the gravity to pull them together into a ball and actually lots of moons are too small to be forced into a spherical shape too. All right then so what about the big planets? They are pretty obviously round aren't they? Well it's not quite that simple. So Maricacula he's the public astronomer at the Royal Greenwich Observatory and he knows about this stuff. How old is this telescope then? So the telescope we're going to use is over a hundred years old. It was built in the 1890s and it was one of the largest telescopes in the world at the time and the astronomers here were using it to study all sorts of things but it's still working now so a fantastic example of victory in engineering. And we think to get night for it. Fingers crossed. Beautiful in here. This is the great equatorial giant iron telescope about the size of a bus and the enormous metal dome above us is being opened as the telescope rotates into position and it's dusk right now so you can just about hear the bird song in the park outside. So the guys have lined the telescope up with Jupiter. You are about to look through a telescope which is more than a century old. Genuinely excited. Oh god hang on. That is incredible. You can see the stripes around it. You're right it's very different to seeing it seeing a photograph. There is something that makes the hairs on the back of your neck stick up because you're seeing photons that have come from the sun bounced off Jupiter's clouds and have then come all the way back through the telescope and they're hitting your retina. You can also see though just about. It's not quite spherical is it? Jupiter is a huge ball of hydrogen and helium. It's 11 times the diameter of a 300 times the mass of earth and gravity is trying to squeeze it down into a perfect sphere. But it's also spinning once every 10 hours and so there's a competition a battle between gravity and rotation. Gravity trying to pull it together and rotation trying to push it apart. Well Jupiter's main of gas right it's very easy to squash but what about the earth? What about something a rockier planet? Anything that is spinning will not be a perfect sphere. The earth is squashed at the poles and bulging at the equator so if you go to the equator you are further from the center of the earth than you would be if you were standing at the poles. And in fact the point on the earth which is furthest from the earth center is not the top of Mount Everest. It is actually a mountain in the Andes close to the equator which although is not as high above sea level as Mount Everest is further from the center of the earth because the earth bulges there. So you're officially saying that earth isn't round? The earth isn't round technically it's an oblate spheroid not a sphere. Hold the flipping phone people the earth isn't round. No it's an oblate spheroid. And what is that please? It's one where it's a bit pulled to you around the middle. Dyke me after I've eaten a nice curry. It's a middle-aged spread it's fine. I think I'm not a middle-aged. Okay well they may feel any better. Roundness was considered close to godliness in the past. I'm not middle-aged. The idea that the universe is built up from spheres goes back a very long way certainly to the ancient Greeks. This is the aptly named science writer Philip Ball. The bodies themselves the planets for example were thought to be perfect smooth spheres like billiard balls really and they were also thought to be fixed to these spheres that were somehow transparent these crystalline spheres that carried them on their orbits. The Greeks particularly the Greek philosophers influenced by the ideas of Plato believed that there was a kind of beauty and symmetry and harmony in the universe and so it would make sense that these perfect shapes spheres and circles would be the shapes that the universe was made from. The problem was that the more sophisticated the telescopes and the more observations we made the less spherical these spheres became. As we now know the planets don't follow perfectly spherical orbits. The problem then was how to reconcile that with this deep belief that everything would move in circles and would be made up of spheres. Astronomers started to construct a system where you didn't just have one circle. There would be a big circle and the planet might execute little circles sort of on the big one and these little circles were things called epicycles. And after a while in order to describe accurately what they saw astronomers found that they had a what seemed to be actually a rather unwieldy and rather ugly picture of the universe. The first time that really started to be challenged in a serious way was with the work of Nicholas Copernicus towards the end of the 15th century. First Copernicus said the sun was at the centre of our solar system. Then Kepler found the orbit of the planets was elliptical and not circular. Galileo looked through his telescope and saw a moon that wasn't spherical or smooth but had mountains and craters. Saturn had rings, Jupiter had moons, everyone was unique. Astronomers couldn't hang on to their perfect celestial spheres anymore. Very quickly after Galileo's observations with the telescope, others started to see all kinds of things in the heavens. In fact, Galileo himself first got a glimpse of a system of moons going around Jupiter. So, you know, he already the universe looked more complex than it did before and then he and others started to be able to make out the rings around Saturn. And all of a sudden, you know, the universe was much more complicated and the planets were much more complicated. Each of them had its own characteristics. They weren't just as smooth and simple as as billion balls. And so by the end of the 17th century, it was certainly widely accepted amongst scientists, proto-scientists at that time, that the universe seemed to be full of potential worlds like ours and we can find people starting to speculate about what those were to like. Maybe there were beings living there. Maybe there were civilizations there. Maybe we could even go there. Okay, so I think we can agree that astronomy has not provided a perfect mathematical sphere. So, very sorry to our question of Brian Pasano. There must be something in nature that's around there. What about eyeballs? No, not even close. They're elongated in humans and they have a different shape at the front way. Soles, maybe? Definitely not. Frogs born. Clearly never seen any frog spawn. Look, biology is just way too messy for things to be spherical. Most animals are bilaterally symmetrical. There are a few which are round and there are a few which are slightly sort of spherical shape. There is a class of organisms called rotifer, also known as a wheel animal. They're not round. Well, I'm disappointed in biology. I've got to be honest. Yes, well, I don't care. So, if we're looking for something perfectly spherical in nature, I think we have to look beyond biology for something that chooses its own shape. Because a sphere is the lowest energy state. To how about bubbles? I'm Dr Helen Cherskut and I'm a researcher at University College London. Okay, now you are our resident bubble expert. In fact, you're the only person I know who considers themselves to be a bubble expert are bubbles round. No, not mostly. Sorry. The thing about bubbles is different sizes of bubbles are different shapes. And so, on a soap bubble, there's a very thin layer of water that sort of boundary there behaves a little bit like an elastic skin. And as the or soap bubble drifts off with lots of pretty colours, that pull is trying to reduce the surface as much as possible so it does pull it into a sphere. But if you look at a soap bubble, it's never perfectly spherical. And the reason for that is that it's getting buffeted by the air. And when you have a big bubble, what the world is doing to the bubble matters a lot more, just because you've got a much bigger bubble to hold together. But as you get smaller, the surface tension dominates more and more and more. And the buffeting of the world can do less to the bubble because the surface tension's got less bubble to hold in. The world of the small is the place to look for spheres. If you want to see a real sphere, you don't look at a planet or a sun. You want to look down to the world smaller than we can see. And then you get beautiful little spheres. But not too small or else things start to get really weird. There's a sort of debate in the bubble world about what the smallest bubble you can get is. And it all comes down to how small the thing can be and still be a bubble because once you get down to the scale of atoms, the atoms are sort of wobbling around themselves. You can't really say exactly where the edges and that's probably not a sphere. So if you go smaller than the size of an atom or even close to it because of that wobbling, your perfect world doesn't exist. I do love enlisting the help of Helen Chersky because she's not only she a brilliant physicist, but she has helped me with locating the genuine source of perfect spheres, not too big, not too small. Not too hot, not too gold. Well, quite and I have a little surprise for you. Is this going to be a perfect sphere? It is the beginning of a perfect sphere. This is a good start. It's got some lovely champagne flutes and a pint glass. Now you have to choose your weapon. Oh, this is delicious. Okay, we've got a can of Guinness. Are they cold? Have you filled them as well? There's also a bottle of champagne. Yes. I'm a classy lady. I'm going to go for the champagne. Okay, so the deal is here, according to Helen, that both of these drinks, the Guinness, other stouts are available and the champagne. Plenty of champagne are available. Both of them have bubbles at around a hundredth of a millimetre and that is the point at which the surface tension overcomes gravity and creates as near as dammit the perfect sphere. What about fizzy pop there? Well, apparently the bubbles are too big, so they get distorted by the external pressures. They're smaller in champagne then. Well, you know, obviously this is not my area. I think this means is that more field work is required than I think. Cheers. Cheers. So, Dr. Fry, case solved? Yes, pretty much. Everything people think of as round in space isn't really round. Just a bit fat around the middle. I'm saying nothing. So, that was a study in spheres. We didn't quite answer the question of what's the round just thing in the universe there, did we? No, we didn't. And did we? Because there is something else that's quite round. Which is? Neutron stars. You're the more physicsy side of this duo, so what's the neutron stars? Neutron stars are unimaginably dense. I think a teaspoon's worth is something like a thousand Titanic. I mean, it's just astonishing how dense it is. That was Michelle Chippen in, Michelle I'll produce the Chippen in with some actual facts for a change. Anyway, the point is that they are super dense and incredibly enter. However, they are also spinning. So, this thing about angular momentum, you know, it does mean that you do get these mountains if you like an inverted comet on neutron stars. So, they're not absolutely perfectly, perfectly spherical. However, there is also such a thing theoretically at least as a non-spinning neutron star. And that probably would be the roundest thing in the universe. And so, it's theoretical, but if we were to find a non-spinning neutron star, how round would it be? I mean, seriously round. Certainly, if you scaled it down to the size of one of these bubbles, probably more round than a bubble. In fact, I'm going to put my next stick my neck out definitely more round than a bubble. It's your conclusion on this episode is it's non-spinning neutron star, rounder than a bubble. Yeah. Science people. That's that's that's we are science. Yes. Anyway, don't forget to email us with your curious cases. Indeed, because we've got a whole another series coming up that we need your questions for your everyday science mysteries and email us them at curiouscases at BBC.co.uk. And you can come and see us doing the live version of this show at the Cheltenham Science Festival on date, please, Michelle. I think it's Saturday, the 11th of June. With more confidence, please produce a Michelle. Saturday, the 11th of June. Yes, at the Cheltenham Science Festival in the BBC tent. In which members of the audience are allowed to ask us questions without us, I think that's Michelle research for a week. So we're probably not going to know the answers. Good luck. So the answers are going to be do you have a smartphone and Wikipedia? Slash. What do you think? Interesting question. What are your thoughts on it? But if you live near Cheltenham and are going to come send us your questions. Yes, that's true. In advance, so we can look up the Wikipedia page. Yeah, and you can tweak them to curious Cheltenham hashtag. This is why Michelle is not a presenter. Yeah, we should probably have worked out all of these details. Right, let's do it quickly. Now, curiouscases at BBC.co.uk is the normal email address. The curious cases live at Cheltenham Science Festival in the BBC tent. And the hashtag for the Twitters is hashtag curious Cheltenham. We think. This whole pod end has been full of lots of spurious nonsense, hasn't it, really? Neutron stars and hashtags. See you next time.
