I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of science. Science. I like it. Hello to the Curios. Oh, it's nice to see it. I know the Curios, the very, very special pod listeners for the Curious cases. You are so welcome. Here's so welcome. Sounds like a sweet treat. The Curios. Yeah. You are our sweet treats. I think we may have stretched this metaphor a bit too far. Anyway, this is the podcast, obviously, because you people are listening to it. You're very special people. And today's episode is about earworms. Now, we've had more correspondence, more questions about earworms than any other topic in the history of all seven series. This is something that you clearly want to know about. Why do they get stuck in your head? Why are some tunes more earworming than others? And we've decided to just pick one question, can't cram them all into our 12-minute programme, fortunately. Pick one question, to answer during the actual show. But we have some extra material at the end, in the podcast bit at the end, where we answer a few more of your questions. Just for the Curios. Just for the Curios. I think that perhaps people also write in, because they know it's just a wonderful opportunity to get added to sing some more 80s boring music. But in fact, I don't, in this episode, what I do sing is our theme tune, which goes like this. Bum, bum, bum, bum. That means it's the old, I mean, such an earworm. It's true. What the listeners don't know is that we, not only do we sing that to ourselves quite a lot in the studio, just before we're recording, sometimes we're writing this thing. Either that is talk about the crab dance. There is also a dance associated with it. I have video footage of this crab dance. I am not involved in the video. No, there was Michelle. It's just Adam Rutherford's doing crab dance. It just seemed appropriate when we were singing the theme tune one time, that I felt the need to express my inner emotions of this. It's a lot of side stepping with hands kind of clasping. I mean, the crab dance is the most accurate. Are we going to post this video online? Is this something that we want to happen? I think, you brought up. I think if you do a crab dance, a curious case is theme tune dance, then we can post them. I think we can do a different Twitter challenge. I think that I'm going to suggest to a challenge at the end of the podcast. Nice. So should we get on with the earworms? Should we start singing the theme tune? I've said before, and I will say it again, that tune is ridiculously catchy. Sometimes I just see it to myself and I loop over and over again. Yeah, it's very earwormy, isn't it? But it's not just worm in our theme tune today, because earworms have also infiltrated our inbox and proliferated out of all proportions. Yeah, this is currently our most asked topic, including this question sent into curiouscases, thatbbt.co.uk, by Jeremy Sedgley from Haywood's Heath, and he asks, I have just finished binge listening to all the podcasts of the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry. Could Matt Jeremy? And now I have your theme tune stuck in my mind as an earworm. How and wide earworms occur, and what is their evolutionary benefit? So today we're going to be dissecting your earworms to discover when and how they get stuck. And Will Rutherford, why an earworm, could even save your life? Although I thought it was a DJ that was supposed to have done that. Interesting. Interesting that you should mention that. 24 minutes to 8 here on BBC Radio 6 Music. Earworms loads of. During his breakfast time show for the past eight years, Sean Keveni has gathered and exercised. His listeners earworms on BBC 6 Music. I have a Dr. Dr Thompson Twins earworm every morning because we've got a past two Dr. Car Spaces, and Paul Johnson has the same problem when he gets in a lift at work, he can't help singing, you take me up to the higher floor. But can your earworm rent supreme over even those to keep them coming in? People do tend to wake up in the mornings with a residue of some kind of song in their head. And so we extricate them. And then we play a one. There's something that come up all the time. Yes, there are some that come up very cyclically, which is a line man by Glenn Campbell. That seems to come up like once a month in somebody's brain. Is there one that you regularly get stuck in your head? You just have to see a word, don't you, sometimes. It's something we'll trigger it. Sometimes as a sound, like the squeak of my bicycle break, it sounded a bit like a Barry White Philadelphia soul, you know, sort of violin stab. And then it gave me a Barry White song earworm. So it's terrible because it's all around you all the time. You're susceptible. My coffee machine sounds like the beginning of the hardest button to button by white stripes. Boom, boom, boom. That's ding, ding, ding, ding. Yeah, see, that every time. There's no way around it. Hannah, that is ridiculous. You know, I thought that you wouldn't bleed me. So I have brought in a recording of my coffee machine. Here you go. I can't believe that. I'd like to withdraw my previous statement and that's ridiculous and replace it with, I think that's literally the best thing I've ever heard. You know, I get that every morning. Anyway, why do certain songs get stuck in your head? Well, a group of psychologists from Goldsmiths University of London are shone and his listeners if they could help study just that. His professor, Lauren Stewart. We did a survey with Six Music and we asked people to tell us about a recent earworm episode. From what people told us, we identified some triggers that explained when earworms occur and unsurprisingly recent exposure to a song resulted in an earworm occurring. But additionally to that, effective states, so emotional states. So if people are very stressed, they might get a particular earworm, for instance. We had someone who said that she had this particular banana rama earworm and she said she first had it during her GCSEs. It was May 1989. I was queuing up to go into my chemistry GCSE. Something I knew I was going to massively struggle with. But it just got stuck and it got stuck for weeks and weeks and weeks and I couldn't shift it. Meet Martha. Since that fateful teenage exam, every stressful situation has been accompanied by an unwelcome visitor, Nathan Jones. Nathan Jones, Kevin Gunzula. Nathan Jones, Kevin Gunzula. Notably my wedding day when the person was supposed to come and help me get dressed and show up. It came there, it was there for the rest of the day. Nathan Jones, Kevin Gunzula. Childbirth, cruel to cross an epidural. Anything horrendous that's happened, it's there. Just the one line singing in my ears. Nathan Jones, Kevin Gunzula. And it drives me up the wall. Truly, Martha, that sounds horrific. Yeah, her brain could have at least picked a better song. Oh, don't pretend you know music, Hannah. I seem to recall that you like cold play. Anyway, let's get to the bottom of this. What makes certain songs earwormier than others? And is it correlated to how snobby, pretentious music get up, particular bands? How do... Two-shay, Doctor Fry. Anyway, in 2013, Lawrence team gathered a chart of the song's most likely to get stuck in our heads. So, for you dear listeners, here's the earworm countdown. Straight in at number seven, Pop Pickers. It's Bohemian Rhapsody by Queen. Next at number six, California Girls by Katie Perry. Moves like Jagger by Maroon 5 is number five. Number four is, somebody that I used to know by Gortier. Great song. Never heard of it. Next, 80s Poodle Rock Power Anthem. Don't stop believing that's journey. Number two, perhaps predictably, is can't get you out of my head by pint-sized pop princess Kaimino. And number one is the incredibly annoying Bad Romance by Lady Gaga. Rarararararara. Romarararara. Romarara. Rararararara. What's over on my ass? What is that? I mean, is that even music? It doesn't sound like a theme. I really like it. But what is she doing? Rararararara. There's no way of saying this with that sound like an old dad as well. You won't be not dead. Anyway, I asked Lauren Stewart what it is about this awful song that makes it so effective at infecting our brain. What we found was that having a rather simple melodic shape, so the pattern of ups and downs predicts whether a song is likely to become a near worm. Many songs have got this sort of melodic arc, so they first go up and then they come down. And that's what Bad Romance has. So it's a very generic shape that our brain can easily latch on to making these songs extremely memorable for us. This sort of arc, this melodic arc, is something that is very familiar to possibly the most near wormy songs of all time, which are nursery rhymes. So that melodic structure is something we see in, for example, Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star. Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star. So Twinkle, Twinkle has this very simple melodic arc, mirrored in many pop songs and many classical pieces of music as well. But that alone would make things very boring. So we need to spice things up. And one way of doing that is by having slightly unusual melodic leaps. So intervals that are a little bit unexpected. Which is what we get in Lady Gaga's Bad Romance. Precisely. So that's actually a fifth. But if you couple it with the fact that it goes to the... That's like a minor second. So that's really unusual. So it's got enough predictability, but also enough interest to get our brains interested. And although in our study we were only looking at the melodic features, of course we can't ignore the fact that she is doing something really unusual in terms of the speech sounds that she is making rararar. You know, that's immediately salient because we're like, well, what's that all about? So that's another level of interest that kind of hooks us in. So you're saying that Lady Gaga basically writes Clevver nursery rhymes? Anyone who has a child, as you know Hannah, has experienced the fact that nursery rhymes can get lodged in your brain for days. You know, my daughter has a toy that goes, it literally won't leave my mind. It is an incredibly effective earwaves. Now it's mine as well. Thank you very much. Well, we haven't finished answering the original question anyway because our listener, Jeremy Sajrei, he asked whether earworms have any evolutionary benefits? Well, let's consider this example. documentary touching the void directed by Kevin MacDonald tells the story of mountaineer Joe Simpson left in a desperate situation following a climbing accident in the Peruvian andes he is stranded freezing with a broken leg and little hope of rescue I did have one time when God a song going through my head and it was by a band called Boney M and I don't really like Boney M's music he's slipping into an out of consciousness and this annoying creature he 70s pop song starts playing on a loop I just went on and on and on hours I'm very upsetting because I wanted to try to go up my head I grew a sinking you know bloody hell I'm gonna die to Boney M yeah personally I would have preferred the cold boney fingers of death to that it's certainly a close call yeah so could earworms have a useful purpose his Lauren Stewart again we came up with the idea that potentially music could be seen as the brain's sonic screen saver perhaps this stored music of which we have hundreds of thousands of tunes locked away in our long-term memory when we spontaneously recall one of these tunes this may be our brain's way of nudging us a little bit it provides an extra bit of stimulation when we might have dropped our level of consciousness in in that example obviously Boney M, Brown Girl in the Ring had these necessary rhythmic qualities to provide a bit of extra sort of cognitive stimulation it's enough of a stimulus it doesn't matter what the stimulus is but it's enough of a stimulus to keep your brain focused absolutely yeah so Dr. Fry when it comes to why we get earworms can we say case solved yes they are likely to appear when you are waking up or falling asleep and when your brain is idling they tend to follow familiar melodic patterns a bit like nursery rhyme but with a surprising twist or two to peak our interest they may seem annoying or pointless but they could help your brain to stay alert in times of crisis and to finish this tune to lodge in your brain for the rest of the day you're welcome that was the curious case of the sticky song and actually Adam I'm quite surprised you managed to refrain from singing too much and that's in that I have to but actually I think I sung more than you I know but listen we cannot avoid the fact that the most exciting thing that happened in the last 12 minutes possibly in all seven series the literally the best thing that I've ever heard was your coffee machine playing I know playing the white stripes every morning I mean that happens every morning yeah basically me and my husband have a deal but as soon as we turn on the coffee machine and don't sing the white stripes then we need to divorce because there's no joy left in our lives if the coffee machine breaks before we're ready to divorce I think that's are we haven't considered that was me Michelle can we just play that again because it's so joyous it may be the best thing that's ever happened to me you know what though and Sean said that his bike made a Barry White song wasn't it yeah I wonder are there other household objects that make other songs I think we should get a collection we should get an entire album because you've seen that YouTube video where a goat sings things say this with you know I'm particularly fond of Taylor Swift so that works well for me that Tate yeah and there's another one where the Barry is in a tube station sound exactly like the woohoo's in song 2 by blur so yeah so are we are asking the listeners yeah let's do it as a little challenge send us in clips of things around your house that sound like songs I think they should tell us what songs they are but maybe we'll play a few in the next podcast and see if people can guess so I don't Twitter or to curiouscases at bpc.co.uk and during the course of the program as well we were talking not just we sort of expanded a bit beyond the earworms and into songs that we sing in particular situations so both both of us have some examples of that I mean this one I've got a couple in relation to my youngest daughter which is that when I'm taking her socks off I sing I sing Gets your socks off get your socks off honey to the primal screen song but then I spend the next like you know two hours with that single refrain going around in my head that's true okay so my daughter has a nickname of we sometimes call her the squig whenever we do a hand David between me and my husband where the other person is going to take care of her it always is done like this you're ready for squig Bob oh the studio manager has collapsed the other side of the glass so there's sort of two pillars of your day are listening to the coffee machine playing the white stripes my entire relationship is built on earworms and then what is that two on the machine is it wow that's amazing yes send us in your earworms curious cases at bbs.co.uk but we did promise given that we had so many questions in about earworms we did promise to answer some more of your questions including how to scientifically get rid of them yeah that's exactly right and I put some extra questions to our earworm specialists from Goldsmiths they're on Stuart this this has been the question that has been asked most to the curious cases over six series so we've had many many requests for earworm related questions but I'm just going to pick out a couple of questioners because they have specific points to them Jeff Boone he asked why is music more likely to get stuck in your head than speech it's because there's a lot of redundant information in music there's a lot of repetition so in speech the information content is pretty high so you don't tend to get stuck in these loops the repetition is what makes music so appealing because we can predict where it goes next and there was a very influential theory by David Huron that suggests that actually music gives us so much pleasure because it's our brains way of making predictions about how something will unfold and that's actually something that our brains are evolutionarily geared up to do more in terms of survival and what's going to happen but music is a safe space in which we can sort of test out these possible eventualities and of course we sometimes derive pleasure when we have unexpected experiences during music listening which it kind of explains why pop songs can be so formulaic but the ones that really that we really latch onto are formulaic with slight subversions of that formula absolutely again it's this sort of Goldilocks effect of sort of a moderate amount of complexity so enough predictability but then enough of a surprise to keep us interested and it also explains how on a first listening we might find something really catchy and stimulating but once it's on one of those radio playlists where it's getting played like four or five times a day we quickly lose interest our brains have done all the predicting that they're going to do and it's just no longer a novelty but it might be that you know six months goes by and we hear the tune again and suddenly it's a little bit fresh for us again because we've kind of forgotten exactly how it goes by that sort of definition real quality music has enough complexity that it bears repeated listening such that every time over years of listening you always discover something new about it and so this is another specific question that came from one of our our curious listeners Catherine Ward said any tips for making earworms go away well we did a study where we asked people if you want to stop an earworm what would you do and we analysed what they told us and they fell into two camps either to distract yourself from it either listening to a different piece of music some people actually said that there were particular cure tunes and I don't mean Robert Smith cure tunes the band to cure oh I see right cure tunes that they could listen to that would erase the previous earworm but not get stuck themselves and one of those mentioned was the national anthem really surprisingly and the other way people distract themselves is by listening to some auditory material that isn't music so turning on perhaps radio for and listening to some speech and in the other camp there'll be people who say in order to get rid of it I really have to engage with it and that would be listening to the actual recorded tune to completion or finding out what the actual song is if it's going around in your head but you're not oh what was that song I've got the chorus but oh I need to know what it is before I can if you like eradicate it but there's also been a study showing that chewing gum can help stop earworms that sounds a bit peculiar but it does actually make sense to me and it also reflects something that was anecdotally reported I think on the Sean Keveni program of somebody who said that they sipped water through a very thin straw in order to block their earworm now both sipping water through a thin straw and chewing gum have one thing in common they tie up articulators they tie up the mouth and the jaw and we know that the brain's premotor areas so the areas that are involved in the planning of actions including actions of the mouth and the jaw are involved when we are rehearsing songs in our head so if you're imagining a song versus if you are singing a song many of the same brain areas are involved and they're involved whether or not you're going to sing that song or if you're just imagining it in your head and by tying up those areas because you're using them to chew or to suck means that you're stopping the rehearsal process that helped the earworm persist how interesting yeah if only the poor guy who is stuck on the side of a mountain had some chewing gum nobody would have died if he'd had some chewing gum because it was bony m keeping them alive that's an incredible bit of the film you've seen the film yeah I have I have but I mean Martha would have been she could have done with some chewing gum not a touching gum in exams though or during childbirth I reckon or during weddings I don't know rude isn't it little bit I do anyway I think that's probably more than enough even for the special pod people so remember to send your questions your curious cases to curious cases at BBC.co.uk and your earworms that you find around your house this is the BBC I have another I'm Tim Harford the presenter of a program called More or Less and I have a confession have been tempted lured seduced into the soft embrace of numbers that all around us politicians charities campaigners and corporations know that a sure way to pick up some publicity is to make up an interesting sounding statistic even if it's nonsense two times two is twenty two four times four is forty four and on more or less that makes us sad because we think numbers matter and the truth matters so we have two jobs to do destroy dodgy data with the rightest fury of ten thousand flaming sums while also celebrating the ways in which honest statistics help us make sense of the world all around us politics business health and life so why not check us out that's more or less with me Tim Harford on radio for the world service and available all year round as a podcast
