I'm Dr Adam Rutherford and I'm Dr Hannah Fry and you are going to send us your everyday mysteries and we are going to investigate them using the power of science, science, I like it. Last, I didn't wait for the green light. Didn't, we've only been doing this for ten series, we get this little green light that comes on when we're meant to speak, which is pressed by the studio manager Donald today. Do you feel though it's a bit probabilistic, I mean some studio managers are better than others. I would say there's a 60% chance that you'll get the green light. So the green light comes on and we start speaking but what you just witnessed there listeners was us not doing that. So hello. It's actually the last episode in the current series now. Yeah, that's so quickly doesn't it? So that means we've racked up. This must be our 50th episode. Oh yeah. Is it? I just did maths wrong on my head. And it's ten times five. Ten five. So let me just write that out. Yep, I get the same one. You stole that from a film. I did. Yeah. And today's episode though is about birdsong. Yeah, it's really, it's really lovely. We've got some really lovely interviews with some people pretending to be birds and talking about birds. Yeah, and also talking with real passionate about birds, about birds that they've studied for years. Very sweet interviews that you'll get here. Even more of if you listen to the end. But first on with the show. A delightful question for us to pond during this episode. Sent into curious cases at bbc.uk by Tony Fullford from ealy near Cambridge. Tony says, winter is finally over and the birds are all seeing their hearts out at dawn. What's all the noise about and why are some songs so elaborate? Yeah, what is all that noise about? You know what? I've got an idea. No, no, no, some kind of ruse to make me get up at the crack of dawn, isn't it? Don't you want to hear some beautiful birdsong, Adam? No, not really. Let's tackle the big scientific question first. Why do birds sing? We tweeted, see what I did there, the current president of the RSPB broadcaster Miranda Krastoffnikov to find out. Birds use calls in many different ways. So it's not just the bird's song, which are these long, sort of lyrical, melodious songs that we're very used to in the dawn chorus. Birds will have little sort of chirpy, percussive little calls, often as contact calls or as an alarm call to signify that a predator may be around. Those are all quite short calls. So the dawn chorus call is this long, beautiful bird's song, which can go on for many, many minutes. And what is the purpose of that? It's normally the males that do most of the singing. So it's the females that are doing the mate choice with birds. And so you've got a black bird singing in your garden at home. It's the male black bird that's doing all the singing. The louder he sings, the longer he sings, will give all the female black birds in the area an idea of how fit he is. So the males are showing, here I am, here's my territory, and this is me, ladies, listen up. So it's basically a call to say, let's get it on. Ladies, I'm over here. Yeah. Yeah, we've all met males like that. I don't know what you mean. Interestingly though, one theory is that at dawn it's relatively quiet, and it's not windy, so there's sound carries a long way. And if all the male birds are calling together, then the females can pick and choose their favourite. I mean, it's exactly like being in a pub on a Friday night, isn't it? Not really. Some males, though, will go to pretty extreme lengths to impress the lady birds with their cruning. Here in the UK, the champion, when it comes to bird song, is surely the nightingale. So named because single males can sing all night. It's song has inspired birds from Milton to Keats and musicians, such as Beethoven, Stravinsky and Vierilin. This small brown powerhouse is estimated to have a repertoire of over 200 different songs. But on the world stage, it is not the record holder. Don Kudzmatt is a scientist who has been tracking, recording, and analysing bird song since the 1960s, which bird does he think has the most songs? The one bird that I've been studying mostly is the brown thrasher. Are they pretty? Oh, yes, of course they're pretty. They're a roofless brown with a beautiful long tail and a spotted breast. When he's singing, he's in the very tippy top of a leafless tree early in the season, trying to attack that female. The tail is tucked back down just a little and forward and it's a characteristic pose and the eyes are a gorgeous yellow. Yes, they're very pretty. And am I right in thinking you've actually spent a lot of time trying to work out just how many songs the brown thrasher can sing? Just last year, I spent several days with one brown thrasher. I learned to recognise certain unique songs that he was singing and they happened to be imitations of other birds that I knew. He sings in doublets. He says, good morning, good morning. We call that one particular song. How are you? How are you? Then each one of these doublets I call a song. Of course that's somewhat arbitrary. Someone else might come along and say, well, that entire hour long program that was one song. And they all sound the same to us. But to their ears, I'm quite certain they can undoubtedly recognise different individuals based on their different songs. And so what did you conclude were the number that a brown thrasher can sing? The bird that I studied a number of years ago with my mother-in-law, he came out with about 2400 different songs. There are some neuroanatomists who have actually looked at the brain of these brown thrasers and they have exclaimed that there are groups of neurons in the brain that control song. And the brown thrasher has by far the largest groups of neurons to control these large song repertoire. So there's something very special in the brain that's dedicated to all this singing. So how exactly do birds produce these complex songs? I asked Miranda Crestofnikov. They have a special organ called a Syrinks. I heard about this when I was younger. I played the flute and there's this beautiful flute piece called Syrinks. And I never realised that it's actually this is relating to bird song. So where their trachea splits into the two bronchial tubes, they have this organ called the Syrinks. The two membranes, one on either side, air is forced over this. The membrane's vibrate and that vibration produces a sound. And so some birds are actually able to produce two notes, so basically a chord at once. And obviously we get these incredible songs like the Skylark and Birds like the Rain as well, which produce these incredibly complex songs. Now I understand that's one of your weirdest days at work. I know what's coming up here. You were required to sing like a like a ren. So before that, let's just listen to what a ren sounds like. Right, well gone. How do you sing that? Well obviously, ren's sing incredibly fast. Ren's can produce about 700 notes a minute, so there's no way I can sing that fast. Oh god, give it a go. So we recorded the song of a ren and we took it to a dubbing studio and we got the dubbing mixer to slow it down about 10 times. Well, we have the clip itself. Oh no! So let's have a quick listen. Okay, Richard, I'm ready to rock. Okay, have a listen to this. It sounds like whale song. Do you want to have a go at recording? I have a go. I'll put my best whale voice on and we'll see what happens. Okay, stand behind me please. Oh. Oh, so I mean, I just thought what on earth am I doing? But we recorded it. We sped it up 10 times. Well, we've got that clip too, so let's have a listen to you correctly impersonating a ren. What? That was incredible. Oh, thank you very much. That was, well, as a very, very inexpert bird spotter, I wouldn't have been able to tell the difference. Yeah, I mean, I think the tone of it was obviously very different, but we went out to the local woodland, played it to a ren, and I did actually manage to get a response from the rents, probably telling me to please stay away, you can't sing in tune. What are you going on about? You crazy lady. Why is this gigantic human trying to woo me? I imagine it's what it was really thinking. Okay, Adam, as a biologist, do we know why some birds have a huge repertoire of different songs and then others sing very complex tunes? No, not really. It just comes down to each species. So some females have decided that male birds are fitter if they have lots of different songs, and for others it's just the vocal dexterity. But we do know that by singing, male birds are also risking giving away their position to predators. So it's a really big, partial sexual selection because it's a very high risk strategy. So is it always the male singing to the females? Well, no, it turns out that there are some species where the females sing as well, but there's been far less research into that, which is why a team, including Lauren Benedict, have launched a Citizen Science project called femalebirdsong.org to try and gather and analyze recordings of female tweets. We really want to get better samples so that we can understand when females are singing and why and where and how often. In Europe and North America, females do sing less than males do among songbirds. If you go to the tropics by contrast, females often sing as much as males. In some species, females actually sing more than males. The other reasons that females sing the same as males. Yeah, from what we know so far, it seems that females are singing in some species to attract males. And in other species, they might be singing to repel other females and defend resources. They might be defending a territory or a nest. That's interesting though, there was no, because almost universally with very few exceptions, flamboyant displays or exaggerated traits are the preserve of males who are competing with each other to attract females. So it's interesting that the females also have this flamboyant trait, which is singing. I do think that's interesting. Yeah, and many of the really flamboyant traits of males occur in species where maybe the females do all of the parenting for that species. And so the male doesn't have to put any time or energy into raising young. But in a lot of bird species, they are monogamous where one male and one female will work together and take care of young and defend and build a nest and even incubate that nest. And so if you think about it in a species like that, it's just as important for the female to attract a male as it is for the male to attract a female. And they're each really only attracting one high quality mate. I see, I see. And so birds that form long-term monogamous relationships, I mean, do they seem to each other? I don't want to sort of overly romanticize this, but do they duet? They do duet. In fact, in a lot of species, we see duets. Some of the most elaborate duets occur in species where there is one male and one female that will be monogamously partnered. And it seems to promote that kind of pair coordination. And we don't know if they're singing love songs to each other or just yelling at each other. But effectively, they're really communicating within that long-term partnership. Okay, so what are these couples chatting about? Researchers think that this pair of Northern Cardinals are discussing an issue that's familiar to parents everywhere as their own authorities don't include them at all with me. The songs in North America, all the birds that I am most familiar with, the female is doing some singing while she's on the nest. That's the way it is with this Northern Cardinal that I have been studying the last few days. And as was put to me the other day, the male and female seem to be arranging childcare. Well, in fact, how the female sings from the nest tells the male whether he should be delivering food to these hungry babies or not. This sounds quite a lot like Michael, actually. I'm upstairs in my house, down to my husband. So, Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to why birds sing, can we say case-solved? Unlike us, dogs and fry birds have a double voice box so they can produce two notes out once. So, males can sing complex melodious songs like the Dawn Chorus to attract mates and ward off rivals. But it's not just males who sing, females and couples do too, perhaps discussing childcare or when dinner is arriving. Hey, talking about the Dawn Chorus, when are you going to get up early to go and invest in it? No, no, no, sadly, we are out of time. Yes, very convenient. Why didn't you want to get up early Adam? Lazy. Do you know what? I've noticed in the last couple of series, there's been a severe downturn in the number of torture as things that you've made me do. I know, do you know why? Why is that? Because, basically, my aunt, she lives in France. She called my mum and she said that I was horrible to you. I love your aunt, French fry aunt. Oh God, I just call her French fry. That's not right. I'm exactly. What's her actual name? Not French fry. Okay, thank you, French fry aunt. So, that's partly the reason. Okay, we've got series 11 coming up pretty soon, so I'm going to start for something. The questions, really, that's it. We need to, we need, we can't just talk to you for no reason. We need to, we need a relevant question to do. I feel like we're tempting fate here. Although we did actively solicit the baking, the curious cake off where we made those delicious cakes. Well, no, we made one delicious cake and you threw an average cake on the floor as I recall. It wasn't, look, I'm sorry, that was so rigged. Michelle gave me the blooming brown sugar, so look, it was burned before he even started. That is true. Slaged off by J. Rainer and everything. Got that really burnt, you didn't it? Well anyway, you know, we're sort of low level actively soliciting things which will be amusingly painful for one or the two. For Adam, not for. One of the two of us. For Adam. Now, in this episode, as ever, we have a few extra clips for you. And I only just want to tell you how much I loved Don Cruise, but he was the loveliest, loveliest man. I quite want him to be my grandfather. In part, because he just shared with us this most amazing recordings that he has captured himself of different birds. Now, actually just last weekend, Don captured this recording of this pair of birds, a pair of Santil cranes, which found in the Santils of Nebraska, and all the way up to Siberia, you find them. And as you will hear in this clip, they have quite a different call to the ones that you heard in the show. Wow. So is that that's one bird and back and I'm going, what, what, what, what, what, what, and the other one in the name? Did I do that one? That's mostly it. The male and female can do the same call, but in that particular sequence, when she gets really excited, she throws her head back and just pumps that head up and down, throwing out those higher notes. Her voice is always the higher, his always the lower. And when you look at them, he is quite a bit larger than she is. And they're essentially saying together, this is our territory, come and fight us if you disagree. Yes, and I actually witnessed that. A lone female came into this territory, and I could hear her coming in, and the pair started duetting vigorously. And before I knew it, the female of the pair had launched into the air and chased this intruder out. And the male kept calling from where he was standing, but eventually the female came back and just the most vigorous back and forth alternating duet by the two. And shortly after that, they went on a victory lap. The two of them flying over their entire domain. And I think it took them 10 minutes just circling around and just the most spectacular. These are the most charismatic creatures. Get off my man. It sounds like a scene from, I don't know, EastEnders or some soap opera or something. That's a low, I don't think Don Creed's the notes. What EastEnders is. I wonder what percentage of our listeners know what EastEnders is. No, that's an amazing noise. It's, I'm going to give you an age-specific cultural reference point here, which may not work for you, but I think there is a secret posse of ravers from the mid-90s, because that sounded like something out of the future sound of London. I don't know what you sound like London is, but I do agree it sounded like a raven. If there are any curios out there who get that reference, please just... I want to remix it. I want to remix it. That's what we want. We want a raven track. Yeah. Of the Sandfield Crames. That was a completely amazing noise. And it's very easy to romanticise birds, because these passorine birds, they call, they form these lifelong monogamous relationships. And then we've talked about through the program, and Don was talking about there. And it's, you know, it's really romantic, isn't it? They form, they have one pair and they stay with us. But it's not romantic. Almost all passorine birds that are in monogamous relationships have what's technically known as extra pair copulations. Are they all swingers? Is that what you're saying? They just appear to play away, both the males and females. Once in a while, they just, you know, freshen things up a bit. Well, you know, you only live once, don't you? Oh, okay. Something came up in the interview, which I thought was very interesting when I was talking to Lauren Benedicts, which is just this whole idea about female birdsong. Because as we've talked about in the program before, particularly when we talk about the sex program last series, in almost all cases of showing off, in order to attract mates, it's the males that show off. And have, you know, big tails or ridiculous dances or I've lots of Tweety songs. But as we talked about, lots of female birds also, also seeing and we're not really sure why. Do they do it to show off, ever? From memory, there are a couple of examples of, not singing, but females that have glamorous displays. One of them is called the Dottoral, and the males are quite drab, and the females are quite glamorous. Are you hearing? Yeah, and the other is pipefish or seahorses, because the males do all of the child rearing. In fact, the females get pregnant, and then they pass the eggs onto the males who actually gestate them in a little pouch. So they get pregnant. And then, but it's the females who got all the glamour. Yeah, so they're super, super stripy and super bright, and the males are really dull looking. Anyway, anyway, the point was, in the interview, we were talking about how we don't know much about female bird songs. We do about male. There's a, in general, there's a huge skew towards us knowing more about males and females. I wonder why that is. That's weird, isn't it? Yes. But the patriarchy doesn't exist. Apparently. Anyway, no, it's so many of the researchers are based in temperate zone habitats, which is like, you know, where we are. Europe. Europe and up in the US, yeah. And there, fewer females sing. Whereas in the tropics, as we heard, you get more female bird songs and even some females that sing more than the males. So I asked Lauren Benedict about her projects, which is a citizen science project, which means that you can get involved. Femalebirdsong.org is the URL. And she told me how you can take part. Yeah, this is a great project that's really being run by researchers out of Cornell University and the University of Liden that is trying to collect more documentation of female bird song. And we're really excited in this era of citizen science. There are so many birders out there who are observing behaviors and making wonderful recordings. And we can now reach out to them and get them to really contribute to our understanding of when and how often and in what species female sing. So we're asking all birders and anyone who regularly listens to a record's female bird song, go to femalebirdsong.org and learn about how you can upload your recordings through eBird to natural sounds libraries. And there's lots of information on the website. And we really think this is sort of the way forward in trying to understand when and where these behaviors are happening. So that was Lauren Benedict telling us about femalebirdsong.org, which is... I always think it's great. These are the science projects. I've been involved in a couple of them in the past and it just makes such a massive difference when you can, you know, crowdsource that kind of information. It's a huge amounts of data. There was a great one we had on my other program I chees on you with inside science. It's not good. Where... It's okay. Penguin Watch. Have you come across Penguin Watch? No. I ignored that. Yeah, Penguin Watch, where photos taken in the Antarctic, machine learning was really bad at identifying what were rocks and what were penguins in them. So they just distribute the photos online and people say, this is a penguin, this is a rock. I really, yeah. I'm like on their lunch break. Yeah. Just be like clicking and finding a penguin. It's really fun. That's quite a good idea. Yeah, you get totally hooked on it as well. You sit there, going penguin, penguin, rock. Something that we take, you know, we search on their own. 100, isn't hundreds of hours to do. We don't even imagine the untaughty or real trouble less. You know what, though, talking of cheating on me with another program, I found out recently that Michelle's been cheating on us as well. What? She apparently has been working on other programs. Do you know how I know this? How do you know this, Hannah? Because Michelle won an award, but not for our program. I know. So the massive congratulations to Michelle. Oh, we had she just won. She's just over there recording and blushing a little bit, I imagine. Just not with our program. Just not with our program. What's she's saying? It was a brilliant program with a journalist called Frank Swain. Yeah, it was great. Well done. And I think it's still online. Is it still online? Yes. Yes, so is Michelle. And is she called Michelle? Meet the cyborg. Meet the cyborg, because... Yeah, it was brilliant. Yeah, yeah, it was brilliant. Well done with your award and everything from the program's winning. Michelle, do you like him more than us? Sometimes. Oh my gosh. She said she went there. I can't believe it. I can't believe it. Okay, if you just finish this program quickly. Let's just get cured with Wake Out The Way and get out of here. Oh, man. Curio of the Week. So here's our Curio of the Week. Our favourite correspondence or email or thing that a Curio has done. Right, and Curio... Okay, so we just go over what a Curio is. Curios are our listeners. The name of which was voted for by our listeners. Yes, and it's an extremely high stakes prestigious prize. Imagine like a blue Peter badge that doesn't exist. I know what they actually. I've decided before the start of the next series, I'm going to make some Curio badges. You're going to make some. I'm going to make some Curio badges by my own fair hand. Yeah, but the thing is, start of Series 11. Curio badges are up for grabs. Right, that's on you. I will give you some salitators if you need some help for that. Anyway, this week it's Steve Hignett from Lancaster. Yes, Steve said, I'm curious to know, which is a good way to start a Curio of the Week. Certainly, yeah. I'm curious to know if you ever have to compete with other programs about which program gets the subjects. So he gives examples. David Badeel tries to understand or the why factor. He's got guys on to say, I like the idea of Michelle arm wrestling with the other producers to decide who gets first dibs on the best subjects. Well, see now that Michelle's gone off on one and a ward with another presenter. Actually, I think it's more likely to have the presenters having arm wrestles with each other over Michelle. Yeah. Actually, there have been a couple of occasions where another program has done something similar or a question that has come into another program that we've spied on someone else's desk that looks similar. And in those situations, we hide the question on the other people's desk. Sometimes through the desk away. Cover it in choppy. Yeah, it's all sorts of tactics. We haven't done arm wrestling yet, though. We haven't done arm wrestling yet. I think I do or I actually, in an arm wrestling. I reckon I could take on Brian Cox in an arm wrestling. What about, what about, what about, in this case, go to Conclaude, you're having... Oh, Claudia's fierce and brilliant and mostly fierce. David Bedilla, I could take Bedilla. Yeah. Oh, that's like a really, that's like a really macho challenge that I've just broadcast here. So you're going to take on Brian. I'll take on Bedilla. I love Joan Bakewell as well. She's a national treasure. You're not allowed to fight with Joan Bakewell. I ban that. We should issue a challenge to other popular podcasts in the world to arm wrestling. Actually, you know, one of the biggest podcasts, which I really love, Joe Rogan, who interviews like amazing. The American, do you? Yeah, yeah. The podcast is excellent, except from memory, he used to be a professional mixed martial artist. So I'd like to withdraw that offer immediately. If that's all right. I quite like to see that. I think that would be quite funny. You know how we were looking for a challenge for you. I think we might have just round it. We just need a relevant question now. Can't I take on Adam Bucksdon instead? That'd be much better, wouldn't it? Anyway, the actual answer is that, in terms of the questions that we get, it's completely up to you, Kero's. You send us your best ideas and we'll guard them with our lives. And we're also going to form a ring around Michelle and not let her produce any other programs again. Yeah, definitely not. So, yes, huge, slightly reticent congratulations to Michelle, who makes it all of this happen every week, even when she's not devoting all of her energies to us. We will be back in the next series with some questions from you that you will send us in to curiouscase.bbsc.co.uk and we'll have got over our jealousy, but Michelle hates us. I don't hate you. It's just coming to a reason, said she loves us really. That's it for series 10, 50 shows under the belt. We're going to be back with another set in August. It says here. Yes indeed. See you then for episode 51. This is the BBC. And there's lots more where that particular podcast came from. So why not download the news quiz as part of the Friday Night Comedy podcast. You can find it wherever you found this.
