Hello, Curios. Episode 2 of the Curios cases, series 16. New, longer, more improved, extra time. Extra-hunger. Bless me. Much better. 100% better. No. Some of these episodes do end up quite me heavy. Some you heavy, so... Well, we're any recorded ones so far. I don't know how you know. Have you been secretly recording these without me? I just... Jen. I've just analysed the data from 70 episodes and I've calculated... I do. ..the overall we get equal weighting. So, the tragic thing is, I actually believe you. Here's the show. Music Radio Podcasts I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... ..science. ..science. ..science. I like it. Music The sun is shining. There's not a cloud in the sky. Which doesn't necessarily please everyone. Our question today comes from 12-year-old Alexander, who we think is only happy when it rains. Yes, he wrote to our email, curious cases at BBC.co.uk, with the question, is there a machine to make it rain? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Now, this seems simple enough to me. Surely rain is simply water falling from the sky. Is it now my simple minded friend? Okay, where does rain come from then, Adam? Rain comes from clouds. And what are clouds? Clouds are gassy water in the sky. Yeah, but water in the sky doesn't always make clouds. And clouds don't always make rain. Okay, okay, slow down. One thing at a time, please. Okay, so you can have water in the atmosphere without any clouds. Can you? Yeah, a bush can. It can be humid without clouds in the sky. So, what makes a cloud then? Well, I can actually show you. Can you? Yes, I can. Thank you for asking. Anyone can do this. In fact, this is a classic home demonstration. It's all a little bit blue, Peter. But you can make a cloud in a plastic bottle. And there are instructions for this on this week's programme page at BBC.co.uk, forward slash curious cases if you want to try this at home. But you will need adult supervision, Adam, because it also requires matches. Here is one that I made earlier. Right, I've got this bottle. It's about three quarters full of water. I put the lid on, and I can give it a shape as instructed. I'm trying to make sure that the air is saturated with water. So, now I'm going to get a match. I'll just put the bottle on the floor. Let's hope that it doesn't spill. Get a match lighter. Get it nice and burning. And then put it in the bottle and the cap on. Okay. Look, it stinks. Now, if I squeeze it, oh, that's quite cool. It's gone cloudy inside. I'm not sure what the dealings with the milk bottle was the best idea. I don't think it's quite got the structure to be able to go in and out. But you can kind of see it. Yeah, your conclusion there, you can kind of see it. Not the type of result you might want to publish in a top journal really there. So, you used a milk bottle. Yeah. Glass is not known for being flexible. Oh, no, it wasn't glass. It was one of those plastic milk bottles. But if you do it with like a coat bottle or a lemonade bottle, when you let them go, they spring back. Whereas, they're milk bottles are quite floppy. So, you let go and it just stays wished. It's just sort of two liters of ones you get from the supermarkets. Five pint, yeah. They are opaque. They're kind of cloud coloured. Which is true. It's why I couldn't really see it very well. Your methodology here is I'm detecting flaws. I'm a mathematician, not an experimentalist. Clearly. What's supposed to happen when you do this is that in the bottle, the air that's trapped in the bottle, as you hold the bottle, it's all cloudy. And as you squeeze the bottle, the cloudiness disappears. But for a better explanation, I can hardly believe there could be one. Here is meteorologist Aizen McGiven, who works at the UK's Met Office. So, there's a couple of things going on there. When you squeeze the bottle, you're increasing the pressure in the top empty bit of the bottle. And when you increase the pressure, you increase the temperature as well. Now, when you release the squeeze, you're lowering the pressure and therefore you're cooling the air. And it's when air cools that clouds are created. However, clouds don't create spontaneously. The tiny cloud droplets that you see don't create on their own. They need a helping hand. They need to condense around a particle, for example. So, that's where the smoke came in handy. Those tiny smoke particles allow tiny water droplets to condense around those smoke particles. So, what you're seeing, that cloud you created, are tiny smoke particles that are surrounded by water and they're essentially cloud droplets. And that's what's going on in our atmosphere all the time. So, when you see this cloud, it's not, it's definitely not the smoke from the match in the air in the bottle. You're seeing water. Yeah, you're seeing water adhering itself to those smoke particles. But it's important to say that seeing a cloud that's kind of a generous description for what happens in this experiment. I was imagining when I was asked to do it, you'd get like this beautiful suspended, cumulus cloud in the middle of a bottle. Like a fluffy sheep or something. It would have been so wonderful. It's probably more accurate to just describe it as a bit of fog in a moment. But it's still worth trying at home. Right, listen, I'm willing now to accept the clouds are more than just water in the sky. But hold on, you've got your invisible water of a performing droplets around the smoke particles. Yes, but what is the water latching on to in the actual atmosphere? Well, Aiden's got an answer for that too. There is some smoke, for example, from wildfires and from volcanoes. But there are other things that can form particles that allow water droplets to condense around them. For example, sea salt from waves crashing onto the shore. Or things like dust that naturally forms the atmosphere. So there are lots of these particles in the atmosphere. There are so many. These particles are tiny, by the way. They are so small. They're about a hundredth of the size of a cloud droplet. And those cloud droplets are so small that you can fit a million of them into a raindrop. So these tiny particles that allow cloud droplets to form around them. They're so small that you get about a hundredth to a thousand of them in every square centimeter of the atmosphere. Or every cube centimeter, I should say. Okay, so it's not just water in the sky. It's water that's latching onto the tiny particles. And then there's the pressure in the atmosphere that changes. And then magic, it rains. I'm still not entirely getting this. Because there's no one squeezing the atmosphere to change the temperature. I mean, true. News just in from the International Space Station. They've looked out the window and confirmed that there is indeed no one squeezing the atmosphere. Yes, thank you. But when you squish your milk bottle, you're effectively changing the temperature of the atmosphere in the bottle. But what is changing the temperature in the actual atmosphere? Well, there's warm, moist air that's moving up. Because as the International Space Station residents will tell you, when you go up, it gets a bit colder. Right, I'm not talking to you anymore. I'm going to ask Professor Mark Mead-Dovnik, Director of the Institute of Making at University College London. When it gets to a certain height, it's cooled down. And that colder air can no longer hold that water in it. So it condenses out as these little droplets. And that's when you see it as a cloud. To form a droplet, it's actually quite difficult because all of the water molecules, which are invisible to us, are a gas. They have to kind of all come together into one point and start to be a droplet of water. So they have to bond together. But how are they going to coordinate that? That sounds difficult. And it is difficult. But if there's a tiny particle, and often you get these proteins drifting around from plants or bacteria in the air, and they'll coalesce on one of those, and then many, many little water molecules will coalesce, and they'll start forming a droplet. Similarly, in places where there's high pollution, there's little dust particles or sutt from factories and things. That also will seed the clouds. You know there's an extraordinary amount of dust in the sky. There's this really brilliant story about some divers who were diving in some caves in the Bahamas, and found just this extraordinary amount of dust hidden in these and water caves. And they got tested, they've sort of analysed it. And it turns out it came from the Sahara. How'd it go? So it's blown up through the atmosphere. There is this channel of micro dust particles that get blown up from the Sahara, go up into the sky, and then essentially travel thousands of miles. We see this on our cars, don't we? It's sometimes when it rains, and then it dries, and then it's super mucky. Oh, is that the Sahara does? I think so. I believe that it is. It's just amazing to think that there's that amount of, not just particles of pollution and bits of protein and smoke and stuff. There's actually sand up there. Well, tiny, tiny bits of sand, all like the minerals, I guess. But some people say that there's some suggestion that this is the reason why the Bahamas are so beautifully rich with all of the life, the coral reefs, all of that stuff. It's been seeded by that mineral rich dust coming from the Sahara. Now, Mark Mead-Ownick mentioned cloud seeding there, and that is a real thing. And this, if we could do an artificial version of cloud seeding, rather than your milk bottle fake news, this has to be the key to answering Alexander's question. Can we make a machine to make it rain? Well, Mark told me how it's supposed to work. If you have a whole body of air that's full of water, but hasn't yet formed a cloud big enough to rain, you could seed it with these chemicals, and the most popular one is silver iodide. So, you spray silver iodide into the air, you go up to the water, and then you go up to the water, and then you get into the air, you go up in the plane, and you just shovel it out the back. And now you've got air that's humid, it wants to form a cloud. Suddenly, you've got all these particles everywhere that the water molecules go, yepy, they latch on to each silver iodide crystal, and they start to form these big droplets. And now, you have a cloud, right? They've done this, and this works. This is known to work very, very well. Forming the clouds is well-proven technology. Gaining those clouds to rain, that is less easy. And many, many people claim to have done this for real, and this goes back decades. In fact, all the way back to the Vietnam War, where they were very keen the US Army to make it rain on the Ho Chi Minh Trail to stop their adversaries from being able to move around so easily, and basically make mud everywhere. And so, they had this thing called Operation Pop Eye, and they flew over, this is a sort of tropical climate now, so you have a lot of humid air, and they flew over regularly over the Ho Chi Minh Trail with silver iodide particles, and they claimed to have made that work. They claimed to have made a lot more mud and a lot more rain, and made it a lot more difficult for their enemies. There's quite a lot of stories like this. There was one quite famous story about Paul McCartney singing, Here Comes The Sun. Good Beatles track? Yeah, and there'd been cloud seeding to make sure that there was sun on that occasion. No. Which is so cool. Tara Parmetonkinson, I think, that her dad paid for cloud seeding on her 21st birthday, if I remember. I mean, there was an old episode of Would I Light You, in which she admitted it? Truly. Truly, truly. Crikey. How much does that cost? Well, a lot. But even mere mortals are able to do this. There is a company that will use cloud seeding to try and clear the clouds on your wedding day. For a mere £100,000. £100,000? 100,000? No, you can't put a price on perfection. It was blistering sun on my wedding day, and we spent zero pence on cloud seeding. But one of the things that I remember reading a while ago was that the Chinese might be using this technology to clear the skies for when they've got a big ceremony. The Olympics, maybe, was it? I don't know. Is this stuff real though? Well, see, that is a good question. And that is what I asked Mark Mead Ovenick. No, no, they do that. The question is whether it works. So I think herein lies the problem. When you do statistical analyses of these experiments, it's extremely hard to verify the claims. Because of course, if it rains on the day, you don't want it to rain on a Mayday parade. Clearly, it hasn't worked. So in Russia, for the Mayday parade, it was so keen to make sure it didn't rain on that day that they would try and seed the weather around Moscow beforehand to try and get all moisture out of the air, so it wouldn't rain on that day. And back, as far as I know, they still do. The question is whether it works or not. So you don't know whether rain that comes down as a result of seeding is because of the seeding or whether it would have rained anyway. And if it doesn't rain, well, you don't know whether it wouldn't have rained anyway. So statistically, it's quite difficult to verify claims of efficacy. Okay, okay. So working out whether your cloud seeding is working means that you've got to be able to measure it against what would have happened if you hadn't cloud seeded in the first place. You've got to see whether the rain really was the cloud seeding or whether it would have just happened anyway. And to do that, you've got to be able to predict whether it would have rained. Right, but we do have legions of people, very, very clever people who are dedicated to doing exactly that, basically predicting what the weather is going to be like. Yeah, but it's hard, though. It's very, very hard. Here is Professor Liz Bentley. She's the chief executive of the Royal Meteorological Society. And she explains how weather forecasting actually works. There are three things I guess to make a weather forecast. The first is we need to understand what the weather's doing now. We need lots of observations. We take over 200 million observations around the world every day. And that comes from all sorts of land observations, people who have thermometers and rain gauges, and we're taking measurements, satellite data, we're getting radio soons that take data from the atmosphere as you go up in a weather balloon. So all sorts of data coming in and we collect that, and we share that with all the different countries around the world. And then we need a numerical model. So we model the atmosphere. We have all these mathematical equations that describe what the atmosphere is doing. And we run this model and it's very complicated. So we need a super computer to run that model big, super computer. And then it produces a forecast for a day ahead or a week ahead, or however far ahead we want to go. And then you need a person to look at that data, to analyse it and to make some assumptions as to how well the forecast has coped with that weather situation. So they may tweak it in the end. So we've got super computers that are fantastic and great models that can predict the forecast of what the weather is going to do. You still need a person in the mix to take that forecast and then communicating. I mean, I've been forecasting or involved with forecasting for 25 years. The scale that we're looking at has got finer and finer and finer over that time. And the models are looking on about a one-colometer scale. So we can get down to some really fine detail of what the weather's doing now. And hence, the accuracy of the forecast has gone up because our models have improved. And we really must salute the very clever people who work with these extraordinarily complex chaotic systems with the sole intention of telling you whether you need a broly tomorrow or not. Is that the sole intention? It is definitely one of the sole intentions. Among many, I guess, possibly. Possibly. Okay, but even on that question, whether you need a broly or not tomorrow, they don't always get it right. And a little while ago, I had a chat with BBC Meteorologist Helen Willetz about exactly that. All right, we are standing above the quite famous BBC pit of journalists that you see on the BBC News in the weather presenting area. Now, you've been presenting the weather since what the mid-90s or so. How has that changed in those years? The forecasting has changed quite dramatically. Yeah, mid-90s, I trained as a meteorologist when we actually used the cube. I don't know if you remember the magnetic symbols. No. Oh, yes, I do, just about. So when I did my weather presenting as part of my initial forecasting course with the Met Office, we actually used the cube, which rotated with the magnetic symbols. We used to draw the surface charts, all the observations that came in. We used to draw those up by hand. But obviously, you can imagine what has happened in those 25 years now. We've had huge advances in technology. And of course, now you've got computer models that can help you with the forecasting. We had computer forecasts, so I'm not that old. But only just. Those computers receive millions of pieces of observational data, temperature in the atmosphere, the wind, the wind direction, the pressure. We used some of the most powerful computers in the world. They do billions and billions of calculations a second. So it's almost like you've got this gigantic computer bigger than a room in a... Like a sports hall. Like a sports hall, churning through these equations. Yes. Running a sort of simulated version of the world. And you're feeding it in observations from the real world to make sure that they look alike. Exactly. So you've put everything in. You've got your very, very complex mathematical equations. Delicious mathematical equations. Absolutely. And they repeated many, many times. And each time the forecast is set a few minutes further in time into the future, so it enables us to produce forecasts. A few hours ahead, a day or two ahead, and years and years ahead as well. So the accuracy has improved, even though it doesn't feel like it's sometimes? Yes. So Helen told me there are two main things here. The computer power has vastly increased, with able to crunch through the equations much faster and much more accurately. But also how far into the future those equations can look. And if you look at the overall trend here, forecasts are improving by a day every decade. The thing is that with all of this probability, with all of this messiness, this uncertainty, where the forecast has to choose a single symbol, sunshine, rainy cloud, whatever. But the question is, what symbol should they choose? And there is a phenomenon known as wet bias, which is this idea that meteorologists will often choose the wetter symbol. So even if there's a lower chance of rain than that they can be sure that it's going to rain, they're lean towards showing the rain simple, because people get much crosser with them when they're wrong, saying it won't rain and it does, then if they say that it will rain and it doesn't. So that is what I finished by asking presenter Helen Willett's. Do people get annoyed if the BBC forecast is wrong? Long time ago when I was at an event in South Wales, the weather front was meant to clear, and it was clear that we were left with quite thick low level clouds, but it meant the difference between feeling that lovely warm, may sunshine and going to your outdoor event, where you're meeting the local meteorologist, two cloudy skies, when it feels quite chilling, you need to actually have a coat on in May. I did get quite a lot of groans and moans that day. It was the forecast and it was fun. Well, you know, these things happen, but generally speaking, I think people are very forgiving and they understand the vagaries of the weather, and we don't go out to get it wrong. It's quite a tricky thing, really, isn't it? I mean, everything that you're dealing with is in chance and uncertainty. It's like you're throwing loads of dice back here trying to work out what the forecast is. And then after all of that process is done, you've got to come up with one single answer. That's all anyone cares about. Tell me what the answer is. Absolutely, and that's what we're here to do. Even in amongst all those dice that we're throwing, we are more accurate now. Absolutely more accurate than when I started 25 years ago. And hopefully that will continue into the future. More accurate, but not perfect. Alexander wants to bypass all of this forecasting business and make it rain, like some mad comic book villain. Well, to be fair, his motivations were unclear in his question. But this is the point, right? If you don't know if it was going to rain for sure, then it is really hard to tell whether you're intervention, that is spraying humid air with silver nitrate to make it rain, is actually making a difference. Right. So the cloud seeding in the Vietnam war that Mark talked about to make the trails more muddy is one example that people have claimed actually did work. So I put that question to Mark, did it work? So people who've done statistical analysis of the experiments out there that have been performed say that if it works at all, then it's about a 3% effect. 3%? It's not sounding very good for our rain machine, is it? No, not really. It's a bit disappointing. But this isn't just about, you know, war-mongering or stories about weddings. There is a real potential benefit for making it rain, for actually inducing rain, because, you know, obviously rain is a crucial part of our natural ecosystem. What is the idea if you could make it rain, you could help farmers water their crops? Right. So geoengineering, many people hope is going to be a part of contesting climate change. And the idea that we could make it rain in arid places is very attractive. There's this phenomenon called desertification, which is where temperatures go up and plants die and you can't grow crops there, and the soil becomes barren and not fertile. And it turns into desert, which is not useful land, because you can't grow stuff there. So if you could make it rain over that land, you could keep it fertile, even if the temperature is increased. Well, exactly, and you could start planting crops again, because the roots just won't take in very sandy and arid deserts. Is this actually feasible though? Well, we don't really know, but this is what I asked Mark, we heard of Nick. The problem is in places where there's a drought, there isn't much water in the air at all anyway. So the seeding is going to be ineffective because it's not like there's water in there, and it's just not raining. It's said there isn't any water in the air. And to get water into the air of the quantities you need to get it to rain is impossible. So it doesn't really help you there, even though there is some claims from places in Israel, for instance, where they've managed to kind of take advantage of certain weather fronts to get it to rain more. Again, it's very hard to verify. And I foresee plenty of issues here as well, because just having the water in the air is only part of what makes it rain and part of the ecosystem of the weather, because presumably you've also got a whole bunch of other stuff like wind and sunshine stuff that you really can't control, which is going to affect whether or not the cloud seedings actually going to work. Yeah, I mean, so this is about whether the rain is to do with the weather system. So when different weather systems come in as we know only too well in the UK, often there's a front where hot air meets cold air, and it's the rising of one body of air over another that then cools it down and produces heavily laden clouds and rain. A front coming through is something that no amount of seeding can really help you with, but we'll create lots of rain. If you've got a kind of well settled air mass and it's full of water, but the clouds aren't raining, then maybe seeding will work, and certainly people claim it does work. And then of course there's all of the sort of political fallout from trying to engineer the weather, because of course, well, country borders are much more static than the weather. And presumably if you were just next to Russia, you might not want it to rain on the day before Mayday. Yeah, I mean, that's always the issue, isn't it? The wind, the prevailing wind would take the clouds you've just created and just make them rain on someone else. And of course there is that kind of idea in the, I think it's Douglas Adams. He mentions the idea of a rain god and people who feel like it rains on them more than anyone else. They feel like they are rain gods and the clouds follow them around. Certainly I think that you could really annoy people a lot by seeding clouds over different people's or regions houses. And also the necessity for rain water to actually feed crops in different areas, which you might not get if someone's nicked all your water. That's an important point. But as I said before, really the amount of water we're talking about in terms of weather systems is so huge. And it's geoengineering. What we're talking about in terms of seeding is a small pin prick in comparison to that. So if you have a weather system with lots of water in it, it's going to rain on you. You're not going to be able to change too much of that. Okay, so geoengineering is really hard. It's a massive project. It has limited efficacy. But is there anything that we could be doing to induce rain or have some positive effects on things like climate change? At the moment, because of the global lockdown, there aren't very many aircraft in the sky. And when you look up into the sky and see one of these planes, often you see it coming out of the back is these straight lines called contrails. Now they are actually little clouds formed as a result of the engine expelling out tiny particles of uncombusted fuel and other little particles that come out. And they basically nucleate little clouds. And they're in a straight line that they follow where the plane went. But now we've had this whole period of very, very low amount of airplanes in the sky. So scientists are actively using the data now that without contrails to see if contrails themselves, the production of them does change the weather. And I think this is going to be really interesting to find out whether it heats up the climate or it cools it down. It has a net heating or cooling effect. And climate engineering or geoengineering with clouds, is this a reasonable or feasible way of tackling climate change? I think the data is not there yet, but it might be. But even if it was proved to be effective, I think there'd be a whole lot of ethical issues what you'd want to answer about whether this is the right way to try and solve climate change issues, rather than other technology that we already know works like moving away from fossil fuels and onto renewables. So, Dr. Fry, when it comes to whether we can make it rain, can we say, case solved? Yes, Dr. Rutherford, we can. We can't. Rain clouds form in humid air when seeded by tiny particles. Human-made versions of those particles can be put into the atmosphere to seed clouds. But clouds don't necessarily equal rain. And since rain is notoriously difficult to predict, we don't really know if it was the artificial cloud seeding that did it. So a rain machine? Nope. I really enjoyed that. Actually, the whole idea of something so simple sounding with lots of science to try and explain the underlying complexities and the answer was no chance. Can you, okay, I want to know, can you grow crops if you use water? I don't really. This is, I'd be perfectly honest with you. I can't. Halifites. No. Halifites. Be perfectly honest with you. I didn't know the answer to you, but Jen, our producer, who knows about these things just came away here and said, Halifites, no, you can't. So this is something that I know about from writing and doing programs about synthetic biology, because there's a team at Imperial who've been trying to engineer crops that can root in desertified places or places that tend into deserts by genetically engineering them. I don't know how that, I haven't talked about that for a couple of years, so I don't know how they're getting on with that. If any of them are listening, do write in and tell us. But desertification is a real problem because it just removes land from being potentially useful. I mean, if you could reverse it, if you could take all of the land that's difficult to grow crops on, that's difficult to leave wild and reverse it. I mean, that's a massive thing. Absolutely. And we know that the Sahara was a rich and fertile, fecund area in the past. But has become desertified and is growing, is becoming more desertified as climate change progresses. It does feel like there are these little science questions like desalination, right, which sounds like a very boring thing, removing the salt from water. But if you could make an advance in that so that you could very cheaply and easily take salt out of water, I mean, that's something that could end up having dramatic consequences. Do you know that was an A level question from when I did physics? 25 years ago, would it be cheaper to carve an iceberg off one of the poles and simply tow it to an area that's needed desalinated water? Bearing in mind that, you know, a significant proportion of it would melt on root. But would you have enough ice desalinated ice when you got there to make a decent gin and tonic? I can't remember what the answer was. I did get my A level question. Ice might be more important in the pause. I strongly suspect that that's not a good idea for a number of reasons. Your Mrs. Super practical during this episode. That's the second or third time you've corrected my very sensible suggestion for making a gin and tonic with some actual real world consequences. Anyway, should you do a cure of the week? Let's do Curio of the Week. Baba. Rather for the price, Curio of the Week. We've got a lovely letter in Fikure of the Week this week. It is from Amy Bennett to her 13 years old. She apparently also wrote in with a nature versus nurture question. So regular lawyer listener, she says that she listened to our podcast while she's drawing and she goes on for hours in a single day. And she decided to draw us because I really like your podcast. Here is a photo of you with your moustaches. I hope you like it from Amy Thumbs Up. Now, I've got to be honest with you. This is pretty extraordinary. It's very good. Things that of note. Incredibly angular asymmetric hair on me. Going on there, Amy. I'm fairer, rather better. She's also captured my eyebrow being slightly raised quite dramatically raised, you might say. Possibly even more than you can actually do, which is quite a lot. I mean, it looks like I am constructed with two halves of a face from completely different people. And Amy, we haven't come across your nature versus nurture question because Jane, our producer, won't let us look in the email box just in case we start responding. Which would be definitely unethical and possibly illegal. But you know, a nature nurture question is right up my street. That's genetics. Of course, the only thing I've truly known about. But here's the thing we don't say nature versus nature anymore. We say nature via nurture. Okay. What is in the question settled as in genetics, our genes, our DNA is nature and nurture is everything else in the universe that isn't genetic. And these two things do not work in conflict with each other. They work in concert like a some sheet music being played by a symphony orchestra. What about epigenetics, Adam? Joking. That's my trigger question. So for listeners who don't know this, the two questions I get asked more than any others. The first is, are we still evolving? We get about eight of those per week, curious cases. And the other one is, but what about epigenetics? To which my response is? Ask a better question than that. Anyway, Amy is our, what is it? What is she? She's here in the week. Curie over the week. And she gets a what colored badge I can't remember. I think purple. A purple badge. Jenna, their gold ones left. Maybe. Oh, maybe she says. So this is not to Jenna. Jenna, did I get purple or gold? Does Amy get purple or gold? Due to the shortage, we're currently on purple. Oh, so it's just a purple. Sorry, Amy. Clearly a much meaner person Michelle was. Right, and that is the episode. Let's finish this quickly. Bye.
