I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. Hello, Curios. This is the second installment of the Hunt for Aliens. Aliens Part 2. I want to believe. And we'll find out whether Adam Rutherford does believe after the show. Yes, we will. Right. So in the first part, we went through the solar system looking for microbial life in places like Enceladus and Europa. And in this episode, we're looking for proper extraterrestrial intelligence. Clever Aliens, basically. Yes. On with the show. Greetings, Earthlings. And welcome back visitors from other worlds. Yeah, it's the second part of our Curious Cases quest to uncover alien life. We're asking how science searches for life in the universe and what are the chances of finding it. And today, we are looking not just for life, but for intelligence. Well, don't look at me. Don't worry, I'm not. Watching stars like those shining on high. That somehow you're that great unknown. You may find you are not alone. At the first scientific meeting of the search for extra terrestrial intelligence in 1961, Astrophysicist Frank Drake revealed a new mathematical equation to calculate the number of civilizations that could make contact. It required users to input seven figures, including the number of stars in the Milky Way, the fraction that have planets, the probability those planets contain life, and whether that life is intelligent enough to broadcast signals into space. You are not alone. In 1986, Frank Drake revealed on radio for the conclusion he reached. About one or more new stars is created in our galaxy each year. Most of these will have planetary systems. And in these planetary systems, there is likely to be at least one planet suitable for life. Thus, we estimate that there is about one new potential life-bearing planet created in the galaxy per year. Our experiments and laboratories here on Earth indicate that where you have a suitable planet, one fairly similar to the Earth, life will arise, and in a time of the order of several billion years, you will produce an intelligent species. And in an instant cosmic time, they too will have radios and motorcycles and automobiles and all of the rest. And if we make estimates of the length of time civilizations may be visible, we come up with numbers like 10,000 years, and that suggests that there might be 10,000 civilizations that we could detect in our galaxy at the present moment. At the time of that broadcast, Frank had just become the first president of the new SETI Institute. So how does his estimation stand up today? We asked current SETI Astronomer Seth Schostach. Well, I actually still subscribe to that estimate. And it's true that that's just a guess because it depends on things we really still don't know. We don't know how long, for example, a civilization will last, or we don't know just because I give you a million planets with life. You know, how many of them will ever cook up something clever enough to build a transmitter? We still don't know any of that. But 10,000 is what Frank said 30 years ago. I'm still with that, but it is a guess one has to confess. But not everyone is quite as enthusiastic about the concept of the Drake equation, including Matthew Cobb, professor of Zoology at Manchester University. Well, frankly, I think it's nonsense in terms of it being a useful guide because it actually misses out the most important bits, which are at the very beginning. So probability of life developing, I'm prepared to go along. That might be quite probable. It might be quite easy on Earth. It happened virtually as soon as geological conditions allowed it. But the problem is what he really misses out is the stuff that happened on Earth between life appearing somewhere in some ocean. And then us having a spaceship going around Earth with people sitting on it and doing an experiment. And those probabilities of us getting from that to there are really quite mind boggling small. Okay, so forget about inventing spaceships. What you're saying is that even the jump between single-celled organism and anything more complicated is pretty unlikely. So how do we get from what's there to here? So life appears on Earth 3.6 billion years ago. And basically, nothing much happens for a very, very long time. And then something fundamental happened. And this is not a product of natural selection. I think that's the thing that people don't understand. Two single-celled life forms fused to create a completely new form of life, which is called a eukaryote, which has now produced all the amazing stuff we can see around us. So plants and animals and all the rest of it. That happened by chance. A single chance event, a Tuesday afternoon, two billion years ago. Yeah. So does that mean that we might be able to say with some confidence that life is likely to exist in the rest of the universe, but that complex life, that is so unlikely that it may just be us. This is where I have a problem with a lot of physicists and mathematicians who tend to say, quite rightly, the universe is very, very big. Therefore, it is almost certain that there is life somewhere else, simply because of numbers. But I think what that shows is they don't understand the numbers on Earth, because the probabilities of getting to our existence are incredibly small. Small, but not zero. And if there's one thing mathematicians do understand, it's the concept of infinity. Yeah, well, fair enough. But even after multicellular creatures appear by chance, and then after two billion years you eventually get to us, we could have easily have gone the same way as our equally brainy cousins in the Andertals who went extinct. So it's been a bit touch and go for human kind. And that's way, way before we invented any sort of, wow, intercelecommunication devices. Okay, let's just agree that the odds on those particular term to the Drake equation are incredibly long. But there is another part where those odds have shortened considerably over the past couple of decades. Since the first exoplanets were discovered over a century ago, the number of worlds found outside the solar system has mushroomed. Sarah Rookheimer from the Center for Exoplanet Science at the University of St Andrews reveals the current running total. Well, as of yesterday, we have 3,801 exoplanets that have been confirmed around the stars, around us that we're looking at. And then just from that number, we can kind of get idea statistically of how many planets there are in the galaxy. So this gives rise to the headline of maybe there are 40 billion Earth-like planets in the galaxy. And we're going to hopefully in the next few decades follow that up with further observations to see if we could detect signs of microbial life in them. Some of these 40 billion Earth-like planets lie in what's called the habitable zone. That gold-ulux location that's not too hot and not too cold, just right we hope to support life. So how close could our nearest interstellar neighbors be? That's what's so exciting to me as the closest one is actually around our nearest star. So Proxima Centauri is the closest star, you know, other than our Sun, to Earth, and we have actually found a habitable planet Proxima Centauri B around that star. And so really this is the best case scenario we could have ever possibly hoped for. So we are still talking about interstellar travel. We're talking about getting from one solar system to another and those are, you know, those are big distances to come up. Astronomical you might say. They are literally astronomical, but that doesn't mean that we're not thinking about it. And there was a big project launched a couple of years ago with a huge fan fair, Stephen Hawking backed it. It was called The Breakthrough Star Shot and it was all funded by this Russian really an echoed Yuri Milner. He's actually named after Yuri Gagarin himself. And the idea was that they would develop these very small spaceships like the size of credit cards that would fly out at 20% of the speed of light and go towards the alpha-century system. Okay, so what are these little credit card spaces going to do when they get there? Well, I think the idea is just a harvest, a load of data and sort of they may be even able to image Proxima Centauri or their local neighborhood. I mean, this is a pretty ambitious project, if you ask me. Mad, that what you're saying? ambitious things in the mad. I like the fact that people are bold and trying things is good. But there are, you know, also some people who think that if we're looking for intelligent advanced life forms, then maybe we shouldn't be looking for biological signals at all, because aliens will be dramatically different to us Earthlings. Now, be prepared to get seriously sci-fi here with our alien hunting astronomer Seth Schostak. The question of what the aliens might be like is of obvious interest to Hollywood. In fact, they occasionally even call me up and say, what's the alien's going to look like? But the assumption that they make and everybody else makes is that they're going to be soft and squishy. They're going to be biological. They're going to be alive. But of course, in this century, we are inventing artificial intelligence that can do anything cognitively that we can. So my thesis here is that the majority of the intelligence in the cosmos is not alive. It's artificial intelligence. And it makes the whole problem much harder. That's for sure. You don't know what they find interesting to do. You don't know where they're hanging out. You can't presume that they're hunt planets in this so-called habitable zone. They don't care about the habitable zone. But you could argue, well, no matter what, they will need energy. Any computer, any machine requires energy to function. So you might find them hunker down near big black halls, are very, very bright stars, or other places where there's a lot of energy. Okay, there. So Seth Shostat really doubling down. He's going for super intelligent robots. Well, I'm not willing to do anything. Not even killer robots from space. Maybe that. Okay. So to finally wrap up our alien quest, we mentioned at the start of these two episodes that we've had loads of questions from curious listeners around the world on this subject, including Henry Cuesta from Bogota in Colombia, who wanted to know how long it would be before we discover signs of an alien civilization. So what is the verdict? I honestly think that the chances are getting better simply because the technology is getting better. This whole search for signals that would tell you somebody's out there depends on computer technology. And I'm speaking to you here from the Silicon Valley, and I'm surrounded by all these companies that are you know, beavering away every day to speed up computers and make this task a lot easier for us. So I've bet everybody here a cup of coffee that we'll find ET within two dozen years. Either there are aliens or there aren't. Both facts are absolutely staggering, but we don't know which one it is. So I think trying to find out what is the answer is absolutely fundamental to know in our place in the universe. I think that you have to remember that whilst we're doing all this work out there trying to find the stuff, we mustn't forget that there is an amazing ecosystem on earth. It's the only one we got. There is no plan B. There's no planet B. We can't go anywhere else. We've got to look after what's here. So don't forget that there are the most bizarre alien light creatures living in your garden now. So go out into the garden, lift up a rock and be amazed. So Dr. Fry, when it comes to weather we are alone in the cosmos, can we say case salt? Well no, at least not yet. The Drake equation was conceived to try and narrow down how many alien civilizations exist in our galaxy that could make contact. But the more we find out about complex life on this planet, the more improbable and unique we seem. However, we are discovering there are potentially billions of planets inside the Milky Way. And if you are an alien species listening to Radio 4 please email curiouscasesatbbs.co.uk. We'd love to have you on. But no probing. So there we go, totally inconclusive. We don't mind that though, do we? We often say that the inconclusive episodes of curious cases are that's what science is. Do you lean one way or the other? I mean, you know, the Drake equation I have to say, I think as equations go, I've seen more elegant things. Yes. As a conversation starter I think it's good. As an actual prediction I don't think it's very good. But I am nonetheless leaning towards the not alone in the galaxy. Well, that is interesting because of course in a sense this isn't quite science. The question of whether you think alien life exists in the rest of the universe or not is at the moment a belief structure and therefore we don't have any evidence. However, having said that with my supersonic science head on, in the last few years I've kind of flipped and it's entirely dependent as we were talking about with Sarah Rukheimer on the number of exoplanets that we have discovered. Because when I was an undergraduate 1993 there were nine known planets in the entire universe and then it went down to eight. There are now what did Sarah Rukheimer say just then? Some billions. Yeah, thousands of identified ones and possibly billions and so the numbers just massively changed. I'm with Matthew Cobb on the rest of it to do with the biology. I think the chances of us talking to them are infinitesimally small. Talking to them I agree. I think the chances of talking to them are very, very small. But I also think I don't know if I totally agree with you about how this is a belief-based thing rather than a scientific thing because I do think that actually you can think about this probabilistically. I think that your erimagins are gigantic. Yes. But I do think that you end up with something that appears to be non-zero. Well, quite possibly and I bow to your superior maths. You're full to do otherwise. Let me infinitity times anything apart from zero is a number. Yeah, it's a big number too. You know, when we got this email from Mike Hawkeham, he's a part-grade journalist and his wife Amanda Joykin is a librarian and they live in Scotland and Mike and his wife. They didn't just have one question about aliens. They had quite a lot of questions about aliens. So he's a little extract for you from their email. Well, I mean, it starts so brilliantly. Help me rather than fry your own only hope. You know, you have more attention now. In brackets, just in case anyone didn't realize that. That's a shameless Star Wars line still. Er, then he goes on. During a relaxing evening of reading books and watching sci-fi, my wife Amanda turned to me asking, why do we look for alien life? She exclaimed if galaxies and planets are so far away and what we observe through telescopes and other devices is actually ancient light or sounds, we'd only be seeing historical signs of life even if we do see or hear anything at all. He goes on to say, I confess she's the brains in our relationships. I don't really have an answer or semi-decent comment to add to her observation. So he figured he'd ask us. I'm not sure we're going to contribute more than what Amanda just said. But this is the crux of the matter though, isn't it? Because when we look at a star that is 70 light years away, the light that we're seeing occurred 70 years ago. It's true. Although if you think about how long the Earth has existed, how old the galaxy is, these windows of time, 70 years, 100 years, 200 years, they're like the tiniest little slivers, the tiniest, tiniest little slivers of time. Yes. So we decided to quiz our experts about about exactly this to help you, Mike. That's what we're here for. So here is Monica Grady and her opinions on the matter. When we look at the stars, we're not looking at them how they are today. We're looking at them how they were, you know, the nearest one to us is for light years away. So the light that we're looking at today left the surface of that star four years ago. Where when we look at the sky, we're looking at the past and it is going to be the same with any radio signals. So now we've only been communicating since 1906, which was the first radio broadcast. So that's 112 years. Now that's a very, very small fraction of our planet's lifetime. Are we going to go on for another, you know, 100 years, 200 years, a thousand years, communicating. But we're still not going to get very far into the outside universe or even to the outside bits of the Milky Way in that time because you can't be the speed of light that that is the absolute limiting factor. We also put this question to Seth Schostach from Setty who I would say is generally not more optimistic about this stuff. So it's certainly quite possible that societies might not, if you will, overlap in terms of their existence. That might mean that they don't ever exist at the same time that anybody else does. But it depends on how long societies actually do exist. And we have no idea. If I give you a million societies in the Milky Way, all of which have reached the level that humanity has reached in 2018 say, you know, how quickly did they go away? We don't know. I mean, there are plenty of pessimists out there for you. We're going to go away pretty quickly. But, you know, there's no real reason to think that that's true. Even, you know, in our most horrible scenarios where we unleash all the weaponry or we completely destroy the environment or whatever, you know, it's very hard to get rid of homo sapiens now. It's really, really hard. So I don't know that this is such a worry that societies will spring up and then die so quickly that they're like flash bulbs popping off in the galaxy and there are no two flash bulbs that are flashing at the same time. That could be, but I think that that's somewhat unlikely. You know who got this right? Who got this whole question right better than anyone else in one of my top three favorite films of all time, Contact, Carl Sagan, J.D. Foster, you know? No, you've never seen it. No. Oh, well, when they finally do receive spoiler alert people and they finally receive a signal which they managed to translate and is from the planetary system Vega. And they... Is this the one where they give them some coordinates of where they're going to meet? Yes, exactly. And it just so happens that these aliens know latitude and longitude are completely arbitrary units of geography invented based on imperial... She's ruining my best film. Yeah, but actually no, no, they don't do it like that because they use a three-dimensional different system and they could do go through a wormhole. Can I go back to my point? Sorry. But the point is the signal they receive from this star system which J.D. Foster has L.E. Arroway decodes. When they decode it, it is a film footage of Hitler at the Olympics in 1936. Now immediately the government people are completely freaked out by this. Why are aliens sending us footage of Hitler? And the justification for it is that the Vega star system would have received the first strong broadcast VHF signal from Earth and sent it back to us with an interlaced message within it. But just to say we've received this message and we sent it back. So it gets over the time delay by sending a message from our own history. Clever. You look so unimpressed. You may have slipped into outer consciousness. No, I was trying to keep up but I don't think you explained it very well. Oh well thanks. Just watch the film. It's a master piece. What do you think I'll get more from watching the film while listening to you talk about it? If you like we could do it the same time. Or watch it. I'll talk about it. I think I'm busy that year. Anyway, now I think it's fair to say that Seth Schossak has told us some of the more out there ideas really when it comes to the search for alien life. But there is this problem of how do we look for alien life forms if it's not an habitable zone. Where do you find them? Seth told us about a new paper that's just come out. That blows the out there, nothing out there, out of the water. Have a listen. Recent paper by a fellow by the name of Dan Hooper actually suggests well one problem that everybody confronts in this universe is that it's expanding. That sounds good in some sense. But in fact it's not so good because eventually all the universe runs away from you. It starts getting farther and farther away. That means you can't use it either for building stuff or for energy sources and so forth. You don't want everything to run away all together. He says that very advanced societies or intelligences, they might not be societies, would want to corral as much of the universe as they can and keep it from running away. Keep their part of the universe from expanding anymore so that it doesn't get beyond their reach. Now that sounds like a kind of crazy idea to go out and snare stars from other galaxies and bring them to your own neighborhood in order that you can use them for the future. So you know this it sounds like a really nutty idea but it's not so nutty if you were a billion years more advanced than we are and you were facing the fact that eventually if it all runs down and all runs away you might actually try and do these sorts of things and if anybody is doing them it might be obvious from very far away that somebody's rearranging the universe here. Well I think we can just leave that one there. You you be the judgelessness. If you are you know thinking about what to do for your A levels right and you're thinking about whether or not you want to be a scientist just imagine that this could be your life sitting in the room coming up with theories like that and being paid to do so. Yeah anyway look we're almost out of time but what we haven't done in our second episode of this series 11 is. It's Curie of the Week and it's my favourite Curie of the Week ever. Fast thank you. You said occasionally. Baby he's totally too cheap for the philanthropist. Curie of the week. There it is that's Oliver Law from Derby. He wrote in and said, dear Curie's cases my name is Oliver and I am five. I love listening to Curie's cases and my favourite bit is Curie of the Week. And Oliver's daddy who's called James he told us that that was Oliver's first ever email that he'd ever sent and he was very excited to be writing into us and sometimes he sings Curie of the Week himself in bed and that was my favourite email that I've ever received. Oliver you are Curie of the Week for your amazing rendition of our jingle and we didn't design it like this but just like the Wu Tan Clang Curie's cases is for the children. I didn't get that. We'll send a badge out. Oliver will send a badge out to you and thank you so much for sending in your clip. We loved hearing you sing. Okay now episode three coming up soon next week if you're listening live and it is we reek our revenge on Michelle the producer. You're down right we do. So exciting. So exciting. So exciting. This is the BBC. Hello I'm Antonio Quirk and I'm the presenter of the film program on Radio 4. I'm Caitlin Benedict and I'm Antonio's lovable idiot sidekick. I'm on Radio 4 every Thursday afternoon talking to the most interesting people working in and around film. And then afterwards there's always something exclusive to the podcast anything from the work of Derek Jarman to the overwhelming cultural importance of Mumma Mia and its sequels. Take a listen on Radio 4 on the BBC Radio website and all year round as a podcast.
