I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. Hello, welcome to... It's the curious cases. It's the curious cases. I said that extremely excitedly. I liked it. Did you? I even put my hands in the air and pointed to the ceiling. That's how excited we are to bring the next curious case podcast. And you know that when you listen to the podcast as you are doing now, that you're getting an extra 22% better content. How did you measure that 22%, what are your error margins? That's what I want to know. If you add up the numbers and then do a maths and then it comes out between 21 and 23, you would understand. Sure. If you say fat cloud enough, it makes it true. It is. So do that. Fat. Fat. There we go. Now we want you to rate that extra 22%. Now that we all agree that it's a fact. Exactly. Exactly. And using the podcast software that you are currently using right now, which probably has some sort of way of rating this system thing, I don't really understand. Basically at the moment, we've only got 22 reviews. And that sort of makes us feel like only 22 people in the world have ever listened to us. And add and see go. My dad needs a bit 3k. I'm not saying every now and then. I know it's true. So anyway, please do rate us on your usual podcast provider. Other podcast providers are available from whichever one you're using at the moment. No, they're not really. And when you rate it, make sure you put the top rating and not anyone lower than the top rating or else we will find you. You know when people do this on YouTube, it is definitely my least favorite bit of the YouTube thing. Don't forget to rate and subscribe. I know. Don't forget to get punched in the face by me. Now face by me. Calm those people. Just so you all know, this is not us. We didn't want to do this. Michelle is insisting. Yeah. Should we tell them about what our show is about today? Yes, I've forgotten already. It's about itchy and scratchy. Yes, this is a great question that sent in by loads of you. Not for lots of people, yeah. Something that clearly has been bothering our scratchy listenership. It's true. Why do we itch and why does scratchy make it feel better? Most tricky, there were two tricky things in fact about doing this program. The first was not singing the itchy and scratchy theme song from Simpsons. We don't have the rights to do that. Unfortunately, you know what's going through your head at the moment. But the second thing really was that both of us just were scratching almost continuously through this process. Now in this episode, we will reveal where the most pleasurable place on the body scratches. There are genuine scientists who've looked into this. Yes. And whilst we encourage you to email us with lots of things, suggestions for questions, this is one that we are asking you not to write in to tell us your favorite place to scratch. So please don't write into curious cases at bbc.co.uk with where you like to scratch. Now this curious case has really got us scratching our heads. And not just our heads because it seems that everyone does quite a lot of scratches. Yes, our question today was sent in to curious cases at bbc.co.uk by multiple listeners, including Martin Simms, Rebecca Root and James Webster. And by Zander Tova from Whisperer Green in West Sussex, who asks, I have always wanted to know what an itch is and what scratching does to stop it. Why does scratching some itches feel so good? Oh Adam, must you. Sorry, I've got an itch. It turns out that there is a lot more to scratching than you might think. In fact, at Washington University in Missouri, there is the centre for the study of itch. Yes, that is its real title. I spoke to co-director Dr Brian Kim. So you're going to have to explain that. That's the most brilliant institutional title I've ever come across, I think, the centre for the study of itch. Yeah, people have suggested other names like centre for the study of tickle and things like that, but we settled on itch. I suppose it makes absolutely perfect sense that you would have an academic institution devoted to something that literally everyone feels, I suppose, on a daily basis. Yes, I mean, it's funny because everyone can really relate to itch, but yet it's been so overlooked medically and scientifically, probably one of the most overlooked aspects of medicine. Well, overlooked no more by us. Adam, Adam, stop scratching. Something I think I might have knits. That's surprised. But actually, insect bites are a pretty good place to start. I asked neuroscientists, Francis McGloan from Liverpool John Moore's University, why are they so itchy? Okay, well, the infect releases a toxin into the skin that has an impact on vast cells that release a chemical called histamine. Histamine locks onto receptors on the itch nerve and sends information to the brain that there's an itch experience on that part of the body. What's actually happening in your skin that makes it all red and blockchilling? Well, that's causing what's called a local dilatation of the blood vessels and the blood vessels become leaky, highly leak plasma and basically what you're doing is washing away the toxin that's initially caught at it. So it's a very normal natural defensive reaction happening within the skin to get rid of the itch causing agent. Right, so it's the toxin in the bite that itches? Well, sort of, but it's more the reaction to the toxin. So the swelling that you get is plasma and white blood cells flooding into the area to try and wash everything away and your immune system response includes releasing histamines and that's what itches. Alright, so why don't muscles itch then or your brain? Well, the histamine's bind to specialise nerve fibers that you'll only find in the skin because your muscles just don't need that kind of protection. You have to remember, of course, that your skin is doing a very important job. It's like your spacesuit. It's shielding your lovely insides from the nasty outside world. Okay, so itching is only a skin thing. As we heard before though, the biology of itch is a very neglected science compared with other nasty sensations like pain. Until quite recently, the same nerve fibers were thought to transport feelings of both pain and itch from the skin to the brain. But in 1997, a groundbreaking discovery revealed that itch has its own separate nerves responsible for that oh so familiar itchy scratchy sensation. Now, if you accidentally lean on your hob, the sensation will travel through your fast pain fibers at 80 miles an hour. That you can almost instantly pull your hand away. By contrast though, itchy signals crawl towards your brain at a sluggish two miles an hour. So once you've been bitten, it takes a little while for the itching to begin. Yes, and this stuff is all very new. We're still discovering new things that are revealing more about why we itch. Brian came to me about a rather unusual experiment. They recently conducted at the Center for the study of itch. Yes, it still is a real place. You put mice that are itching and scratching and you've induced this process and then you put other mice that are not itchy, essentially in the same physical proximity and what you find is that the mice that are normally not itchy when they're apart from the itchie mice start to scratch. And in that experiment, they sure that it wasn't a sort of chemical stimulus or a pheromone or something in the atmosphere that was causing the second mice to scratch in response to the first one. Yes, absolutely. Mice were actually able to observe other mice in video and still develop this contagious itch response. So you've got one set of mice watching videos of another set of mice scratching and then the first set starting. I see a ridiculous experiment. I love it. Do we know whether this is whether this contagious itch behavior is something that humans do? Well, we think so. As many in the audience, after listening to this, we'll actually start itching. We know how this happens. When I give talks, I start to watch people scratch in the audience. So even the concept can elicit this, but the contagious part is this idea that you observe someone else scratching and then it starts to make you itch. And that's the sort of social aspect to it, but also you've gone right into the neuroscience of how this actually works. Yeah, the study was quite amazing in a sense that it actually discovered that a specific organ that was thought to be attributed to really regulating the circadian rhythm so that the day night cycle. And it was really not thought possibly due to its small size that this would really be involved in anything else. So therefore it was very surprising that this organ is there to sense through a visual pathway, scratching behavior and elicit sensations of itch. What is the name of that bit of the brain? It's the super chiasmatic nucleus referred to as the SCN. So it really kind of flips the script so to speak on perception as going through a different circuit in the brain. Right, you're going to have to go through that brain big end for me. Well, you are forgiven because this is brand new research and no one really understands how the brain works. Anyway, this bit of the brain, the super chiasmatic nucleus is tiny and we thought it was exclusively involved in regulating our day night cycles. That's basically sleeping. But in this latest study, this bit of the brain is active in the mice that itch when they see other mice scratching. Got it? Well, okay, that's mice, but let's test this itchy contagion on us. So have a listen to this. Now, I defy you not to have a quick scratch after hearing that. I know I feel, but it's all over. So Mr. Biology, why is itching so contagious? Well, the truth is that we don't really know, but there are various theories. Seeing someone scratch could signal to your group that there are insects or parasites around and by scratching yourself, you could be brushing them away or it could even be beneficial for the insects or parasites because it dilates those juicy blood vessels and brings them nearer to the surface. Okay, enough of that blood. You know how I feel about that subject. Anyway, back to the last half of Zanda's question, why does scratching in it feel so good? At a neuroscientist, I've been puzzling this for years. I can make you itch by a technique called eye-unterfaces where I can pass histamine through your skin using electric current. So there's no damage to your skin. And so I can create all of the normal responses to itch. If I scratched your skin before I did that, you'd find it quite uncomfortable. If you scratch your skin after I've made you itch, it's now rigthreadably pleasant. And I'm sorry, we do not know what the mechanism is, that is causing something so rewarding to happen in response to the release of histamine from Marcel's and this sensation of itch. What I can say is that any behaviour that is associated with a reward, i.e. anything that's nice, is generally evolved to be of some benefit to you. In the same way that anything that is unpleasant, you're going to basically stop you doing it again. So reward and punishment if you like, are two basic mechanisms that brains use to promote behaviours that are in evolutionary terms good for you and the boyd ones which are bad for you. But are there some areas of the body which people respond to more? Are there some areas that sort of feel nicer? Yes, together my colleague Gil Yosepovic, we got a paper published that demonstrated that scratching the ankle was what most people reported as the most pleasant body location to scratch. The ankle, I mean that's quite bony. I think again it's interesting to ask the question because the reward associated with scratching a body part must bear some relevance to the importance of that body site. So if you're feet on the ground, if you're looking to evolutionary terms, this is where the insects may be crawling onto your body etc. So that may have evolved to be a very important location to scratch in itch when you sense one this. Again, it gets back to that question that if something's rewarding, are you pleasant? It's there for a reason and the evolutionary reason is one of protection. Okay, so scratching does have some advantages. Yes, it helps dilate the blood vessels to release more plasma to wash away any particular toxin. And it feels so good. But it's not always beneficial. The problem is that it sets up what's called an itch scratch cycle. Scratching the skin can release even more histamine which then sends more itchy signals to the brain which makes you scratch even more and can break the skin causing scabby infections, blood gushing. Enough with the blood. Enough with the blood. But this itch scratch cycle can become a big problem with skin conditions like X-ma or psoriasis. And it's even worse as Brian Kim told me for patients who come to him with what's called chronic itch. It's very serious in that it's incredibly debilitating studies have shown that chronic itch is just as debilitating as chronic pain. Patients on dialysis itch terribly very consistently and they're absolutely miserable with very few treatments. If you have end stage liver disease, you'll start to itch. We think that itch is not only a way to detect the environment around you but also a way for your body to tell itself that there's something wrong. So accident example, I had a patient who came in with chronic severe itch for two years. Everyone essentially thought she was crazy. Psychiatrists put her on psychiatric medications. Turned out she actually had a lymphoma. We, after going on chemotherapy, her itch went away. She was a different person. But we feel that we will be employed for a very long time because we think that there are actually very distinct mediators of itch that have not been discovered. And we feel that we've really just hit the tip of the iceberg. So Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to the question of why we itch, can we say case solve? Yes, Dr. Fryd. Bytes or stings release toxins in the skin, which in turn release histamine. HISTamine triggers signals which travel up special nerve fibers to deliver itchy messages to the brain. Scratching is pleasurable and even contagious. But beware the itch scratch cycle. The more you scratch, the more you itch. You could say that when it comes to itching, we've just scratched the surface. Terrible. Terrible dad choked there, Hannah. I know, I just had to get one in there. It was my turn. It was quite nice. Otherwise you take all of them. Yeah, that's true because I am a dad and you never will be. You know what, right, talking about insect bites. Once I moved into this new house, it was like renting this flat. And I went to bed the first night on this like, you know, it was furnished flat and couldn't get to sleep because I just felt like I was really itchy. And after a couple of hours, I just said to turn on the lights and there were like a thousand bed bugs, not even a century. And I thought until that point, I thought the bed bugs were like dust mites that you can't see. But they're actually like insects that kind of swell up with your blood to the size of a finger now. I've never, ever been as itchy in my life. That's horrible. It's a little bit when I think about it. What did you do? We kind of, well, it had to get the whole flat sort of fumigated so we couldn't stay there for a few weeks. Yeah, horrific. Tell me your most itchy story. Oh, there are so many. Well, we did, I said in the program that I feel like I got in it. I got three kids and that means everyone with kids of a certain age wants to get to school. Well, know the joy of combing through their hair with that oily nonsense in order to get rid of the nits. And then just feeling scratchy yourself for weeks, weeks off. I mean, basically everyone involved in the making of this program was just itchy and scratchy. Now, all the way through. It's been all day scratching. Even John, the studio manager, I have been watching him through the glass. Yeah, he's scratching behind his ear right now. Michelle, he's got luxuriant hair. She's scratching. We are quite lucky, though, because these itches do subside quite quick. Or actually scratching kind of makes them feel okay. But there was an article in the New Yorker. We didn't manage to fit it into the program, but a woman who had such a bad chronic itch that she scratched through her skull to her brain. Oh, no, I don't know, that's so grim. But how can you scratch through your skull? I think it was just over a really long period of time and just she'd wake up. She couldn't kind of stop herself from scratching it while she was asleep. But she ended up having to have like a bit of her brain taken out to try and like, you know, whatever insert biology there. Yeah, I don't think I want to subject our podcast listeners to any more of that particular story. Let's just go back to one of the matters that we've been dealing with over the course of this series, which is what do we call you? The important matters. Yes, what do we call you lot? So we've had various suggestions about the podcast faithful. So the rather than prior regulars, that's my current favourite still. That one was sent in by Mr H. Mr. has been named singing Hedgehog on Twitter on Twitter and the rather Freinians. That was well, that was actually sent in by Dan Price. Dan Price is my uncle. So that's why. No, I don't quite know how that managed to make it out of this. So I think needs to be struck from the list, struck with just conflicts of interest. Where are my uncles sending in ones about my name with your script in the middle? So sorry, DJ, we're just going to have to erase that. So of the newer suggestions we've had, Mike Ward of Twitter, he's a big fan and he suggested the anti-predeans. Oh smart, like what he's done there, like he's done there. Early podcasting. Yes. Hannah Norton, who was actually our questionnaire for the What Is Fire episode. Yes. She has been a bit greedy. I'm going to say she's come up with two. One, the inquisitorial squad, which I quite like. I like that one because I think that's from Harry Potter, isn't it? And your massive Harry Potter fan. Pretty much. Yeah. And I'm partial to a bit of Harry Potter too. Hannah's other suggestion was the quidnulks, which I think must be Latin. Yes, it's definitely Latin. You know Latin. You're posh. But it means an overly inquisitive person. Does that make it an negative thing? Does it sort of describe a child who continually asks why? But that's us. That's basically you. Is it? But in this program, it's a joyous celebration of being inquisitive, inquisitive. The quidnulks. So the pod listeners. So for the next episode, we go, hello and welcome to the quidnulks. Oh, Michelle's just, she's still recording. Hang on. Michelle's just chintin. She says she's not sure about the quidnulks. Let's ask John. John, do you like the quidnulks? What do you think? Quidnulks? I think we'll make a decision by next series. Okay. Michelle our excellent producer who basically runs everything and reigns us in from being absolute silly people, all the time. She said that we're going to decide by the beginning of series six. What that means is she's going to decide and then she's going to tell us. Let's put it on a let's do a Twitter vote because we did a Twitter poll to see who our glorious listeners would prefer was thrown into the centre of a black hole. Yeah, who, who did they vote for Adam? Who did they vote for? Was it, oh no wait, it was you, wasn't it? And who did Michelle throw in? It wasn't me. Yeah, well, that program was recorded before we did that vote. So let's put it to a Twitter vote and we can see who prefers the quidnulks or the inquisitorial squad. The inquisitorial squad sounds a bit like quipa curious on there as well. I still like that one. Yeah, we can do, but I think quizitorial squad sounds a bit like a grind band. We might get some more there by next week, so we'd have to pop them as well. We could do four. Is that the maximum? Yeah. Okay. I mean, you are on Twitter a lot, so I expect that you would know that. Shut up. This is the BBC. I'm Tim Harford, the presenter of a program called More or Less, and I have a confession. I've been tempted, lured, seduced into the soft embrace of numbers. That all around us, politicians, charities, campaigners and corporations know that a sure way to pick up some publicity is to make up an interesting sounding statistic, even if it's nonsense. And on More or Less, that makes us sad because we think numbers matter and the truth matters. So we have two jobs to do. Destroy dodgy data with the rightest fury of 10,000 flaming sums, while also celebrating the ways in which honest statistics help us make sense of the world all around us, politics, business, health and life. We got home, just by the trillion, all we hear and both seem to pay for it. So why not check us out? That's More or Less, with me, Tim Harford, on Radio 4, the World Service and available all year round as a podcast.
