Good afternoon, Kyrys. All good morning, all good evening. Well, whatever time you're listening to this at... So today's programme is a sort of... It's off the back of our Wasps vs Bees programme. Yes, just to recap, Wasps absolutely terrible, Bees totally brilliant. I think that's pretty much a good time. That's not exactly how I remember it, but I was defending Wasps and then we put it to a Twitter vote and I think I lost. Yes, I mean, as tends to happen when it comes to Twitter Wars with you. Anyway, off the back of that programme, we had a few other questions about different types of insects. And we decided to do this one, which is a slightly different tone, I guess, because this insect, the Mosquito, which this programme is about, has caused an incredible amount of untold damage in the world. And we wanted to dig into a bit of that for you over the next half an hour. Music Radio Podcasts Today's curious case comes from listener Kathy in the UK. She gets straight to the point and asks, what is the point of Mosquitoes? Music Radio Podcasts Okay, so this is off the back of an episode from the last series, what is the point of Wasps, in which we discovered that they are essential pollinators and an absolutely key part of a very complex ecosystem. And Stripey Jerks And they are annoying Stripey Jerks too. Anyway, Kathy goes on to say, I can definitely see the positive side of Wasps, but not Mosquitoes. You should do what's the point of Mosquitoes because they kill thousands. Well, it's millions, in fact. Malaria is the single biggest cause of death in human history. Which is going to make it quite difficult to love this particular insects. Yes, even for me, it is difficult to be positive about the bearers of malaria and loads of other diseases, which have caused quite this amount of human suffering. But that doesn't mean we can just get rid of them without consequences or dismiss them out of hand. Indeed, okay. So in the trial of the Mosquito, our first witness is Dr. Erika McAllister, senior curator of flies and fleas at the Natural History Museum in London. She curates their Mosquito collection and told me that not all Mosquitoes are interested in biting us for a blood meal. Both the male and the females actually need nectar. So they only need the blood for the egg development. And so it's only the female that needs it. Now, interestingly, not all females need blood for egg development. In fact, there's a whole group of Mosquitoes called the Toxyrankitis. And they are completely vegetarian, has adult. And they're massive. They're amazing creatures and they scare people. Is they big? And they're like, everyone's like, oh no, these are huge swigs. And they're going to eat us. I love the paranoia when it comes to big things because it in life, it's generally the really little things that cause the most damage. Because it's not the Mosquito that causes the damage. It's what she transmits the problem. Well, let us sign the blame correctly here because Mosquitoes don't actually cause the disease directly. Do they? Yeah, that's right. So the Mosquitoes, what we call a vector, which is the animal that carries the pathogen, which is the disease-causing agent, which in the case of malaria, is a little bug called plasmodium. Is that like a little parasite plasmodium? Exactly. So it's a single-celled organism that has to reproduce inside our bodies. So it circulates in our bodies and that's where its reproductive life cycle happens. Hold on then. So the only way that you can get malaria is if a Mosquito has bitten someone who has got this parasite and then it gets to you via the mosquito. Yeah. So the Mosquitoes got it in its stomach from eating some blood from... How does it get into you, though? Well, the first thing that a Mosquito does when it injects its proboscis into your skin is it does a little sick to stop the blood from caraculating. Lovely. Yep. Nature is pretty grim when you think about it. It's pretty metal. Yeah. And so then this parasite is in you because the Mosquito sicked it up into you. Exactly. Why is that? So the plasmodium is in a form called sporozoids at this point. It circulates in your blood and goes to the liver where it infects liver cells and then they become mererozoids. Are you making these words out? I wish they were, but that's what they call it. They're quite cute words for something specific. Something really, really devastating. So then they get turned into trophozoids and skits onts, which infect red blood cells and go into your blood again. And so the next Mosquito that sucks that person's blood would also spread to disease. So what you're sort of saying here then is we've got a zoo and auto disease, something that's carried by animals that spilled over into humans. I mean if only we had some sort of a, I don't know like a global epidemic prompted by that sort of thing of disease is jumping from animals to humans that sort of spill over. As just a reference point for discussion here. Yeah. No idea what you're talking about. We're definitely never going to experience that ever at all. As you sit here three meters away from me. Waves from across the studio. With the face mask on. Okay. All right. And so mosquitoes aren't the ones who are creating the disease they are just carrying it. And Erigotomi that actually it's not even all mosquitoes. So there are about 3,600 true species of mosquitoes. And of those, only about 150 or so fall into this vector category. Well, that is a bit like the wasps because there are, I don't know, something like, I think we said there were some of that 150,000 species of wasps. And it's only about two or three. There's a real stripy jerks who annoy you at your picnic at the end of the season, the yellow jackets of the annoying ones. Yeah. So in fact, actually with mosquitoes it's just a handful that are the most problematic for humanity too. And even then it's only the mothers who need to feed on the blood for their egg development. Which just goes to show that it is always women's fault, isn't it? There's about 10,000 species. It's a really, really small number of insects that feed on blood. And there's very small number again that feed on humans. So we're kind of a new adaptation, but there's a lot of us. Now blood is protein packed. It's wonderful source, you know. And it's just mothers trying to give the best start to their children as it were. So they've evolved, a lot of them specifically are now co-evolving alongside us. And we're seeing species that weren't attracted humans in the past. Now thanks to us moving into their habitat, they're adept in their diet to come towards us. And this amazing source of both the adult food, she needs the blood to stimulate egg development, but also because we're so messy. We leave pots and pans and everything like that around. This creates lovely little lava habitats for a lot of these species. So we've made ourselves the most perfect food source for both the adult and the level stage of the muskitos. Of course, all of our human-made receptacles that we leave lying around, they can collect rainwater and muskitos need to lay their eggs in standing water. Right, and it's not only that, but some scientists also have theorized that we are even more responsible for the origin of malaria because of our farming practices, so the development of agriculture thousands of years ago when we started farming, particularly YAM farming, what we do is clear forest areas in order to farm these plants that we could then eat, but in doing so we created standing water and ditches. And what that did is give a sort of rampant, malarial breeding ground right on our doorstep. And so that may have been one theory goes. The spillover from muskitos into us. Because it's only when muskitos live in close proximity to humans that they make that jump into us. Exactly, if we never come across a muskito, you're never going to get malaria. So you're saying this is all awful anyway? Well, we certainly didn't help. I mean, we created the standing water, we created the breeding grounds that enabled muskitos to be in such close proximity to us. Okay, all right. But herein though lies one of the key claims for the defence, because muskito-lovy, where they exist in ponds, they're actually an incredibly important fish food. They provide essential sustenance for fish stocks, and that means healthy waters and more food for us. And this is not the only benefit that muskitos bring. The males, the vegetarian and the females need nectar. She needs plant sugars to sustain flight. Now, everyone goes on about the bees as the most important insect pollinators, but flies are really important. However, we have been negligent in understanding their roles. With an exception, with muskitos, is actually understanding them in the Arctic ecosystem. So the Arctic is cold. And most insects, like humans, go, NAP, not going to live there. It's too cold, or whatever. And the muskitos are like, yeah, bring on. We can live there. And in doing so, they're very important, specifically for some cold, resistant plants, some of the orchids, things like that. They are the most important pollinators for it. It also, it's interesting enough, as looking into this, the caribou populations, they are driven by muskitos, because they obviously don't like them. But in doing so, they have specific ways that they go. And because they defecate what they've eaten, they're spreading the seeds of other plants. So there's many things that are connected now to these muskito populations. So in Arctic systems and things like that, we definitely know they have a really important ecological role. Look, if all that tea muskitos got to bring to the table is that other animals hate them so much that they defecate in other areas, they think you're really clutching it, straws there. Yeah, okay, fair enough. How about this one though? Okay, so muskitos have also been the inspiration for better surgical instruments. What clever people have developed is smart needles. Because most people don't realize they've been attacked and sucked by these muskitos till after the event, there's an ability of this muskito to sneak up on you and be pissed your skim without you knowing. Her hypothesis, her mouth parts, have got six individual forms and only a few of them will actually penetrate. And the one that does at a very tip of it is got a little serrated edge. So it's like a little saw. And she's basically operating a pneumatic drill to penetrate your skim. And in doing so, she exerts so much less pressure than if she was just to try and shove in her mouth part. So these clever bots have thought about this and said, do you know what? Let's invent needles that operate on the same system. That is cool, bio mimicry and all, but I'm still not 100% convinced that smart needles as an inspiration is a really robust counter-argument for malaria. But for the prosecution, let's just broaden this out a bit because it's not just malaria. It's Professor Kate Jones from University College London because she works at the Interface of Ecology and Human Health. Let's not underestimate how devastating these diseases are, really. There are lots and lots of diseases which they transmit like malaria and dengue fever, eczeka, yellow fever, Japanese encephalitis, westernar fever. There's lots and lots of diseases and some of these cause a huge number of cases per year. Malaria, for example, is over 212 million cases a year and dengue is around 100 million cases. So Mosquitoes probably cause more deaths of more people than any other animal tax on. So although it's only a few species of Mosquito, you're talking about loads of diseases affecting millions of people all over the world, and I can't even think how many individual mosquitoes that might involve. So trying to tackle this is ridiculously hard and the picture is constantly changing. I think there's a pretty mixed picture actually. I think some species of Mosquitoes are increasing and some are declining. And that you'd expect that when you're changing landscapes cause some species would be more adapted to those new landscapes and some will be cut out or out competed by other species. Some Mosquito-born diseases are definitely on the increase. Amazingly so. For example, dengue fever which is transmitted by AD's agit tie among other vectors. There's been a 30-fold increase in dengue fever over the last 50 years expanding to new countries and some areas of Asia have just seen an increase of over 1,000% in the 20th period. So this disease is really on the increase and it's probably because we're changing the landscape and changing the climate that's more suitable to AD's. And you've seen increases in yellow fever as well, increasing in many endemic countries after these were completely wiped out a few years ago. It is a mixed picture though. So there's been a dramatic decrease in malaria across the world. And it's hard to know how much of that is because there's a huge amount of work has been going on to eradicate malaria from lots of different countries. But we think that urbanising areas aren't so good for the malaria vectors. Well, we don't quite understand why yet as opposed to the dengue Mosquitoes which really, really like urban areas. So it seems like the global trends are going against malaria but going for dengue fever. So we are frankly in the swamp with today's curious case the court case for Mosquitoes. Yes, what is the point of them, especially when they spread untold suffering and disease? Yes, more untold suffering and disease than any other cause in history. This is something that still affects hundreds of millions of people every single year. But it is just handfuls of Mosquito species that have done this and in their defence. Mosquitoes don't cause the diseases if the organisms that they carry. All right then. So why don't we just target those disease organisms then? Why don't we just nuke the pathogens? Right, well going off to the pathogens is it would be a sort of theoretical solution to this. But it's not that easy. The diseases that Kate listed are difficult to treat in people. So antibiotics work against bacteria, not against viruses or plasmodium, which causes malaria. There's no vaccine yet. So there's no sort of preventative measures that we can take against the pathogen itself. So that is why instead we have to go after the mosquitoes in order to stop the crucial thing, which is the spread of the disease. There's quite a few ways that we've been tackling diseases that Moskeys have. The original large part of it where we control the vectors, like control mosquito populations. But a significant proportion of development money goes towards stopping the biting in the first place, like with bed net treatments, for example. And a huge amount of money is poured into medical treatments as well. So I think there are lots of different ways to tackle this. And I think they all need to happen really to some extent. Give us a sort of overview of the types of methods that the world community has been using to combat the mosquitoes. So bed nets is one, but what else? The fact of control to start with, people have filled in areas where the insect would live. So people have filled in swamps. They've also spread a huge amount of insecticide around. And then of course you've got all the medical treatments for malaria as well. And there's lots of new things coming up with kind of gene editing that's controlling the vector in terms of its ability to host the plasmodium or reducing the vector populations. Yes, but preventing the spread of something like malaria isn't always that simple. It's certainly not as simple as just chucking up a bed net. Bed nets brilliant. Only if you're in an environment where mosquitoes feed at night. So that's Africa brilliant. So an off leaves all of those ones. But in Indonesia and in various other places where you get different species transmit in malaria, a lot of them they come at dusk or dawn. So when you're outside eating, you're even in meal. That's when you're going to get bitten. So a bed net is not going to be that helpful for you then. There are other things that you can do though. So like trying to get rid of standing water. Because that's where mosquitoes need to breathe. Exactly. So this is a tactic that's relanchor employed. Trying to get rid of standing plants and pots and pans and even car tires. Anything that can collect rainwater. Exactly. Even the tracks left by car tires, which are places where mosquitoes can breathe. Was in the puddles that left in the mud after you've driven through it? Yeah, exactly. Okay, so how unirtered Sri Lanka get rid of all standing water, including car tire tracks? Well, Universal hoverboards was the solution. No, obviously not. The point is the tactic that they employed was to build clinics to diagnose and treat people, but also a big education program to educate people about not leaving standing water around as much as possible. Now all of this takes money and takes effort, but there have been no Indigenous cases in malaria in Sri Lanka for several years now. Yeah, that is amazing. But it's also very hard to achieve. So only 10 countries in the entire world have managed to eradicate Indigenous malaria since the year 2000. Yeah. Amazing job done 10 down, bad 100 to go. Well, yeah. But even when you get there, it still requires constant visual sense, because all it takes is for somebody to come into the country with malaria, get bitten by a mosquito, that mosquito to spread it out, and suddenly you've got another uncontrolled epidemic on your hands. It's very much like COVID in that sense. Sure, but maybe the right thing to do in that situation is to deploy the nuke, which is insecticide. Yes, but that brings us to the next problem, which is whether insecticides can target just the disease carrying mosquitoes. I don't know of many that do. I don't know how they can. They were spraying in the Kamaag in the South France. Lots of mosquitoes there, and they have fibre cases of dengue, so they want to get rid of it. But in spraying for the mosquitoes, they got rid of a lot of the other insects, and they did actually show there was an impact on the number of chicks born to house martins, would be a lot less, because there was just a lot less food full stop. So it works on insects, per se, rather than specific in a lot of cases. Yeah, this effect, this sort of unforeseen consequences, can be much worse too, as Kate Jones told me. The spraying of insecticides, particularly in the US, in the 1950s or so, really kicked off what became the environmental movement, and that was because there was indiscriminate spraying of DDT, and other insecticides for crop insects, but also to control vectors that were causing malaria. And malaria was eradicated in the states in the 1950s. But its continual use caused lots of vegasism to collapse, because the insecticide goes up through these food webs, so it gets into birds and makes their eggs very soft, so that it can't reproduce. Why I said that it kicked off the environmental movement, because that was one of the big drivers of Rachel Kasten, writing her silent spring book, which was published in 1962. So that led to DDT being banned in 1972 in the US. But what's really interesting was that was a really big controversy, and I come from an ecological conservation background, and you hear about Rachel Kasten being the guiding spirit of the environmental movement, and all good. But in the malaria world, she's kind of thought of slightly differently in public health, because she was instrumental in removing and banning DDT from the states, and other countries affected bands, because they saw the impact this had on food chains and ecosystems. So inadvertently banning DDT meant that vector populations weren't controlled, and more people died of malaria, which is obviously quite controversial, but this is a whole different view of Rachel Kasten than I have. But the other argument really is that DDT was becoming less effective at treating these vectors on mosquitoes anyway, and not all countries banned it, so it's still in use, in fact, in some countries in Africa. And I didn't think it could get more complicated. Well, I mean, ecosystems aren't unbelievably complicated. They're networks. They sort of, you know, house of cards built on other house of cards, and you pull one card out, and the whole thing completely collapses, and we are just not very good at understanding complex things. But the latest thing in the question control mosquitoes is a bit simpler, and it's right up my street. Is it science fiction? It's not science fiction. Is it Charles Darwin? Blowser, it's genetics. Bingo. Yes, so his zoologist Professor Matthew Cobb from Manchester University to explain. The simplest way is to bombard with him with x-rays, and this just generally kinds of screws up with their genes because it creates mutations, and means that they're offspring. The males, they are sterile and they're sperm and non-functional. So what happens is if you release vast quantities of these sterile males into a local population, they will mate with the females, their offspring don't exist because the males are sterile, and your population crashes. However, that's not going to last forever, and they will eventually return. So that's the old way of doing it. The more recent way of doing it is to fiddle around with the genes. This is going to be more precise. Every male that you're going to release is indeed going to be identical and sterile and so on. So the various technologies that have been used for this, and this is one of the things that's been currently debated, and I think they've actually decided to do this in Florida at the moment, to try and get rid of the Aedes Egyptian eye, and mosquito that transmits Zika virus, which is pretty unpleasant. Okay. Now, there might be a bit of evolutionary biology theory missing from some of these discussions, because well, it's best summarised in the old Jurassic Park phrase, isn't it? That life will find a way. If you start introducing organisms that are sterile, or that they've got particular modifications to stop them reproducing, what we tend to find is that biology, evolution, those species will find a workaround in order to do the thing that all organisms want most of all, which is to make little ones of themselves. Yeah, evolution is smarter than you are. Basically, what you're doing by doing anything like this is you're then creating pressure, whereby any individual who can escape what you're doing will then have an advantage, and they will then reproduce, and you'll be in a new situation, which might even be worse than the one you intended. And this is why, often when I discuss this with people, people say, why don't we try fiddling around with plasmodium or the zika virus? Why don't we attack that directly? And one of the reasons why you wouldn't want to try changing the plasmodium or make the mosquitos resistant to the plasmodium, which is the thing that causes malaria, is that the plasmodium would then find a way around that. And we might end up with a situation in which we had a super plasmodium, which, say, was also resistant to the drugs we have at the moment. So it could be very, very bad. Okay, super plasmodium. I'm going to go on a limb here and make a guess that that sounds bad. I would agree with your assessment there, Dr. Fry. Don't let that put you off, though, because there is another possible approach called a gene drive. A gene drive is something that was theorised, amazingly, right, back in the late 1960s, the first idea came up about how you could actually get a gene to copy itself. So part of the problem at the moment is that if you make a male mosquito that's got some problem, it can't fly or whatever, but it can still mate, then you mutated that gene. And all animals have two copies of each gene. We've got two chromosomes, exactly the same. So if you alter one chromosome, or even if you alter both chromosomes, so you've got an individual who's got two copies of your mutant gene on both chromosomes, he then mates with a wild-type female who's got two copies of the normal gene. So that means that they're offspring, they get one mutant chromosome and one parental wild-type chromosome. So they've now only got one copy of that gene. So you've immediately diluted your original effect. That individual with one copy of the mutant, one copy of the wild-type is then going to mate with a wild-type individual. So now you've only got one copy again, and very quickly your cunning mutant version is going to disappear from the population, or be it such a low frequency, simply because every generation it gets diluted. So this relates to the basics of sexual reproduction. You've got to get half your genes from your mother and half your genes from your father. So I've got a packet card to explain how this works. Go on in, go on in. An analogy type. A demo. All right, so imagine that your genes are a packet card, a suit of cards, right? So your fathers are the spades that go from A to King and your mothers are the hearts, which can also go from A to King. In the next generation, you also need cards A to King, but they can be a mixture of the hearts and the spades from your mother and your father, right? So you go and select one from each pile? Exactly. But they've got to be the same one, so you end up with A to King, but they're a mixture of the hearts and they're a mixture of the spades. And that is the basics of sexual reproduction. Yeah, I remember it being much more fun than that. Yeah, I'm going to choose to ignore that comment. But the point of this is that if you've got a gene which is to do with, you know, the thing you're interested in, then it is possible to lose that card because it comes from either your mother or your father. It's either a spade or a heart. Just by the shuffling process as you go through the generation. So eventually you just might not have the ace of spades in your pack anymore. And the gene drive is a way to stop that from happening. The initial idea was that, okay, so what if we make sure that in every generation, the gene we've manipulated copies itself over onto the other chromosomes? So even if you just got one copy of that gene, we've now got two copies. And that happens every generation. So rather than it being exponentially diluted, over time this gene would now be increased double every generation. And so very quickly you'd actually get this gene into the whole of the population. That's the drive business. And this was theorized in the late 1960s. And then in 2001, a chap called Austin Bert, who's an Imperial, he came up with a theoretical conception that you could use this to control natural populations. So he's entirely thinking in the air. And what really changed to make this possible was the development of CRISPR, which I suspect many of the listens will have heard on. This is the new gene editing technique which, unlike every other technique, works in virtually every organism. So by using CRISPR, it became possible to use this system that was present in bacteria, because bacteria have some of these elements, transfer them into mosquitoes or other organisms, and then start to use this gene drive to double every generation the copies of a particular gene. So in principle, the answer to the question, could we get rid of mosquitoes is yes, you could. That's the danger with this system, is that you have effectively created something that is a bit like a runaway chain reaction in a nuclear bomb. I don't think I'm exaggerating in saying that. That's what you can do. Because once it's released, this thing doubles every generation. If it were to get out, that's what would happen. Going back to your cards, what's the equivalent? Can you put it in that analogy for me? Yes, sure. So remember, you can't see the cards that you're shuffling, but you know that they're all there. So if you want to guarantee that you're always going to get the ace of spades in the next generation, what do you do? You mark the card. So when you're doing the shuffling, you can always see there's a marked card there. So you always pick that one. And that's what a gene drive does. It's basically a little bit of DNA, which sort of is guaranteed to be passed onto the next generation, regardless of the shuffling that normally would happen. This must spread quite quickly, then. How if you put that in, how quickly does every member of the population have it? Well, if you start with one and a hundred, so one percent, it reaches saturation in that population after about 10 generations. Saturation, everyone has it. Not everyone necessarily, but it's permanent in the population. It cannot be bred out. Cracking. I mean, in my professional opinion, knowing what I know of exponential growth, I can certainly guarantee that it does happen quite quickly. So it's nice to have exponential growth on our side for once. Tell you that. Yeah, I guess so. Except that biology never plays to the rules. It is the science of exceptions and in experimental conditions where we've tried gene drives in mosquitoes. After about six generations, it stops working. And we don't fully know why. This seems like one of those situations where we really would want to know why fully. I agree with your assessment of this, but it is being repeated and we're trying to understand exactly that process. But the broader point is we're definitely at a stage where we need to be thinking about what we want from this technology, how it works, how it can be deployed. Because it has incredible potential. It has a lot of unknowns to it and a lot of unknown risks to it. And we sort of need to decide collectively because history has shown us that mosquitoes are amazing at spreading all around the world. What we can see from the spread of ADs of Gipsy Eye and the Zika virus that it transmits is that this is a global issue. So ADs Gipsy Eye is, as the name indicates, found in Africa. And the Zika virus is found in Africa as well, where it is not a massive problem. However, ADs of Gipsy Eye moved across the Atlantic, probably in, you know, ships and did two things. One, it colonized the whole of the Americas very quickly. Secondly, the virus that it carries also changed and started to cause the terrible effects that we can see in Latin America today. So what that tells you is that a decision you might take in Africa, you can say, okay, let's get rid of the mosquitoes in our village. But that decision, if it goes wrong, that decision could then have planetary consequences. Genetic engineering is massively regulated. You can't do stuff in the lab without, you know, going through absolutely tons of paperwork to say exactly what you're doing. Isn't there regulation? Isn't there a framework that is globally agreed to prevent this type of research going wrong? No, that's the short answer. Right. Uh-uh. Yep. Uh-huh. No. No, no idea, is it? I, again, agree with your assessment, Dr. Frye, suboptimal. One positive from this, from a very significant issue, is that governments are at least aware of it. The US intelligence community is extremely concerned about this. I kind of veer around on this because I know, because I'm writing a book about the history of genetic engineering, that when the very first genetic engineering techniques were developed in the early 1970s, people were terrified. They were terrified that this was going to get loose, that there would be new diseases, that we would destroy ecosystems. And yet, nothing happened. Now, that might be the owl, or that was just because it was so clunky, and nobody malicious tried to do this. This is completely different. But I think also, we do need to temper our fears. I don't think we should be frightened of this. I do think that governments and national scientific bodies should be taking this very seriously, and trying to see if it's possible to have an international regulatory framework to ensure that this technology is used in the best possible way, and that all the appropriate risk assessments are done before any decision is taken. You know how I do like to quote films? I do. I don't know whether you've noticed that before. So there's the Jurassic Park one, which comes up quite a lot in our conversations, which is... Life finds a way? Exactly. But there was another one that came up in our conversations between Mia Matthew, which was from Spinal Tap, which is there's a very fine line between clever and stupid. I should put that on your tombstone, that's a room. Anyway, understanding something as big as the influence of hundreds of thousands of insects, that's something that's not very easy, but this is something that we're going to need to get grip of, because Erika McCallister told me that it has been right on our doorstep before, and could well be again. We have a resident population that can, if pushed as it were, be affected towards malaria, and we had it definitely during World War II, especially when a lot of the troops came back from Africa, they'd contracted malaria, they'd all been put together in North Hook, East Anglia, is very marshy, it's great for mosquitoes, and so they created a perfect breeding situation where a lot of people were re-infecting each other, and therefore we had a viable population in malaria. Everyone, we're pleased to know that there is a mosquito surveillance group. This is a group of scientists who get together, they have got monitoring systems all around the UK, and anytime a species turns up, which is problematic, they quickly go to the area, take some samples, identify what's happened, and take any action if necessary. Luckily, this hasn't happened so far. So, okay, that leaves us with really one option. Should we just kill off all the mosquitoes if we can? Here's what Erika thinks. I don't think we should get rid of all mosquitoes. There's about ten other species that are really, really important, and these are such human loving species, then maybe a way I hate saying this, that we should get rid of those, because obviously the impact they have on many societies is enormous. But, my concern in doing this is if we get rid of those species, we'll have the species not therefore just move in, because you've created a gap in the environment, in this niche, will they not come in themselves? We are seeing this with non-human liking mosquitoes, where we've got landing crotchmen into previously understood habitats, forests and things like this, that these mosquitoes are then adapting from a non-human host to a human host. So, are we going to be creating little monsters? I don't know. So, Dr. Otheth, the case for mosquitoes, what is the verdict? The jury is out, Dr. Fry. Mosquitoes carry disease-causing pathogens that have killed literally millions of humans. There may be more species that can carry diseases too. Our interaction with nature is partially responsible. But eradicating mosquitoes is a possibility, just one fraught with unknown risk. Because evolution is much cleverer than us. So, there you go. I mean, one of the themes that we come back to on the programme is, every so often is how complex ecosystems are and how bad we are, trying to eradicate species. We were always talking to Kate Jones about that, because she's the real expert. To do what we're also about it dealing with, or maybe just me, even when mosquitoes are not carrying illness, even when you're perfectly safe by being bitten by a mosquito. It's the one thing in the entire world which I have a really terrible allergic reaction to. Oh, do you? Yeah, so, when I get bitten, it comes up like the size of a CD. Absence, gigantic. A compact disc for the younger listeners is an old storage format that became redundant in about 2002. Anyway, when I go on holiday, I like cover myself in decent, every single moment of the day. It's like obsessive. Anyway, there was one point. This is like quite a while ago, where I went on a holiday with a friend, cover myself in deeds. And then at night time, I didn't have any deep on my face. I've got a gigantic mosquito bite on my cheek and it was a little like half a hamster, basically. Hances again. Oh, thank you. Recurring theme. Anyway, got back to London. Right, and there was a guy that I was dating at the time. It was very early on. We only had like two or three dates. And he was like, could you want to go on a date when you get back? And I was like, I can't and look ridiculous. And he was like, I don't care what you look like. I think you're a great person. I really don't care. Come on, come out. It'll be great. So I said, okay, all right. You know, he clearly likes me for my personality. And then he turned up. He turned up and he was like, what the hell is wrong with you? I'm at it. Yeah, that one didn't work out. I got stung on the eyelid by a mousy once when I was... On the eye. Yeah, we were in France and we were about... It was really hot and I slept in a hammock overnight. And at five o'clock in the morning, I woke up and I couldn't open one of my eyes and it was particularly annoying because we were driving home that day. And I couldn't because I... I couldn't see how one... I could only open one eye. My goodness, man. I mean, it is... That's... We're being silly and we're being trivial. It is an incredibly serious issue. Of course. Yeah, of course. I'm dealing with the source. Plasmodium is much harder than our attempts at dealing with the mosquitoes themselves. You know all sorts of scientists get involved in this, you know, ecologists, biologists and so on. The mathematicians have offered their support in this area too. So there's a really brilliant technique called geoprofiling, which is where you say, okay, given all of these cases of malaria, given that we know how far mosquitoes can fly, can you create a map that links all of those things together and tries to predict where the breeding grounds are, where the stagnant water pools are? There was one case that was done in Egypt a few years ago. It's a really fascinating idea, really clever idea of trying to work backwards from the information you know to fill in the gaps. I think that is an area that Kate Jones works in as well. Oh, yeah. She publishes papers where they... I think particularly with Ebola, another infectious disease, where they do try to model where outbreaks are going to take place. One of the things that I thought was interesting when we started talking about how infections work. One of the biggest causes of death in history is the lack death. Plague and there's lots of similarities. What between malaria and the black death? Well, one of the striking similarities, how the disease actually propagates. What, by being sicked up by an insect? It's in your body. Did you like that? It's like maybe we want to sick up myself. But yeah, go on. What? I mean, this does come with a little bit of a health warning, because it's one of those moments where biologists get really overexcited because of how cool the mechanism is. We're forgetting that A, it causes horrible disease and B is pretty gross. I think there's been a... There's been a... Enough for a gap. Yeah, I think, you know, not too soon. Too soon? There's not too soon. Okay. So I'll do it quickly because it is a bit grim. But basically, the plague is caused by a bacteria called Yosinia Pestis. And Yosinia Pestis typically lives in marmots and doesn't cause many any harms. In marmots are like fat squirrels. And flees feed on it. They say they bite a marmot. And they suck up some blood and they get some Yosinia Pestis in this. And somehow this transfer to rats and then it transfer to us. But the process itself is really cool. It's really cool because what happens is Yosinia Pestis doesn't do anything in marmots. It goes into the flea. And then when it's sitting in the flea's midgut, which is sort of specific temperature, that is the temperature at which Yosinia Pestis starts to grow. So it grows and it multiplies and it forms this sort of... In the gut of the flea. In the midgut of the flea. Okay. Yeah. And it forms a bolus, which is just a little clump. But it does something even more clever. It stimulates a... It's just so cool. It also... It basically puts a sheath around it to stop it being digested. So it puts itself in a little bubble? A little bubble just contains Yosinia Pestis. And then releases a chemical which makes the flea thinks it's hungry. Even though it's just had a... So then... So the flea's just eaten. It's got Yosinia Pestis in it. It's not... Latin. Thank you. Good. And then the fleas like, I'm hungry. Gonna go find a human to bite. It jumps on something else and does it again. Bites, the human. First thing it does, same as the mosquito. Similates. It sticks it up. Stop it, it's coagulating. So it pukes up. It's midgut, which contains all of the Yosinia Pestis. And that's how it spreads. I know. They thought it was in the air, didn't they? Yeah, that's where the word malaria that comes from. Is that right? I think the mal in malaria is bad air. I think. This is another one of those moments where... Just say whatever the hell pops into our hands. I don't look just what I'm in the house. Someone will write in and correct us. You know what? Because this programme was inspired by the programme on Wasps versus Bees. I mean, it was... Let's be honest, a resounding victory for Bees. I don't think so. I thought that we would ask Erica seeing how she is. Queen of all things. Flies, fleas and surely Bees. I thought I'd get her take on what she thinks of the humble bumble. I think she's making down one of these days. Somebody is going to find me. It's going to be like, all the Bees are going to turn off my garden. I'm like, no, Flies, help! Rescue me! What? Bees are crap. Erica, I thought we were friends, man. I thought we were friends. Come on. That is... Wow. Yeah. She was like on the A list of guests during the recording. And now, I don't know. Thanks for your contribution, Erica McCullister. Flygo. We'll never have you one again. You can't go around saying Bees are crap. That is how to lose friends. Amazing. No, no, we love you. She's great. And she's welcome anytime. Should we do Cure of the Week? Yeah, let's do that. Brotherhood and fries. Cureo of the week. Now, this week's Cure of the Week. I'm afraid it's riffing on the Latin again. Few serieses as ago when we were talking about. Wasn't that long ago, was it? I can't remember. You know, I think we've just going to have to agree that we forget things. And you can remind us when we repeat ourselves. Because otherwise, I mean, in the last, I would say five to ten episodes every single time. I don't know, I've launched into a story. And then be like, we've told this one before. I think we've told that one. And many of them didn't make the cut. But I think we're just going to have to agree that we're allowed to sell the same stories again. I think we're just going to have to. Yeah. You write in. If you get bored listening to us, tell the same stories over then... Well, sorry. Sorry. Anyway, it was... We were talking about species names. And it was... It was the episode when we were talking about z-donks and... growlabairs and pizzleys. And I went off... All real animals, by the way, if you want to go check out my website. Exactly. And I went off and one of my... This is a bingo card thing, is now I started talking about species names. Yes. And I'm going to make those bingo. Thank you. And... But it was... It was a lot to do with the fact that I was most amused by the fact that the sub-species name of the... One of the Western low-line gorilla was gorilla. So it's genus names gorilla. It's species names gorilla. And it's sub-species names gorilla. And I wrote this in a book so I could just have the word gorilla. I think five times in a row. Anyway. Tivo from Belfast took that clip of Adam saying the word gorilla over and over and over in a scientifically accurate way. And... Well, he made a little rave for us. And what I will say about this is that it is... Equal parts brilliant and weird. Super weird! But we love it. Tivo, you are cure over the week. You can play us out. Gorilla gorilla gorilla Bah f 25 Extra extra extra Gorilla gorilla Gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla gorilla. Gorilla gorilla gorilla per Engineize. CRACKET DOL splits hole covers Karela GuruKu
