I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC Hello, the Curios. This is the last episode in the current series of the Curious Cases of Brother and Fry. And we are going out on a high. As Adam and I were walking to the studio today, we realised we've been doing this for five years. Five years. It's the longest five years of my life. LAUGHTER Well, thank you. Anyway, here's a programme about... In a good way. Licking poisonous frogs. It's lasted so long because I've enjoyed it so much. Licking poisonous frogs. MUSIC MUSIC This week's Curious Case is something a little toxic. And poisonous. And venomous, too. We are going all in with the bitey, stingy and spitty animals today. Yeah, and this is a subject on which I come tantalisingly close to having no personal experience whatsoever. I only ever got my first waspsing at the age of 46 a month ago whilst playing cricket in Kourthu. What happened? It flew up my glove and stung me and it was oury. That's... That sounds really awful. Are you okay? I struggled through. The hardship I overcame it. Oh, that is a real relief. Thanks for that story, Adam. Anyway, listener, Janie wrote two Curious Cases at BBC.co.uk And Janie was watching a documentary about poisonous frogs and wondered and I quote, what would happen if a frog licked itself or another frog of the same species? Yeah, I mean, like... It's kind of a weird thought. Yeah, it's a little, but I think what she was getting at was whether or not toxic animals could poison themselves with their own venom. Right, okay. That is a good question. Now, we need to set some constraints first because you just said toxic, venom and poison in the same sentence. What's the difference? Well, I think we should ask someone, maybe someone who spent much of his adult life annoying, angry creatures on television. Hang on, do you mean someone with some actual personal experience? Exactly. Someone who's maybe been scratched and bitten and stung and spat out by many of the world's toxic or dangerous animals. Tell you what, how about Steve Baxchall? Explorer, presenter of the BBC's Deadly 60, and most appropriately of all, author of venom, poisonous creatures in the natural world. So I guess the classic thing is people talking about poisonous snakes, which is incorrect. There is a difference between venom and poison and it's down to the method of delivery. So simply put, a venom is injected, a poison is ingested. If you eat an animal and you die, then it's poisonous, and if it bites you and you die, then it's venomous. So it's venomous snakes, they're not poisonous snakes. Exactly. And what about toxins? Well, toxins are chemicals that cause harm. Venom are toxins that animals make that cause harm. And poison? Big hair glam metal band from the mid 80s. Okay, thank you for that. So we move on though, because it's not actually just snakes. There's a misconception that snakes tend to be the only animals that are venomous. In actual fact, toxins are pretty much ubiquitous across all of the various animal groups. Not only are they invertebrates, obvious examples being the scorpions and the spiders, but there are mammals. There are birds that are poisonous. There are frogs. I even actually wrote my master's thesis on the first described Newt or Salamander that is venomous. And here's Ronald Jenner, who's a venom expert at the natural history museum, with a whole zoo of horrors. If you think about venom in the animal kingdom, think Niderians, these are the Cienemones, these are corals, these are geologists, they're venomous, very old group, think about stinging bees and wasps, those are venomous. Think about snakes, I think about some venomous lizards, even in mammals we have some venomous creatures such as the slow lures, the venomous primate. So we talk about many hundreds of thousands of species alive in the world today, that are toxic by either being venomous or poisonous. What's a slow lures? Well, it's like a lemur, it's a bit like a lemur, small, it's not a monkey, but it looks like a monkey, like a bush baby. And the fast lures? That doesn't exist. Okay. Well, I didn't know actually that there was such thing as venomous mammals. Well, there's the duck-billed platypus, which has venomous spines on its hind limbs, and then there are some shrews which have venomous bites, and then we just heard about the lures with the venom glands on the inside of the arms, but they're not really lethal, they're more like a nasty allergic reaction, that's what you get from the slow lures. And the median-paced lures? Ah, it also doesn't exist. Okay, well, do we get back to snakes? Because I spoke to Nick Casewell at the Liverpool School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. I currently think there are about just under 4,000 different species of snakes found in lots of different habitats across the world. And of these, the majority are actually venomous, around about a 70 to 80% of all snake species. But that doesn't mean that they're medically important to humans, and in fact, we think probably only around 200 species are actually what we would call medically important, as in there is a threat of harm when they bite a person. Yeah, nature is really pretty awful, isn't it? It's absolutely horrible. Most things want to eat you, and many will inject a lethal toxin, and they don't just inject it. Cobras, snakes, they spit venom, and it's relatively harmless unless it enters via your eyeballs, or through membranes of the nose, or it just goes straight in your mouth. Okay, hold on though, a question about taxonomy, because if poison, Steve Baxwell said, are toxins that you ingest? And cobra spit venom, if it accidentally goes in your mouth and then you swallow it, does it then become poison? Well, I sort of don't care, because while you and Steve Baxwell are arguing about the semantics of whether it's venom or poison, I'm just slowly dying a painful toxic death. Han, it was a worst thing. Don't be so dramatic. But look, okay, I want nature to be nice. I want nature to be cuddly. I don't want nature to be terrified. Well, I'm afraid we can only disappoint, because evolution is exceptionally good at two specific things. One, it's incredibly inventive, and two, it's utterly indifferent to your opinion and or suffering. He's Ronald Jenner again. The point of venom is that it is a fantastically useful adaptation, because it allows venomous creatures to procure food by immobilizing prey, to defend themselves against dangerous predators, by inflicting pain on them, and those are two of the major uses of venom, there's others as well, like competing for limited resources, and causing each other pain by injecting venom. So it's a useful adaptation, and the best illustration of this is that if you look in the entire animal kingdom, venom's have evolved at least 100 times, independently from non-venomous ancestors. The oldest example being, all the relatives of sea and aminies and geolipists. The oldest fossil record shows that more than half a billion years ago, venomous creatures already evolved, and venom as a weapon, therefore predates stealth and speed and cunning, by a long shot that is an old, very useful weapon to have. Can't they just all be friends? Well, it would be nice, wouldn't it? But no, snakes need to make baby snakes, and that means eating cute animals. Right, but why do they attack people then? Because snakes don't generally eat humans, but they will still bite. Yeah, absolutely. Because venomous animals can use their poison as a warning, or as a defense mechanism, not just for attack, and it's often animals that use venom defensively that have the most pain-inducing venom. As Steve Bachel knows very well. So I've got a pretty impressive list of things that have stung me over the years. The thing that I think put me in the most overwhelming pain is the insect, which is quantified as being the most painful stingy insects on earth, which is the bullet ant. It's a giant ant about the size of my little finger, which occurs in central and south America. And it has a sting, which is only used for defense. It doesn't use it on its prey. It contains neurotoxins so that you feel the sting systemically through your entire body. And local people, a particular group called the satere Maui, use it in a tribal initiation ceremony. So they'll weave these gloves with the stinger on the inside, and you put your hands into the gloves, and you dance for about 10 or 15 minutes, being stung over and over and over again. And the reason it's called the bullet ant is that one single sting feels like being shot. So being stung hundreds of times, was the most overwhelming experience I ever had. For about three hours, there was nothing in my world apart from pain. I was completely just in this little bubble of intent, fierce, for a rocious pain. Yeah, hard to know from me on that one. Why would you put yourself through that? Yeah, not high on my bucket list, either. Well, to be fair, Adam, given how you reacted to the was sting, I think we all know that you and Steve are very different people. Yeah. But okay, let's set aside the utter insanity of volunteering to do this. Why does it hurt so much? How does venom actually work? What we see when we analyse venom is a lot of variation in terms of the toxins found within. And these toxins are usually proteins, but they're enumerous proteins in any particular venom. And so a venomous snake can have anywhere from two to two hundred different toxins that when combined and injected into a prey can cause a lot of damage. But these toxins do lots of different things and different species will have a different cocktail of venom toxins depending upon its evolutionary history. So this could be neurotoxic venom, which causes paralysis, or it could be a hematoxic venom which causes bleeding disturbances or drops in blood pressure. Or it could be a cytotoxic venom which causes local destruction around the bite site. Okay, cocktail of toxin proteins, local destruction, bleeding disturbances. I mean, this is so much worse than I imagined. This sounds unnecessarily cruel. As I said, nature absolutely indifferent to suffering or your opinion. And this is just the most efficient way. The toxins found in venom have high levels of specificity towards different targets. So for example, a neurotoxin is able to bind to a neuromuscular receptor. And so this is the point by which nerves are transmitting a signal to the muscles to allow contraction of that muscle. But when snake venom toxins interact at this neuromuscular junction, they can block some of these receptors and they prevent that nerve signal moving to the muscle, meaning that the muscle can't move. Now this is a really effective way for a snake venom to immobilize a prey. Other venom toxins do very different things. They can act on the blood clotting cascade, for example. In a prey, this would usually result in rapid stroke. So the animal that's being inventive is quickly immobilized as a result of these toxins. Other toxins can break down blood vessels, effectively punching holes in them, leading to a prey item, bleeding internally. And other toxins destroy cells, causing lots of damage around the bite site. And to add another layer of complexity to this, what we sometimes see is that certain snake venom can do multiple things. Which must make it extra tricky for treating human victims of snake bites. So we might have a case, for example, of someone bitten by a russell's viper in southern India, where they will have bleeding disturbances, they will have clotting disturbances, and they will also have elements of neurotoxic paralysis as well. And so for a clinician treating snake bites, it can be extremely variable, depending upon which snake and which cocktail of toxins has actually been injected into that person. Okay, so today we're in the terrifying and extremely painful world of venom, toxins and poison. And it's a lot more horrible and complex than you might think. Because biology. Hmm, biology. I love it. And there's a ridiculous range of venom types, too. A vast array of different chemicals that are found in nature, each of which acts as a different toxin. Yeah, everything from lickable tree frogs to bulletin. Sure, but you know there's even a huge range of variation within the same species, which makes things very tricky for people like Nick Casewell. Venom variation is one of the biggest challenges we face as researchers working on snake bite. So this can be between one snake family and another, one snake species and another. But even within species we can see major variations at population levels or geographical levels, where the same species of snake can have very different range of toxins found in their venom, over even relatively small geographical areas. And even in the adults and young of the same snake family. Wait, hang on, I just understand. Do you mean that different species of snake that are closely related will have different types of venom? Well, yes, but I actually don't mean that in this case. I mean within the actual same family like family family. So there's a mummy snake and there's a daddy snake and there's a baby snake and they all have different venom as well. It's super cute. It's definitely not. I know. An interesting example is the Eastern brown snake living in New Guinea, in Australia. It's a very dangerous snake, but have this interesting phenomenon where the baby snakes hunt small lizards. And for that reason they have a venom that is neurotoxic predominantly. It paralyzes the lizard and they can easily eat it. And as the snake grows and becomes adult, the dietary preferences change. So the adult brown snakes, they eat mammals. And in order to do that, they need to change the composition of the venom. And interestingly, if you compare the venom of the adult Eastern brown snake with the babies, you can see that the adults have these blood clotting factors in their venom. The babies snakes don't need that because by just paralyzing the lizard, they have sufficient power in their venom. So that's a very strong illustration of very different venom compositions in babies and adults based upon the prey preferences they have. Now this is really important because when it comes to treating bites, you need to know about that variation because members of the same species might have different effects depending on how old they are or where they are. One of the most extreme examples is in the southwest USA where Mahavir rattlesnakes over a couple of hundred kilometers have quite considerable variation in their toxins. At one end of that spectrum causing bleeding, disturbances and hematoxicity, local swelling. But at the other end of the spectrum causing neurotoxic effects and systemic neurotoxicity. And so we think that variation is probably dictated at least partly by natural selection for different prey types. Toxins are being honed for their potency or their utility against the different prey that might be available in different habitats. But it's also possible that other factors may play a role including the local climate as well. Well this is all brilliantly horrifying but we have veered quite far away now from the original question which was why don't venomous animals poison themselves. Steve Baxor might have the answer. So the short answer to that is it varies tremendously. A lot of snakes will use their venom for a male to pacify a female during mating or for male or male combat. So over the course of deep time they have evolved a certain amount of resistance to their own venom. The venom of their own species. That doesn't mean that venomous snakes are invincible to venomous bites far from it. There are lots of species like for example the King Cobra which only focuses on eating other snakes and it uses its venom to incapacitate them so clearly it has to work on them. There are lots of other animals like for example the male duck-built platypus has a venomous spur on its hind leg which has an extraordinary effect on human beings. There was one guy an Australian guy who had fought in Vietnam war and been shot in the arm and he described being stung by the platypus as in a whole different league to being shot like in a totally different world of pain but that venom is believed to be used by the males on females during mating and it doesn't kill them it just seems to pacify them so there is a range of different effects that venom can have within one's own species. Why exactly would a snake bite itself? Oh I don't know I mean it's an idiot by accident when it's super drunk Ronald Jenner has some ideas on why a snake might bite itself and then die. The answer is yes some species can kill themselves there are documented cases of it. A couple of years ago there was a case of a brown tree snake in Australia that was held in captivity and it had to be moved from one enclosure to another it started threshing around and then it bit really hard on its own tail. Of course the handler removed the tail from its mouth but 10 hours later it had died it had basically paralyzed itself with its own venom but this is a question that needs to be answered really on the basis of individual groups of venomous snakes I don't think you can generalize too much here. Okay we've got some answers then an actor example there of a snake biting and killing itself there you go Jenny yes some venomous creatures can kill themselves with their own venom but some others well they just can't because biology. However whether a tree frog has ever been known to lick itself we're going to put that one decidedly in the requires more research folder okay but I want to know what's going on when you have immunity to your own venom so I asked Kristi Wilcox author of venomous how earth's deadliest creatures mastered biochemistry to tell me more. It seems to come down to what strategies they have used to prevent their own toxins from harming their bodies there are essentially two ways to be immune to a venom at least at the molecular level so you have these venoms that have very specific targets within the body and by that we mean that they cause harm by binding to or stopping or messing with a very specific thing that's happening in the body like protein and so one way to become immune to a venom is to change that target for example if you had a neuron targeting toxin it might be blocking an ion channel that is needed for that neuron to fire if you change that ion channel you could become resistant to the toxin now the catch of that of course is that these targets are usually very essential parts of our bodies and ones that you don't want to mess with too much because you need your cells natural molecules that interact with it to continue to do what they do. An ion channel needs to get opened by whatever normally opens it and so if you change it too much you might not have it work anymore it's kind of like a lock in a key you can think of the key being the toxin but also molecules in your bodies are keys and if you change that lock too much you might have a key of your own that won't fit. The other way of becoming immune or resistant to venoms is to generate some sort of substance that stops the venom from doing what it does before it reaches that target and you see this in species like a possum they have these proteins in their serum that just bind to venom toxins and kind of gum them up and so they can't do whatever they were going to do to the body because they get bound up by these proteins while they're still in the animal's blood. So the same technique for stopping a toxin from poisoning yourself can also evolve in animals that you want to eat or want to eat you so they're immune to your toxin. Yeah exactly I was completely amazing that's proper evolutionary arms race going on there and a possums well you know they actually eat rattlesnakes so it's really useful for them. That doesn't quite how cool what is an possum though? It's a marsupial in fact a possums are it's the largest order of marsupials in the Western hemisphere. Yeah but what is it? They're sort of like ratty horrible things that secrete fowls-melting liquids from their anal glands and they pretend to be dead so they don't get eaten. And otherwise you just find them in the corner honking on the head of a rattlesnake. I mean nature I hate nature. It's really horrible. Okay you know what maybe there's another way around this. What happens if you embrace the horror and get bitten not once but lots of times? I ask Kristi if that would work to give you immunity. The downside to using something like a serum strategy is that you aren't inherently immune to the venom there is a concentration effect. If you get a small dose of venom serum proteins probably can bind it up and no problem but if you get a really really large dose of venom then you might get these defenses overwhelmed and then the venom toxins still hit their targets and still cause damage. I mean it's still a pretty good way of doing it. I think a possums are immune to 10 or something times the dose that a person would be so it's still effective but it's not necessarily as effective as changing the target. Alright another option then. What about physical barriers of protecting yourself against your own venom? Other snakes may have simply walled off their venom glands to keep that venom from getting into their body. There are lots of different strategies for keeping yourself protected from your own venom and some of them are going to make it so that if you bite yourself you're fine and some of them aren't. Yeah I'm kind of less impressed with that because I've got all sorts of physical barriers that stop things from being where they shouldn't be like I don't know blood in your eyeballs. Okay thanks for that Adam appreciate that. I have to say though there is a more serious side to all of this because of course while snakes are probably much more scared of us than we are of them snake bites in humans are still a very serious problem in certain parts of the world and in 2017 snake bite in venoming was reinstated within the list of neglected tropical diseases by the World Health Organization. Nick Casewell is one of the guys who's tacking this so let's get the numbers from him on how bad a problem this is. So snake bite really does have a profound effect particularly in the tropical and subtropical regions of the world places like Sub-Saharan Africa, the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia really suffer the greatest burden of snake bite. We currently think around about 2.7 million people are bitten by snakes every single year and of those around 1.8 million probably are envenomed by them and this means that they show some signs of the bite of those 1.8 million people probably as many as 130 to perhaps 140,000 people will die as a result of a snake bite every single year and maybe as many as half a million people will suffer from long-term morbidity as the result of a bite whether it be the loss of limb function or even potentially the loss of a limb via amputation or through mental disturbances following the trauma of a snake bite. We also think that snake bite incidents are hugely under reported too. The current treatment for snake bites is anti-venom and these were developed over 100 years ago. What this involves is taking a small amount of venom from a snake and immunising a sheep or a horse and over a period of many months immunising this animal with venom. Now the animal itself doesn't suffer from this because the doses that are used are extremely small so they are not envenomed but what happens is that these venoms will stimulate an immune response so the animal will start to produce antibodies against those toxins and these antibodies can be taken from those animals by a blood sample and purified and at the end of this process you basically have either a liquid or a dried product which then can be reconstituted and given to a patient and those antibodies within the anti-venom will actively bind to venom toxins that are circulating in that patient and prevent them from causing the pathology. But hold on a second there are tons of snakes and they all have different venoms and they can have different venoms in the same family in the same family group and in different geographical locations then how do you treat such a huge range of potentially lethal toxins? Well okay so you can have both you can have monovalent or mono-specific anti-venoms and those just work against a single species but more often they tend to have something polyvalent or poly-specific anti-venoms and they can work against a whole host of different snake species at once. Right so I guess you you choose all the snakes that are likely to bite a human in a given location and you just have a sort of mixture of these in the anti-venom? Exactly that which does make sense because it means you don't have to worry about trying to work out exactly what snake bit you when you're in that life and death situation but according to Nick these polyvenom anti-venom mixtures they come with their own challenges. So if we make an anti-venom against 10 different venoms only about 10% of the anti-venom is actually going to be useful for blocking the venom toxins from that one snake species that bites a patient and this means we have to give more of that anti-venom to affect cure and this comes with some problems too because the anti-venom themselves have some challenges in that they are made of horse or sheep antibodies which our bodies can recognize as being foreign and so we can have adverse reactions to anti-venom. The other problem with increasing the doses needed to treat people is the cost. Most people who are bitten by snakes live in low and middle income countries of sub-Saharan Africa or South Asia and anti-venoms can be extremely expensive so the more vials of anti-venom are needed the greater the cost to the individual. So what we're trying to develop is new oral therapeutics that can be delivered soon after a bite in the field or the community and that can at least reduce or slow the severity of an venoming following that bite. Okay now I feel like Hannah you're beginning to embrace the whole horror of evolution. I'm not I'm not I'm definitely not. Well listen another one of our listeners wrote in Scott Prober and he asked whether animals are evolving to be less venomous and as Steve Baxchol says it's an evolutionary arms race out there. There are so many different kinds of animals that are venomous it's going to be different across all those groups. An example of an animal that is becoming more venomous are the snakes in Australia. So for example the inland type-amp which is usually considered to be the most venomous snake in the world has developed a biological arms race with its prey which is believed to be down to the fact that they live in the desert. Prey is relatively difficult to come by it's fast it has big teeth big claws and so if the type-amp was to have a conventional strategy of biting its prey holding on and waiting for its venom to take effect the prey would fight back and would do the snake damage. So instead it bites it releases and it waits for its venom to take hold before following its prey and eating it but that's got to happen quick otherwise the prey is going to be miles away and so over time it's got stronger and stronger and stronger and stronger until now today it has a venom that's believed to be powerful enough to kill 250,000 mice. Clearly it doesn't need venom that strong but the key is it can bite a bandicoot and that will be dead within a matter of seconds. Bite release weight go in and finish off its prey. So in that very specific case its venom has become much much stronger and much more powerful over time. I've got question. Is your question what's a bandicoot? Might be. Well a bandicoot is a paramellolth. Well that's not helpful what's a paramellolth? It's a short-legged pointy nose small marsupial and it comes from the telegoo meaning pig rat. What a lovely mental image that is. Okay so that's something that's getting more toxic but you know it's not all horror. Ronald Jenner has a good example of animals evolving to be less venomous too. Because venom is expensive to produce metabolically speaking if you don't need it the body is not going to make it. An extreme is the marbled sea snake. The marbled sea snake eats mostly fish eggs and fish eggs don't swim away really fast so even though it evolved from very venomous ancestors it's lost it venom. It's lost it venom gland and it's lost it's venom delivery teeth. So that just shows that in evolution if you don't need equipment there's no selection well this all sounds horrible again but what if you actually work with these evil creatures of bitey toxic nature? I asked Nick Ronald, Christy and Steve what their worst bites ever were and believe it or not some of them were worse than getting stung by a wasp on holiday once. So here at Deliverpool School of Tropical Medicine within the Centre for Snake Bites Research and Interventions we actually have around about 200 venomous snakes that provide us with all the venom that we need for our research purposes and they also provide venom that's used to make anti-venomps that are delivered all over the world to save people's lives. So we have to work with these snakes on a daily basis and that can sometimes be quite challenging but it's also pretty interesting and fortunately I haven't been bitten myself by any of these snakes but of course it is kind of an occupational hazard for those of us who work with them. I can say the most exciting sting and envenomation that I've ever had was from a baby lace wing. A lace wing is a group of insects are quite beautiful harmless adults but their babies are little creatures with huge jaws that inject venom to kill aphids and other creatures they hunt and I was in Norway sitting in the garden of my colleague Ivan Dundheim and one fellow my arm and it bit me and I got a painful stinging sensation for about five minutes. Ivan was immediately jealous because he's also a venom researcher but luckily one fellow on him and we were both bitten on the same afternoon and we now are perhaps the only two people we know who have ever been bitten by baby lace wings. No I have definitely gotten stung by sea urchins and I oh I got stung by a really large Portuguese manor big big jelly relative that hurt but I haven't been bitten by any snakes so I think among venom experts I should count myself lucky. I have been spat at by about 10 different species of spitting cobras stung by scorpions had spider bites been taken out by the sting of the bullet ant had a venomous snake bite. I've been stung by fire coral I mean I've had quite a lot over the years my luckiest escape was working in South America with a particular kind of scorpion and we were out on expedition in the middle of the jungle and I found one and I caught it and I picked it up and it stung me on the finger and my whole crew just froze because we all saw that it was going to be bad and we waited and about 15 minutes later nothing had happened and I had somehow been delivered a dry sting to my finger for which I am eternally grateful. So Dr. Anford how we solved the venomous vendetta can the snake bite itself and cause itself harm? Well yes and no Dr. Frye some can and some have immunity to their own venom. Some snakes can carry a different toxin to the others in their own family. Some prey have evolved the same immunity as their predators which means they can eat them. Some animals are becoming more toxic and others less but what I really learned is that nature is truly horrible and that frog should avoid licking each other whenever possible. Oh we really did enjoy that. It was some of my favourite programmes when Anna looks befuddled about how awful nature is. I think the reason why you enjoy that is because you enjoy befuddling me but that's that sort of thing. But we did have some proper, I had to show Anna a picture of a bandicoot. I didn't you didn't show me a picture, you show me a picture of a no possum. Oh and a possum yeah. With all the babies on its back. A possum's are horrible looking things, I mean they make rats look really handsome, actually rats are quite cute. Are they? Oh yeah. Not in the holiday rental I was in. If your holiday rental was filled with a possum that would be worse. You reckon? Yeah because they've got a baby fish. Yeah but also the anal gland secretions it is I've smelt it and they are it's just. What were you doing sniffing an possum's bum? And bandicoots as well, I mean that's a completely different awful animal as well because people tend to think of mammals as being cute because they're hairy and they look after their babies and stuff but they're just um. Show me a bandicoot. The only thing I know about bandicoots is crash bandicoot. Yeah not they don't they don't look like that. Hold on a sec. That's a bandicoot. Oh that looks nothing like the the PlayStation game. No really doesn't. I mean that's cute though. It's quite sweet. It is cute though, more like a sort of elephant shrew. Yeah with like a long nose. With a longer nose. They're nowhere near us. I mean that opossum, it's face looks like it's making a screeching noise. That's right and when they play dead, which is an evolved tactics. So when they get attacked by certain animals, they just drop down on the floor with their feet up in the air and they make their eyes go aww and then they look even worse. They're just horrible. Yeah they're not nice. We're going to get complaints from the uh. A possum fan community. Yeah which is huge. So should we perhaps move on? Go on then. See I had a note that when we were writing the script for this and we were talking about being bitten and stung and spat out by poisonous monkeys and stuff. You know how I'm quite into Medieval and anatomical art. And I asked you have you ever seen a wound man before and you said no. Okay well here is an image of a wound man. I'm giggling with my own computer. If I am I going to see something horrible? Well kind of funny horrible. Your version of finding horrible. Okay. So wound men in the 12th century were descriptions in sort of monastic books. Basically sort of premedical textbooks of the possible ways in which you could die. Oh my god. Oh my god. I'm just everywhere I look. There's more horror. Is there a picture of, so show me which one you're looking at? Has he got little speedos on? Yes. So the classic one is he's got he's a guy and he's got little speedo trunks on and he's got like a knife through his arm and everything. There's not just knife through his arm. There's knives everywhere. The arrows. But if you look very carefully, there's a snake eating his ankle and a little puppy chewing his foot as well. Oh my god. Yes listen, his look up wound man. No don't don't because it's just, he's also remarkably upright. For somebody who's sustained that number of injuries. Anyway, should we do Cure in the Week? Yeah, I think we probably should. Right, well we've received a package. Yeah, it's kind of a poster tube. And most of the things that we get sent are nice. Occasionally they're not. Occasionally they come from grumpy old men saying that we're using green ink. Always green ink. That's weird. That's weird. So strange. And this one we think is a nice one though. Oh, that has crossed my mind that it might be a pipe bomb. Strangely, I got trained during my research time in the labs. How to identify a pipe bomb which tend to be weighted at the bottom? Do they come in tubes like this? Yeah, do they? Yeah, this isn't. If it's heavy at one end. Yes, if you get a tube. Then bang it on the table. 17. Don't. Don't do that. But this isn't. We know it's nice. So this has come from. We know it's nice because I've produced a hand of it. We got them to open it and gaze it was something bad. And it should be pointed out. This is actually a letter in letter form written on paper. What kind of the ink? It's pencil. We're okay. Very neat. And this comes from Joe and Louisa in Glastonbury, but they came to point out not the festival. Dear Hannah and Adam, we've been going crazy and lockdown to the extent that that we have even written an actual letter with an address. Indented. Oh, this is so good. This is an old school with a date and everything. Something we haven't done since primary school. Your podcast have helped keep both of us sane to say thank you. And maybe even be lucky enough to receive the coveted Curio badge. We have squashed every episode from series one to 15 into a mad, slightly migrating, inducing poster. We hope you like it. And the blisters will worth it. Oh, you know what? To say I like it is a gigantic understanding. What? How can I describe it? The center, the center of this poster is a beautifully drawn and excellently shaded image of Adam and I with our moustaches. And surrounding us are little doodles of everything you can imagine. We've got the moon factory, we've got scones and people's hugging in the scones and scones. I mean, there's all kinds of things on there. It's absolutely crammed. It's a bit like one of those sort of wears wally tight posters. So where else have we got? Do you remember one of us being chased by a roaring dinosaur? But imagine they had to, so they've also sent us a legend. All the noise. Detailing where each and every episode appeared. Imagine how much they all go to the way out to listen. And do it for five years worth and zero. I mean, to the extent that there are things on here which I definitely can't remember. So there's an aunt saying, no, the colossal naked roll mats will rise. What's that? I remember the naked roll mats. Oh, because we were talking about naked. No, that was just a normal Tuesday afternoon. I think it was a stumble. There's pies floating in space and also with the letter pi, I mean, the number. Is it a letter number? I don't know. That's a mere, it's absolutely stunning. What a worthy, worthy winner. We'll put this up on the website so you can have a look at it. It is absolutely gorgeous. So thank you, Joe and Louise from Glastonbury, but not the festival. You are both archaeos of the week. The last one in this current series. Now, Adam and I are back in quick turnaround, actually. In two different ways, we're back in a quick turnaround with a new series of curious cases next year around February, I think, but looking at them, I'm not sure. We need a response. Sometimes soon after the year. But in between here and there, Adam and I thought we'd branch out a little bit. Let's see what else we can add to our pile. Yeah, that's right, because the reflectors this year are going to be presented by Stuart Russell, who's a mega cheese in the world of artificial intelligence. He can say that to his face, maybe. Yes, mega cheese. You're the mega cheese. Like a huge truffle of Stilton. He's a big cheese in AI research. Definitely, Gorgon Zola, come on. We at least one of us know something about our artificial intelligence. Yes, and so between us, we hope that we will have half of a good zero. Well, it's four episodes, so two. You know, it's a bit too long to be perfectly honest. Luckily, we've been posted on some absolute brilliant guests, who are going to help us find our way through it and answer all of your questions. To go along with what's contained within the reflectors. But other than that, we've got another thing as well, which is that at least one of us is appearing on a new big series with the psychologist and writer, Stephen Pinker, and it's called Pinker Thinker. Thinker with Pinker. Think with Pinker. Think with Pinker. You can tell that the person who's appearing on that is not me. What was your episode about? We just talked about you, I don't know. It was a bit weird that we didn't invite you. It was me, Steve Pinker, and Bill Gates. We just talked nonstop about genetics and Adam Rubford. It's very weird. You should tune in. It's going to be on the 18th of November. Now, I think that's all we have time for. So from at least one of us, it's going to be a restful time until the new year. Yeah, I got nothing on. I don't know anything about artificial intelligence, and I'm not on Stephen Pinker's podcast. So I'll be fresh-faced and july next year. And Hannah's going to be exhausted. Yeah, sounds about right. Before our next series, if you have any letters, any entries for Cura of the Week, any suggestions, any thoughts, I mean, anything, really, then send them in to Cura's Cases at BBC.co.uk. We love reading your emails. Yes, and especially if they're musical, because we think we're getting to the stage where we might have enough for a whole album's worth. Given that we've already got an album name and an album cover, it's amazing. In Terabang and Cover. To be right. Yeah, so if you've got versions of our theme tune, send them in, but they've got to be different from what we've already received. Yes, they do. But we will see you next year. If I think of made a mistake, I'll just sort of pause and try and read it again, so you can... Yeah, you should listen. Paul McCartney has you've never heard him before. You ready? Revealing the stories behind his life and music, we hear about superstardom. When the show heard 73 million people watch us. Drugs. What we had to get into our lives, it seems, was marijuana, falling out with John and Yoko. The thing is, so much of what they held to be true, was crap. His grief after Lenin's death. I was just sitting there in this little bare room, thinking of John, and realizing I'd lost him. And he's sense of wonder. Sometimes I pinch myself and think, where we're there? To hear all 10 episodes from BBC Radio 4, just search for Paul McCartney inside the songs on BBC Sounds. has not yet now existed.いや敷げるといかない…
