Hello, Curiees. Welcome back to episode three, series 16. This one, I'm all over this one. Love a bit of insect biology, especially Waspie. I actually do quite hate wasps. I mean, I sort of like pretend to hate wasps in this program, but I really do hate them. I can tell that this is a secret for the podcast listeners for the Curiees only. We do sort of slightly ham up our roles in the program by about five percent. It's like our personalities plus plus. Plenty little bit, yeah. But I can always tell when Hannah is genuinely offended by something. Like when we did the horror film episode, you hated that. Yeah, but you know that that was real because you came to my house and watched me have a breakdown. Yeah, yeah. It was funny. Anyway, today's episode is about Wasps and wow, she really hates wasps and really likes bees. I do really like bees. More wasps slash beach at after the episode. I'm Dr Adam Rutherford and I'm Dr Hannah Fry and you are going to send us your everyday mysteries and we are going to investigate them using the power of science, science, science. I like it. A peaceful sound of a country garden, a picnic perhaps. Wait for it. Wasps, bunch of summer ruining jerks. Yes, and today's question comes from listener Andrew with exactly this in mind. What is it with wasps? He asks us, why do they need to be so annoying? Wait, though, because he's got a real being, his bonnet about this. A species dies out every day, he says. So would it be so bad if we just killed off all of the wasps? Entomologists would mourn them, sure, but nobody else would miss them. Wasps have no value. Can you convince me otherwise? These are bold words, Andrew. Challenge accepted. You know, I'm with you on this one. I think that wasps have been annoying humans since the dawn of picnics years. The date of the first picnic is unconfirmed, but we do know that wasps have been around for at least 240 million years, according to the fossil records. So wasps predate the first picnic by about 240 million years. Good math there, Dr. Walthanks. Thanks. Nice to see you rounding up. Wait, are you saying that you are on the side of these stripy jerks, then? Absolutely. Some of my best friends are entomologists. Right. Is Andrew right, then? Would entomologists miss wasps? Oh, God, yes. They've been championing wasps for years, decades, maybe centuries. This is a quote from Edward Latham Ormerod in his 1868 publication, British Social Wasps, which to be honest, I'm slightly disappointed you haven't read. So here in my best posh Victorian scientist voice, we do not readily appreciate the indirect benefits which we derive from the labours of wasps. We scarcely know what we owe to them so long as they can find themselves to the fertilization of flowers. Your posh Victorian voice is exactly the same as your normal voice. Right. May I continue? There is a few insects which as obviously minister to our comfort earned well-being as the honeybees, but from the large quantity of rotten wood, which they destroy, and of the flies and caterpillars which they consume, we may fairly regard wasps as no less our real benefactors. Wasps are doing all the hard work while bees just mucking around. Bees aren't just mucking around. Bees are amazing. Look, it's not a competition and besides wasps came first. This is what behavioral ecologist aka wasps lady, Serian Sumner, had to say on the matter. Wasps are the evolutionary root of all bees and ants. So ants and bees all evolved from a wasp-like ancestor. So you might think of bees as wasps that have forgotten how to hunt and ants are wasps that have lost the ability to fly. So you work for the wasps of marketing board here. You're trying to promote a better image. I don't know whether this is a good analogy or not, but it's the idea that a British holiday is just a trip to Blackpool. There's so much more to a British holiday than just a trip to Blackpool. In the same way, there are so many other facets to wasp life and it's just such a crying shame that's a handful of species have kind of tarred the reputation, the public image of what is otherwise a fascinating and rich taxonomic group. Okay, well done. You have found the wasps number one fan. I'm telling you, we are legion like wasps. It's actually only a couple of species that are particularly annoying when you are having your picnic. Collectively, these are the ones known as yellow jackets. There's vestibular vulgaris, which is a common wasp and vestibular Germanica, which is a German wasps. And they ask Serian if the yellow jacket's bad behaviour is typical. Well, there are about 150,000 species of wasps, but possibly three times that many, it depends because we really don't know much about wasps. But about half of the wasps species described so far are actually parasitoid wasps. So they don't have a sting. There won't be wasps that you even notice. There are these tiny little fly-like things that you might see inside your windows. But their reputation is so scarred by this small group of about 50 species from the vestibular wasps and the yellow jacket wasps that do tend to bother us. I'm willing to be persuaded. Should we talk about the history a bit? Because when you mentioned the parasitoid wasps, you'll know, and the listeners will know that I'm a keen Darwinologist, and he wrote a lot about parasitoid wasps. So these presumably are species that have been studied for centuries? Yes, I mean, parasitoids have always been of great interest. Paritoid wasps are really important agents of bio-control. So there are whole factories that farm particular types of parasitoids such that they can release them into their crop fields. And then those parasitoid wasps will disperse across the crop fields, lay their eggs in the pests, the insect pests that cause damage to the crops, and in doing so they help control insect pests. Well, that is very persuasive as a useful wasps. So that level of bio-control, that's parasitoid wasps. What about the irritating yellow jackets? Do they also have bio-control behaviors? We think they probably do. And if we look back in this sort of the old texts of the late 1800s, early 1900s, there's some beautiful anecdotes from what was actually an era of wasps fanatics it turns out. People really notice that wasps could be really important. These yellow jacket wasps in pest control and regulating these insect populations. Hang on, a parasitoid wasps the same ones as the yellow jackets? No, they not. So the yellow jackets is one genus, so it's one group of wasps, and the parasitoids which are abundant, there are thousands of species of them. And what they do is basically they lay their eggs inside the lava of another insect, and the wasps baby eats its way inside out. That's absolutely disgusting. Or awesome depending on your point of view. You know what they there's another similar story about wasps. You know figs delicious looking figs. I'm neutral on figs. Okay, well you're about to go below neutral on figs. So all of those figs that we eat, the female figs, turns out there is no way that they can ponder each other in the wind. The only way that figs can be ponderated is if they make themselves nice and attractive to wasps and then a wasp climbs inside and then lays eggs inside and then there's totally horrible wasp larvae will like worm their way out of the fig, but for the wasp to get inside it's such such tight hole that it tears her wings off so she can't get out she's trapped and the fig has worked out a way to digest the wasp. So when you are eating that juicy fig actually you're just eating wasp carcass juice. Yeah that is horrible, but that says to me that figs are disgusting not wasps. They're involved though aren't they? Wasps are there? There's symbiotic relationship. Yes, maybe I can see that round to you, but this parasitoid behaviour is in fact really useful for pollination and pest control. This is what wasp lady Dr Serian someone had to say about that. So people often ask how much a wasp colony, how much prey does it remove from your garden? It's vastly different depending on the size of the colony, but the estimates go from about 0.16 to 23 kilos of prey per season and that's a single colony. And so if you do a quick back at the envelope calculation based on aphids weighing about 0.2 milligrams, then a single wasp colony in your back garden in the UK could be removing about a quarter of a million aphids. So if you think about that as a service of biocontrol for your tomato plants for example, then maybe people can be persuaded that wasps are doing a good thing. I don't care about tomato plants. You are really not a fan. What's hurt you in a previous life? There's a particularly difficult event for my childhood. Well you're in the woods with my sisters and one of my sisters had a wasp land on her neck. So I pointed to her and was like there's a wasp, there's a wasp and in the act of her looking down to see where my finger was pointing she trapped the wasp in her neck. I know that's not funny. It's very funny. It's very funny. She was very angry with me. Anyway the point is that these are anecdotes. This is not data. What we need if we're scientists is data and you get that from experiments. So we have decided to set up our own wasp picnic just to see how pesky these critters can be or not. But as a result of social distancing I didn't get to go on the picnic at all. I was sitting in my studio bedroom whilst another wasp, our guru professor Adam Hart from the University of Gostershire where he got to do all the fun bit. I'm outside in my garden. It's glorious where the slightly windy so I'm sheltered by the lee of a child's tent from some camping expeditions across the weekend and I'm looking at a saucer with some jam and some fresh tune wealth not fresh tuna freshly open tin tuna and that's presumably your lockdown lunch is it? Well it depends how regularly we can get to the shops it might well be at some point but at the moment it's trying to be a lunch for some wasps. Tuna and jam that's possibly the jam but does they like tuna? Wasps are predators they actually spend most of their time going after things like caterpillars and so on so they like protein so these sorts of things can attract them just as much as later on in the season they tend to get attracted to all sweeter things. What are the wasps that you are hoping to attract with this delicious buffet? With this fabulous smorgasbord. The wasps we're trying to get hold of are the social wasps these are the yellow and sort of black stripy wasps the ones that classically bother us at picnics and they're the ones that live in large colonies sometimes in our loft sometimes in the ground and in other locations and they live in big societies kind of like honeybees and it's those social wasps that we're trying to get and there's really only a handful of those in the UK compared to the huge number of solitary wasps actually that most of us tend to look. What's the difference between a social and a solitary wasp? Just good at parties? Well we might think that the social wasps aren't particularly social but if we look inside their colony what we see is a societal setup that's really very sophisticated they have an individual that's the queen she is the largest wasp in there she's the one that does all the reproducing she's the one with the active ovaries and that's mated she's laying the eggs and all the other wasps that we see in generally the ones that are out bothering us later on in the summer they are the worker wasps and it's their job to keep the colony going to feed the young to build the colony up and to get to a point where they've got enough about them as a colony to start investing in new queens and new workers start rearing nose up to go into the next year and make the next generation of wasps so they're very very socially in that regard what they don't do unlike honeybees is spend the winter as a society as a colony towards the end of the summer they die off and it's only the mated new queens that overwinter and they're the ones that start the whole thing from scratch in the following spring now you've mentioned bees there everyone's fine with bees they're lovely and furry and they make honey but most people absolutely to test wasps and part of that is that they appear to be more aggressive they're a bit more annoying and they come after us at picnics is this fair no actually I don't think it is fair so let me recount a very common anecdote most people you mentioned earlier that bees are lovely and furry and fluffy and they make us honey actually those lovely furry fluffy bees that we often associate with making honey a bumblebees they don't make honey at all when you look at honeybees lots and lots of people mistake them for wasps so I think quite often wasps get a bad reputation it's fascinating that it is all about reputation there with regards to our interaction with these insects that basically bumblebees have just got really good PR and wasps have really blown it yeah bees have amazing PR honeybees of course they make honey and that's always going to be a big advantage right they make something that we like and at one point was a very valuable part of our medical cabinet and one of the only real sources of sugar you know they have wonderful PR and then you've got wasps and I think they're just seen as fugs yes they are I feel like you might have cut that interview short there look there is also a very serious side to all of this which is that every year around 10 people are killed by an anaphylactic response to be and wasps things in the UK and around twice as many of those come from reaction to wasps as opposed to bees and this is a very serious thing the only cure if you can call it that of this life threatening allergy is either to carry around an apy pen at all times or venom immunotherapy which essentially takes about three to five years and involves being injected with tiny amounts of venom to build up your tolerance over time yes well that that is serious and I am going to have to concede this point as well but for the vast majority of people stings are very painful but they're not that severe and it seems actually that the problem lies more with people's behaviour than with the wasps behaviour no it doesn't it lies with the fact that wasps the thugs he hunt as like predators just just wait let's go back to mind to you with Adam because I asked him why humans are such terrible wasp botherers we've got a few things operating really first of all we're quite tall generally and we're landmarks and lots of insects but wasps in particular like to use landmarks when they navigate around you often see them circling us and you'll see them doing it to bushes and trees as well they're not even bothered with us we're just a feature but of course they're mainly a problem when they're attracted to our food and towards the end of the summer the colony that they're from no longer has any larvae in there and the larvae play a really important role in some social wasps because the workers feed the larvae protein things like caterpillars and the larvae are able to convert that protein into sugars into carbohydrates they can produce a sort of sugary secretion that the workers get so it's thought that towards the end of the summer when those larvae aren't present in such numbers that the workers are perhaps looking for sugar and of course sweet sugary things are generally what we like to drink outside so that's part of the problem the other problem is that towards the end of the summer the colonies although they're on their way out actually have a very large number of workers in them so we have a large number of workers that are perhaps looking for sweet stuff combined with our behavior of being out in the garden getting the last rays of the summer sun eating outside and it ends up with wasps becoming quite an use since just for a week or two towards the end of the summer so for listener Andrew who wanted to know what the point of wasps is on balance wasps in the UK seem to be a good thing for our back gardens and our ecosystem i don't know about you if i am thus far entirely unconvinced by the evidence well that's because people like you are so into bees that as serian said no one gets to do actual wasps studies in in the wild so we're only really just beginning to understand the range of ecosystem services like as helpful predators or as pollinators that wasps actually do perform don't get me wrong wasps are probably not as important in pollination as bees are because of course they're primarily hunters aha i knew it can you just but they do visit plants because they need this sugar to keep them going they're not eating the prey themselves they're feeding that to their larvae but unlike bees most bees they are not very fussy they will visit any flower they're more or less generalists wasps are recorded visiting and putatively pollinating over 600 different species of plants and there's one particular study which has shown that in the absence of bumblebees as pollinators paper wasps can completely replace the pollinating services of those bees this is in a controlled greenhouse experiment so they remove the bumblebees and they put in the wasps the wasps were just as good at pollinating the plants as those bees you see she's making my point for me here bees fussy pollinators wasps they get the job done okay i'll concede one point to wasps for lacking the refined tastes of the gentile bee and being willing to just pollinate any tom d'icca or harry you can have that point you can have that well fine look the fact that wasps aren't that fussy about which plants they pollinate that makes them even better here's serian with some actual science we ran an experiment in Brazil where we set it up in a kind of semi natural greenhouse so it's like a big greenhouse but it was screens rather than glass and inside this big greenhouse we set up these different wasp colonies so these are tropical paper wasp called polisys satan as the names just they are truly stunningly beautiful but very scary looking large wasps and what we did is we gave them some crop plants some maize plants which we did infected with the full army worm which decimates crops across the world and we were interested to see if the presence of the wasps would help reduce the damage inflicted by these pests in any way we did indeed find there were much lower levels of damage on the plants it does provide us with the compelling evidence that these social wasps really could be doing a lot more for us in terms of biocontrol as natural enemies of pests so i love the idea that in the same way that we move honeybee colonies across the us to pollinate fields after fields with seasons we could set up festberries on the sides of crop plantations especially in developing countries that is an actual wasp biologist doing actual experiments and the wasp is called satan and it is successfully destroying armies and that is awesome i mean okay it's kind of awesome i accept that but you know what though while we are on the topic of putting wasp where we want them i want an update what have meant your wasp watch picnic yeah let's go live to an update of the wasp smorgasbord is it bringing all the wasps to Adam Hart's yard it is bringing no wasps to my yard actually i'm looking around i've got house martins feeding above me so they're obviously getting insects that are flying around but we're not getting any wasps and i think there's two reasons for that the first reason is i think we're actually quite early in the year for wasps it's often around about mid to end of July that we start seeing lots of workers appearing and the other problem is as you can probably hear it's quite windy today's this breeze may well be keeping whichever workers are around in the nest wow that was exciting uh yes i don't think we're going to be replacing spring watch anytime soon anyway back to serian's idea of a portable wasp armies which let's be honest sounds like the worst idea of all time yeah so humans we we don't have a terribly good track record of moving species around no because wasps have ended up in places they weren't supposed to be like New Zealand whereby now there are a lot of wasps the number of wasps the biomass of wasps is greater than anything in the beach forest which is the largest intact indigenous forest that we have in New Zealand so the biomass of wasps in summer is greater than all the birds all of the rats all of the stodes lizards and other insects combined in those areas you know it's just so out of balance this is ball brown who is a researcher at land care research just outside of Christchurch in New Zealand most of the things that makes the news these days are whenever there's a giant multi-year nest that's found and these can be maybe three meters tall or something like that and have literally millions of wasps in them for some reason whenever the German wasps were introduced here they've got this trait where they can become perennial nests and they can get massive and i mean yeah they're really scary wasps nests there are three meters tall did you hear that i don't you hear that here's how it happens it all kind of started just at the end of world war two some aircraft parts were sent over from the UK and they had some overwintering German wasps queens in there and those arrived in Hamilton and you know people had bigger problems to worry about at that time and by the time the next year rolled around they had been established so they just showed up and found it to be a paradise here New Zealand a paradise for many but particularly it seems for the stripy gets of the flying insect wild yeah well New Zealand is a particularly interesting place for evolutionary biology and here's Dr James Russell is a conservation biologist at the University of Auckland so 18 million years ago when Australia and New Zealand and other neighboring islands and continents were joined up that was known as Launduana land and New Zealand was one of the first landmasses to break off from that and that was before mammals had actually evolved it was still a land of dinosaurs and birds and so what happened is birds really evolved to become like mammals so we have birds like the coca co which is like the squirrel of the trees and we had little rins and sniped which were like the rats of the forest that just scuttle around on the ground so that's what made New Zealand unique and it's actually what makes every oceanic island around the world unique they never had an opportunity for four-legged land mammals to get out to them what's all of this got to do with what well it's all connected isn't it is ecosystems and complex food webs and a whole ecosystem untouched by humans for literally tens of millions of years when did humans turn up to New Zealand about the 11th century that's quite late then yeah most history had already happened and you see even as the last major landmass to get colonized by humans 1066 was a wordy underway before there were humans in New Zealand exactly so when the Maori arrived and aotearoa as it is called they arrived in about the 10th or 11th century and they brought friends with them because humans always do when we move they brought with them the pacific rat and hunting dogs and none of these mammals had ever been on these islands before so the ecosystems and the species on them just weren't adapted to predatory mammals which hunt by smell and use their teeth so birds certainly were familiar with predators they were used to being hunted by birds but their defense for being hunted by bird is to stay very still but when you stand very still but you have this lovely pungent smell of a seabird or a cacapoe that just makes it all the easier for a cat just to walk up to you and eat you and indeed these first people that came to all of these islands including New Zealand just describe how you could just walk up and and whack a bird on the head with a stick okay so New Zealand has got a long history then of struggling with invasive species yeah that is exactly right and yellow jacket wasps are no exception which does line up with what Bob was saying we don't have any social bees or social wasps so whenever these wasps showed up the native fauna had no resistance to them whatsoever there also wasn't anything evolved to prey on these so they had no natural enemies and next to no competition for resources and so these wasps are really good at adapting to new food sources they've got this ability to learn new sense that associate a smell with a new food source if you were going to design something to be in invasive species the vestibular wasps would be one of those things can I just say that again if you were to design an invasive species wasps would be it that's anyway I'm with our questioner Andrew I think we just kill them all yeah unfortunately it is not that easy pesticides are not always the best idea that's okay though because Bob Brown is trying something else the last four or five years I've been coming to their native range so we now know through genetic tests that the German wasps and the common wasps that are in New Zealand the majority of them the genes say that they've come from southern England so I've been coming to southern England to open up nests and to look to see what is living in there you know what kind of natural enemies I can find in the nests and to see if there's a possible bio control agent that could be released here they go then you just get some other species that can eat the wasp and you know Bob's got some candidates for this by the way there is a hoverfly called a lesser hornet fly and there's a beetle called the meadowicus both of which is young will eat the wasp larvae in their nests problem solved easy peasy yeah that's some real nice science you got going and I'm really interesting but like the man says life does find a way and once you introduce one thing that eats another thing and that gets out of control you then have to bring something else to eat that and before long you've got the old lady who swallowed a fly then a spider then a bird and eventually she swallows a horse she's dead of course exactly and we do have to be extraordinarily careful with this type of thing New Zealanders are unsurprisingly cautious these days as a whole licensing and approval process that they have to go through when it comes to invasive species though aren't wasps or at least giant wasps also grabbing the headlines for being a little bit invaded now you must be talking about giant hornets I might have to concede this point as well this is what it sounds like when a European native hornet worker attacks a microphone yeah that's a hard no for me yeah yeah now you might have seen stories about invasive Asian hornets recently here's Adam Hart to explain now this is the tremendous problem with common names so the Asian hornets that we talk about in this country is a species called Vespa Velutinate it's actually smaller than our regular common European hornets it is invasive it is coming through sweeping through Europe it is causing a problem for beekeepers but it is not the very large hornet which is rather unhelpfully described in the American press as being the murder hornet that is that is vestibular mandarinia and that is a huge animal it's the biggest social wasps it's an incredibly impressive beast it's got a very large sting it's a fabulous fabulous fabulous insect there are reports of those over in Washington state I believe limited reports so I think we can say it's invading over there yet but it has been spotted there coming over from eastern Asia but that is not the species that we're talking about when we're talking Britain about the Asian hornets that is a different species altogether it's characteristic really is that it's small for a hornet it is smaller than the UK hornet which is I think one of the most spectacular insects we have here in the UK when you see a big hornet in this country flying around you know you've seen something pretty cool pretty much they keep themselves to themselves they can give you an arstie sting but they're not to be feared but they are pretty spectacular I actually just ducked can I take you back to that age old conflict between what some bees there is no conflict but go on okay so Asian giant hornets they want to get into bees nests when they get in there they cause all kind of havoc this is kind of game over for the bees it's not good for the bees the way that they do it is they go out and look scouting mission on their own and then calling all their mates to come in and eat the bees but bees can survive just slightly higher temperatures than hornets can so what they do if they find a hornet coming towards their nest all the bees jump on it massive bee bundle and then flat their wings simultaneously raising the temperature just to the point where it's too hot for the hornet to survive but not hot enough to affect the bees total genius it's it's absolutely astonishing and please don't write in in response to what I'm about to say which is that it's an example of an evolutionary adaptation which is so awesome and absurd at the same time that in my quieter moments I question whether it's correct or not it's just absolutely phenomenal but that's kind of the point though because this is an example of an evolutionary arms race is what we call it an evolutionary biology where you know you've got a predator who evolves a really particular ability that helps it attack a prey but then the prey will evolve a way to evade that particular attack and you have this sort of step-like process an arms race the problem here is that the Asian giant hornet has evolved in Japan alongside Japanese honeybees and it's the Japanese honeybees which have evolved this hornet baking ability and so when Asian giant hornets turned up in America in the last few years American honeybees they haven't evolved alongside the hornet so they don't have it so the Asian hornets have found a well a free reign to slaughter as many honeybees as they can possibly get their jaws on and eat them and eat them to death but I think we need to go back to so in some as earlier idea about traveling vestberies because it turns out they wouldn't need to use non-native species. The really brilliant thing about using social wasps in biocontrol particularly in developing countries or tropical areas is that the wasps are there ready in waiting we don't need to import any wasps we don't need to introduce any alien species you can just make do with the wasps on your doorsteps and that's actually very different to the parasitoids that have been developed for biocontrol are often introduced species and as you say they calm with all of that baggage of the problems associated with an invasive species. So anyone who's handled a wasps nest will know that it's made of that sort of almost crisp paper like substance and we know that wasps have been around for a lot longer than humans so which came first wasp paper or human paper? Wasp paper wasps invented paper millions of years before we even thought about it and in fact there's a really lovely story I don't know if it's true but I like it that's the origins of humans learning how to make paper comes from observing these paper wasps making their nests. So the story goes that a Chinese unit sitting under his tree happened to watch a wasps scrape the bark off for tree and then move it up into its mandibles chew it up a bit and then fly up to its nest and he watched it and made this beautiful thin paper material and he thought that's a brilliant idea I'm going to do that and there was born paper it's conceivable I guess. If that were true that would be the most astonishing example of cultural transmission. Wouldn't it exactly so if there is any reason to appreciate wasps the paper wasps in particular it would be that perhaps without wasps we would never have paper or books and where would we be in the transmission of information and learning without paper? Well I don't believe it for a second but I will continue to I will repeat it. Okay all right I can see that is quite cool there might be some point to us. Finally and this is a well documented time of extraordinary insects decline you know really serious dystopian staff the amount of insects that we're actually losing is terrifying and so we need every pollinating and pest controlling insects going Adam Hart and Serian Sumner they've been running a citizen science project since 2017 called the big wasps survey to find out just how wasps are doing in the face of all this adversity that all insects are facing you can find out more about that on this week's program page which is at bbc.co.uk slash curious cases so far wasps are providing us with an unexpected bit of good news as far as this overall depressing story goes. The common yellow jacket wasps seem to be doing pretty well despite the fact that we're destroying habitats and whatnot the fact that they still seem to be doing okay is actually I think a reassuring story that they possibly do have some level of resilience to environmental change and anthropogenic pressures a world without wasps could be a pretty messy insect ridden play ridden planet. So Dr. Rutherford when it comes to weather wasps are busy picnic ruining jerks can we say case sold yes Dr. Fry we can wasps are awesome not the conclusion I came to but wasps are less fussy pollinators than bees which means they could be used to cultivate crops but they are perfectly suited as invasive species which means you need to be cautious about introducing or removing them from a habitat only two species of yellow jackets are the complete thugs who give more than 150,000 species a bad rep can we just get rid of them then no wasps for the win call it a draw okay fine yeah let's call that a score draw I mean I genuinely think that the interesting point that Serium was making there was that there isn't a lot of wasp research despite the fact that they are more numerous and have been around longer and clearly do lots of important things wasps more than bees yeah but you know there's this whole concept of charismatic animals that we devote lots of research and conservation efforts to exactly like pandas to animals that are pretty to look at when in fact you know if Indonesian seagrass goes extinct which it probably will do in the next 50 years the whole eastern seaboard of the Pacific is basically really in big big trouble but try and persuade anyone to get interested in Indonesian seagrass are you saying it's got more of an impact than pandas yes are you saying you hate pandas not as much as you hate wasps you know what I do really genuinely love bees I think they're really brilliant I'm getting that vibe definitely getting that vibe so my uncle right is quite famous beekeeper what famous how just in beekeeping circles he's kind of like a big deal in the beekeeper anyway so in my cousin got married right had this big wedding in Ireland and in celebration of the wedding he set up two bee hives like see through hives one on the left hand side where he painted the queen pink and one on the right hand side where he painted the queen blue well I'm not really into those gender stereotypes I mean all right fine and also that they're both queens and the workers are just in fertile and rubbish I mean you have to sort of gloss over it all of the gender I mean also you would think that for an outdoor wedding where there's loads of cake and sort of champagne around but maybe sex around wasn't the greatest idea but that illustrates just how nice bees are because nobody got done and also presumably the pride was wearing a veil so looked a bit like a beekeeper I'd say that was the right no no no you know what they like so there's this big trade in queens this big sort of black market trade and all the beekeepers they put them in little matchboxes and they post them to each other there's like bees in the post is that legal I don't know that's really weird anyway I think wasp's vb's may run belong the parasitoid wasps those types of stories that we a couple of which we mentioned the fig story which you told me which I did not know and it's quite hard to be I never read a fig again no way I don't really like figs but just definitely not now just to say the crunchy bits inside figs are seeds not dead wasps can you be sure maybe not but some of those stories are so they were sort of almost unbelievable in terms of like the parasitoid nature laying an egg inside another grub and then it eats it from the inside out and then bursts out it's like hey I'm here and there are loads of other examples this one this is not from bees and wasps but the alkan blue butterfly which is a very very beautiful blue butterfly but it also a jerk I said unbelievable evil evil get what it does it lays its eggs inside ants borrows it's even got a technique which I'm struggling to remember where it drops its egg nearly ant nest and I think it drops a pheromone as well someone writing and corrects this rambling story but the ants think it's a they think this grub is a ant even though it's like four times the size of looks nothing like an ant so they bring it in and then they raise it and feed it and even though it looks absolutely nothing like this is called cocoing as in cocoos who do exactly the same things facing their eggs in on other birds nest exactly exactly and then one day this butterfly emerges from this egg and at which point the ants go what the hell yeah it's like here are you I mean it go there was an ant egg there even though it looks nothing like an ant egg and now there's flipping butterfly in and so they all attack it but the alkan blue as it's running from from the nest it has these sort of scales on it which it sheds as they chlorate it coming apart yeah exactly they're pulling off the bits of it and then it flies off and you every time you see an alkan blue and you think I want a beautiful butterfly underneath that you got a real jerk at least it didn't like kill all the ants then that's where I thought that story was going I'm sure I've left a bit out of this story because I haven't thought about it for a long time there's an amazing amazing study once into the complexity of ant colonies which I thought was really brilliant they were looking particularly I think it was it American red ants because it's essentially like a complex system right as you said there's no hierarchy in these systems there's no sort of chain of command there's none of that stuff and yet these extraordinarily complex boroughs just emerge from this very small rules that each and its following so complex instantly that they have what is effectively like an air conditioning system in it they're like deliberately deposit organic waste in these little pockets of these sort of chambers and as that rot that changes the temperature of the air and pulls air through these systems right so that's the amazing anyway the studies that looked into this which was really brilliant the way that they studied it they poured concrete into living ants nest what to make a cast of it just yet and all of the ants and it died yeah it goes back to our point about you know charismatic animals should we do cure the weak yeah let's do cure over the week all right cure over the week this time is a lovely lady called Kiran Nicole now Kiran Nicole sent us a tweet not very long ago she wrote as a former forensic scientist turned illustrator I like to listen to the rather than fry podcast as I paint they are very funny and clever thank you very much now hang on who knew is her next sentence what we knew thank you I need to update my portfolio and so here is my homage to rather than fry and she send us through a little tweet of her picture but yeah Adam you don't need to look at that tweet picture because she actually also you don't know this she actually also separately communicated with me posted me the painting I've had it framed and I've got it up in my wall are you what why have you got that let me see she's passing me her phone here oh that's really nice it's very good why have you got it why is mine look I just was first on the list that it's such a I'd love this it's got molder and skull it's got a molder and skully feel to it you're looking wistfully into the distance I'm looking even more wistfully into the middle distance and I've got a much more angular than my post lockdown jowls I think there's a hint of the vulcan about your ear a little bit pointy I'll take that there's a lot of the skully about your hair though yes this is true this is very true so that is amazing I'm enjoying all the artwork that's coming in particularly when it ends up in my house that's my favourite is this just another one of those things where you know for 16 series it's basically been us experiencing things that we want to do a little bit of therapy and now just acquiring art yes now just acquiring art so okay if you want to send us in some art and be cura over the week if you want to send us in anything else that you've been doing including any wasp versus b chat then please do to curiouscases at bbc.co.uk also send us in questions we've got another few episodes in this series and another series of questions worth to fill until next time though buzz off oh god that's such a dad joke isn't it so rubbish sorry about that people ready
