Well hello, Curios. So, a few weeks into 2021 and things have gone entirely according to plan. Do you remember when we started this series and we said that we are doing double, double, double the length episodes, 30 minutes and double the length series of 12 episodes, but we added in the caveat that that depends on what 2020 might throw at us. Well, 2020 has thrown and so too apparently has 2021. Yes, so all that's meant is we're now into third lockdown which has put a crimp on our plans. It has. When you add in alongside a global pandemic, just a little sprinkle of schools being closed, of course, Adam and I both have children, maybe a little hint, a little whisper of healthcare problems amongst our team, maybe a little smattering too over some studio problems within the BBC. Yes, well all those beautiful ingredients come together with the resulting meal being exactly two episodes short of the four mentioned 12. Yes, now what we've had to do for these final two episodes in the series, we have gone back through our catalogue and we have put together double episodes of our favourite questions that we've ever been asked. Yes, and you might have forgotten these, the fuck we've certainly have, we don't remember any of the content of this, but the first of these is our episodes on hand in us. Yes. We were righty or a lefty. This was one of the first things that we did in our first year. This is back in October 2016. So almost five years ago, right? We did this particular program. And the broadcasting rule is that if it's more than three years ago, then we have literally no memory of it ever having happened before. Clean slate. So I am excited to find out what's going to happen over the next half an hour. So this episode is about hand in us. So whether you're a lefty or a righty. And it's our two double parser from before stitched together. Well, hello, wave's hand, right hand. Well, thank you for all of the excellent questions that you've sent into curious cases at bbc.co.uk for us to investigate. Yes, I've been always truly spectacular. And today we are bringing you the curious case of the sinister hand sent in from Neil Shepperson on Twitter, he asks. What determines left or right-handedness and why are us lefties in the minority? Well, to start, maybe we should explain the title. Why is it called the sinister hand? Well, 90% of us are right-handed, only 10% of us are left-handed. And lefties being in the minority haven't always had the easiest right. I'm not just talking about fountain pens or using scissors. Yes, because sinister is Latin for left-handed, a word associated with evil. And meanwhile, left comes from the Anglo-Saxon word, luft, which means weak. Loft. And the opposite in Latin is dexter, which is always associated with skill and righteousness and dexterity. So, Hannah, sinister or dexter, what hand do you use to write? At my right hand. How about throwing a ball? Uh, badly with my right, even worse with my left. Now, I'd like you to open this can of fizzy pop. Right hand again. Indeed. Okay, so this is all part of a longer test from which we can deduce that you are actually 100% right-handed, as indeed I am, although it's not true for everyone, some people are mixed-handed. Indeed. Only 62% of us prefer our right hand for every task, which does make both you and I add a mother-ford, pretty boring and quite average. So, what makes us right or left-handed? Well, to start to answer today's question, I consulted a handy guide. I'm Chris McManus, professor at Psychology at UCL. I'm right-handed. I have a left-handed daughter and a left-handed mother. And what about true ambidextrous? Are there people who are genuinely equally-handed? No, really. So, all people have a preference. Yeah, I have a theory that ambidextres don't exist. When I get people into my lab and I give them tests where they have to do things as quickly as possible with the right hand, quickly as possible with the left hand, I never find anybody who's equally good and equally fast with both hands. They're confusing being mixed-handed with being ambidextrous. What they mean is they write with their right hand and they throw with their left hand. We mostly talk about hand-edness here, but also, there are lots of other hand-ednesses in the body, aren't they? Yes, we're full of asymmetries. In general, I tend to say that 10% of people are left-handed, 20% are left-footed, 30% are left-eyed and 40% are left-eared. Left-eyed, gone. Explain left-eyed. Look through a keyhole and tell me which I use. I think it's my left. There you go, your left-eyed. That's interesting. But when it comes to left-handedness, where does this one-in-10 ratio come from? Well, one way to investigate this mystery is to look back through our evolutionary past, which is exactly what Primaton just professed and Linda Morshant from Miami University has done. Now, Linda is a lefty and she began studying wild apes in Africa to try and find out where the left handers are in the minority there too. My goal is to basically record everything that they do with their hands. And how do you determine then whether chimpanzees left or right-handed? So, you're following Fifi. She's decided she's going to termite fish. And what lots of chimpanzees do is that they collect tools on their way to the termite mound, so they arrive with their tools in their mouths and their hands. And then she's going to inspect the mound visually. She'll take a fingernail and she'll kind of probe and what she tries to do is open up that tunnel, then she takes the tool in her hand. This is where she's going to show her preference. And she's going to carefully insert that tool down to that tunnel and she's going to carefully pull it out and then she's going to nibble those soldier termites off there. So, within an individual chimpanzee, do you see a clear preference for one hand over the other? Tool use, they will show strong individual preferences. It's often more like a 50-50. Right, so chimps are roughly equally split, half-righties and half-southpores. But what about other animals? An Australian study revealed that all some of the crested cockatooes were left footed. Humpback whales like to slap one of their flippers on the surface of the sea and three quarters of choose their right. Some speckled wing butterflies have a left wing that is larger than the right, allowing them to fly in tight circles, dodging predators and increasing the chances of finding a mate. But, as far as we know, nowhere in the animal kingdom do we see this 1910 split between righties and the lefties. So when did this odd glitch crop up in our evolutionary past? A clue, Linda told me, came from an unusual source, Neanderthal's teeth. When they look at the where pattern on Neanderthal teeth, and you can't see my hands, but imagine if you could, I am going to anchor something in my teeth. Like a piece of meat. Exactly, perfect. Imagine I'm clenching it in my teeth, and then because I'm a right-handed Neanderthal for you right now, I'm going to take my left hand, I'm going to pull it away from my teeth. In my right hand, I've got a knife, and I'm basically working this thing. Soaring cutting out my teeth. Yes, yes, and by accident, I scratch my incisors so that there is damage on the incisors. And, you know, in some of those Neanderthals, we do get the reverse pattern. We see what would have been a left-handed Neanderthal, but the proportion of the population looks right. That is awesome. There is so much science hiding in Neanderthal teeth. There certainly is. And these researchers calculated that 90% of Neanderthals were right-handed. Exactly the same ratio as humans today. But this ratio is a bit of a puzzle in an evolutionary sense. If only 10% of us are left-handed, it's not advantageous enough to become dominant, but not detrimental enough to have disappeared altogether. So I put this to our hand-edness expert, Chris McNannis. It's a very difficult percentage. If 50% of us were right-handed, there'd be nothing to explain. If 100% of us were right-handed, it'd be pretty easy. The real problem is that it's 90% and with all complex human behaviours, it's always a combination of genes and environment, the age-old nature of nurture. What do we think? We can begin to get at that one interestingly because of the work over the last 15, 20 years, looking at fetuses in the womb. Because once real-time ultrasound scanning came into obstetrics, people realised they could watch the fetus behaving. Often they were sucking their thumb and 90% of them were sucking their right thumb. They were right-handers and the ones who suck their left thumb were the left-handers. And this is in uterine in the womb. Oh, this is three months before birth. That's a preference. It's not a skill. You don't suck your thumb skillfully. You just dig it in. Which leads us to say that there is definitely a genetic component to being left-handed. I think so, yes. For long while we assume that had to be just one gene. And about four or five years ago, we did a study where we looked at about 6,000 individuals, couldn't find a single gene which associated with being right-handed or left-handed. We came to the eventual conclusion that it could well be as many as 40 or more genes, determining hand in this. So that's Chris McNeiless from University College London. Nowadays we can see natural selection in our DNA, but when you've got that many, it makes it very hard to spot. Sure, and this doesn't explain why left-handers have managed to survive from an evolutionary perspective with such a small ratio. There are some scenarios where being in a minority definitely has its advantages, like being a South-Paw and Boxing or playing tennis. Right-handers have to adapt their tactics to playing against lefties. Sure, but those sports aren't exactly an evolutionary precedent. Not really, though. This could also, of course, just be a random work. Now, both of us are right-handed. Very much, though. My left-hand is practically incompetent. Well, that kind of rules out answering the question sent in by Hannah Porter, who emailed curious cases at BBC.co.uk to say, as a fellow Hannah and a palindrome, and also a left-hander, are Hannah's more statistically likely to be left-handed? Well, I'm sorry, no, because from the off, I am a writing counterpoint to you there. I am a palindrome, though, so that's pretty good. But there aren't many very good datasets that list people's hand-edness, certainly not listed against their names. So we can't say if Hannah's are more likely to be left-handed. And in our sample of two, it's split with two feet in. But there are, in fact, nationwide databases on hand-edness, and it's not always and tend to one right-to-left split. Is it not? Is it not universal or the question from countries? Well, one study found that the Netherlands has the world's highest prevalence of left-handedness at 13.23%. That's the ratio on that? Is it the clocks? I think it might be the clocks. In the UK, we're 12.2% left. In the US, 13.1% Canada, 12.8%. I mean, they're all around the same sort of number. Elsewhere, rates of left-handedness are far lower. China's a good example. Only 3.5% in people in China predominantly use their left-handedness. Yeah, but you said use then. That's slightly different, right? Because you're changing the question. It might be that people in China are naturally left-handed, but have been, I don't know, encouraged to use that right-handed, instead because of different attitudes toward left-handedness. Yeah, well, that's true, because some cultures definitely have different attitudes towards things like this. There was a 2007 study from Taiwan, which suggested that almost two-thirds of left-handed children had been forced to convert from left-handedness to right-handedness. Well, it wasn't that long ago that leftists were being forced to write with their right hands in British schools. Right, and we're back to the whole sinister, sinister hand. It said spooky voice on the script, so that was my spooky voice. Anyway, we've heard that this is roughly 10 to 1 bias in humans. We're very unusual in this regard, so this got us thinking, well, why does it exist at all? And our lefty is different. Now, some researchers point to a link between left-handedness and conditions like autism and dyslexia, but others say that left-handed is a more creative. And is this related to the notion that some people are left or right-brained? Well, I have been told in the past, actually, I must be right-brained, because I am insufferably logical. Not insufferably, but you want mathematicians to be logical. A little bit, I guess. The logical mathematician is hopeless, but the real question is, does it make your brain lopsided? Well, to get to the bottom of that, I consulted my favourite neuroscientist, Professor Sophie Scott. You often see tests on the internet asking whether you're left-brained or right-brained, and whether that makes you more emotional or analytical. Is there any truth to any of that? No, I'm sure it's possible that people might vary in how emotional and analytical they are, but that almost certainly doesn't relate in a simple way to you, like loading more heavily on one hemisphere or the other. There are definitely differences between the left side of the brain and the right side of the brain. So in most people, language, that's something that that lives, if you like, in the left side of the brain, and the right side of the brain is associated with lots of nonverbal stuff, like understanding melody and music or recognising faces. How does being left-handed or right-handed translate to what's going on in your brain? What happens when we act on the world and when we perceive the world is that the opposite side of the brain deals with the other side of the body. So when I'm moving my right hand, it's actually the left brain that's in charge of that in terms of motor control, and there is a bit of the brain rather delightfully called the hand knob. I don't know if you can find the business of the brain that represents and sort of controls hand movements. I can't believe I didn't know that there was an area of the brain called the hand knob. You know, I thought you'd like that bit, Adam, but the important fact to keep in mind for the rest of this program and have to be honest, the thing that does make the quite tricky in places is that the left side of the brain controls the right hand and vice versa. You have this cross-wiring in the body. Fine, I think I can just about manage that. Now, Sophie mentioned that for most of us, the capacity for language sits in the left side of our brain in what's called Brockers area. Now, in the 1960s, scientists studying Brockers area devise an experiment called dichotic listening, which we're going to do on you now. So to play along, you need to put on a pair of stereo headphones, make sure you get the ears the right way around. And if you're listening to this on the radio, you can download the podcast on the BBC website and then have a listen to this. Be it. Popped. Dished. Doomed. Dove. Weave. Clam. That was really quite weird. Okay, but what words did you hear? Rot. Dove. Clam. So those were all words that were being played into your right ear. So there wasn't the left ear word. Beared. Pump. Dish. Doomed. Loaf. Weave. Now, for most people, the words in their right ear are processed much more precisely. And all of that is controlled in the left hemisphere of your brain, where most people have their language centres. So for right-handed people, it means that they have the same side of their brain in charge of language and their dominant hand. According to psychologist Professor Chris McManus, author of right hand, left hand, that connection is no accident. My theory this is that it's the same genes that make us right or left-handed. They're pushing our hand-ditness control centres into either one hemisphere or the other. They're also pushing language into one hemisphere or the other. Why would there be a connection between the language area of your brain and the hand motor control areas of your brain? Language requires a lot of very fast processing. But actually, if you think about what you do with the tips of your fingers, when you're writing, your fingers are moving incredibly fast in a very precise way. And if you're making a stone tool, everything has to be made with great precision in timing. So I think probably the left hemisphere is actually faster. It's got a higher clock speed if you like. You've got yourself a 400-megahurt rather than the 200-megahurt. So if it was a computer, something like that. So Chris's idea goes like this. Speech and language is in the left brain for most people. Around two million years ago, when humans began to evolve language, that side of the brain also became dominant in controlling our right-handedness. Because that was the most efficient way for our brains to work with language and hand control both managed by the same side. Sounds good, but if that was absolutely the case, surely it would make sense for left-handed people to have their brains flipped around the other way. So their language centres, along with their control for their dominant hand, all in the right-hand side of the brain. Yeah, a bit of a problem there. See, we don't see that. 30% of left-handers have their speech centres on the same side as right-handers. So it's not flipped. And then 5% of right-handers have language on the opposite side to what you expect to. Studying humans is really complex. Yes, it is. But there is another theory in town, a new hypothesis about hand-dness and the brain that doesn't involve language at all. And it starts with the tale of Charles Dickens in his Twilight years. Age 57 Dickens was on a grueling farewell tour of public readings, and thus to notice some rather strange symptoms. He was rushed to see the Queen's doctor, Sir Thomas Watson, who reported thus. He has some odd feeling of insecurity about his left leg, as if there was something unnatural about his heel. Also, he spoke of some strangeness of his left hand and arm, an unreadiness to lift his hands, especially his left hand, when, for instance, he was brushing his hair. The following year Dickens had an even stranger experience, walking up Oxford Street's famous shopping parade in London. He suddenly couldn't read signs above the shops that lay on the left hand side of the road. He collapsed at dinner on the 8th of June 1870 and died the following evening. And it was later discovered that Dickens had damaged to the right hemisphere of his brain. The symptoms he showed just before death seemed to mirror what we now know as left neglect. Here's Sophie Scott again. People with left neglect just behave like the left side of space is not there. So a man shaving himself in the mirror will only shave the right side of his face and somebody eating a meal will only eat the food on the right side of the lady. And not even realise that there is... They're just gnawing the other side. Exactly. And it's not that they can't see that side of space and it's not that they can't hear things on that side. It seems to be hard to actually pull attention over to that side of space. Now you get left neglect after damage mostly to the right side of the brain. Remembering the right side of the brain is responsible for attention to the left side of space and vice versa. Now what people have started to think is that this might suggest that actually attention in the left side of the brain and the right side of the brain operate slightly differently. The attention system in the left side of the brain is really really focused and it's really really strong. Whereas the attention system in the right side of the brain is much more diffuse. Such that if you damage the attention system in the right side of the brain you just get this really focused right pulling over which means that you ignore the left because you can't disengage from this stuff pulling you over to the right hand side. Right there were a lot of left and right in there so I need you to do that again for me please. So let's say that you're right handed. Your right hand side is dominant because one half of your brain, your left half, is really really focused on what your right side is doing. Meanwhile the other half of your brain is taking care of the bigger picture and that means if you damage the right hand side of your brain, the one giving you the big picture, you no longer have anything paying attention to the left side of your body. All that remains is the very sharp focused attention on your dominant right side. Right, I mean, no not right, I mean okay, that does make sense but that only makes sense if you're right handed. What about for lefties? Well the evidence is starting to emerge that you do not find left neglect in left handed people. Right so now I'm really confused how does that work. Okay so the theory here is that brain areas and left handers are flipped over so there it's the right brain that's fine tuned to pay attention to the left side of the body so you're still left with a big picture even when a left hander does damage to the right side of their brain. What we're getting here is that whether you're right or left handed, it could just be down to which side of your brain is better at paying focused attention. Yeah correct one, that's the theory anyway. Okay that's one of the ideas about what's different in lefty brains but does any of this have any effect on behavior? I'm Dorothy Bishop and I'm professor of developmental neuropsychology at the University of Oxford. I became interested in hand in this research because I myself am left handed and I always wondered why I was different from other people. During her research Dorothy came across hundreds of stories about how left handers are somehow different. There have been all sorts of claims over the years linking hand in this with various disabilities things like dyslexia and autism. On the other hand there have been things linking to positive attributes like it's been claimed that architects are more like you to be left handed or musicians. In general the evidence isn't all that good. If I go and look at all the left handers I can find you know a thousand left handers from the general population and compare them to a load of right handers. The odds of me finding any difference between them in things like intelligence or music ability or reading ability is pretty poor but then if I turn the question on its head and I say let me find people who are having major problems with their language development or who have a known condition such as Down syndrome. What's the hand in this distribution there? It is the case that you then are more likely to find it's closer to 50-50 rather than the usual 90% right handed 10% left. What it also tells us is that it's not the left hand in this itself that is creating problems. It's more that it can be a symptom of some underlying condition but in most people it doesn't seem that it has any significance at all for intellectual cognitive development. So there you go then left handers can take some of this. It does not affect your cognitive development. Yes but on the other hand, it might not be the source of your creative genius either. Okay but Adam we can't go without talking about right and left handness in things other than humans and animals. Well like scissors or milk pans or corkscrews milk pans. Yeah milk pans are always right handed. Oh what could they have got a little spout on it? Yeah there's a whole domain of right handed milk pans. Okay that's I mean I have learned something new today but no I'm not talking about those. Those are tools that are made specifically for left or right handed people. I'm talking about something that's much much smaller molecules in fact because these can be left or right handed too. Professor of chemistry at UCL and our favourite chemist Andrea Selle explains. One of the really kind of crucial discoveries of the 19th century and it's interesting it was Louis Pasteur the man that we associate with vaccines who actually first discovered that molecules had this property of handness and in many ways this should be very very familiar you know especially Adam you often convey about the fact that people draw DNA wrong. If you think about DNA DNA is a spiral is a helix and that helix you could imagine drawing it to the left or you could draw it to the right. Now real DNA we know has the spiral to the left but what that really reflects is the fact that some of the building blocks of DNA they have this handedness property. The technical term we use is chirality and so left handed people are extremely familiar with this idea of chirality because of scissors and that kind of thing but molecules themselves can be chiral and so you always have a pair of molecules you have what you might call the left handed the other one the right handed and chemists have developed a whole series of different ways to describe them and so there is something called the RS nomenclature there is the plus minus nomenclature there's even the delta and lambda nomenclature and this is to really describe all the different kinds of possibilities where a molecule can exist in two forms. Now these chiral molecules are in fact mirror images of each other but there is that kind of classic phrase that they are not super impulsible in other words like a left and a right hand if you put the hand one on top of the other they don't map their mirror images so chiral molecules exist like this but of course not all molecules are chiral. So I guess along hydrocarbon polymer and the buckyballs that you know the famously named Buckminster Fullerine they can't be chiral because being a ball of carbon atoms they have mirror planes so you can flip them over any which way and they're still basically the same molecule but the question is is this important? Now this becomes really important because when you think about how a protein coils up right it will fold itself up it's made of chiral building blocks and it will form a chiral structure and the proteins you know they are the enzymes that workhorse machines within cells they're also the receptors the binding sites for signaling and those binding sites are in fact chiral you know when you take a pair of headphones you know those those little earbuds and you stick them in your ears and you suddenly realize that you've got them on backwards or you know you take your shoes and you put them on well you know you've got to put the left foot into the left shoe otherwise it won't work properly and so this is absolutely critical because if in fact you take the wrong version of a molecule and you put it into a biological system it will be having completely unpredictable ways and the most infamous example of this was a substance called thalidomide and this was a drug that was given to women in the late 50s early 1960s around the time when I was born which was designed to deal with the nausea associated with pregnancy and in that sense it was a wonder drug but there was a big problem with it months later the children who had been exposed to this were born with very very severe side effects I remember children who had hands essentially attached to their shoulders shriveled legs that kind of thing now where does this come from the problem is that thalidomide exists in these two forms the left-handed and the right-handed form and it turns out that only one of the two is active for the morning sickness in fact thalidomide is a really weird one because on top of this issue where you might imagine that if you gave only one form you would be okay thalidomide is a difficult molecule because it turns out that in humans the molecule gets transformed from one form to the other and so even if you were to give the pure active form you would end up with the birth defects in spite of your best attempts it's just a reminder of the kinds of thinking and the amount of testing and quality control which is actually required in order to get an active drug so doctor fri when it comes to the case of the sinister hand can we say case solved well handness or corality is a thing in molecules and it's very important as well as in animals and humans the average ratio of one in ten left-handers is unique to us and sprang up somewhere between chimpanzees and humans that's for the cause we do know it's partially genetic but we're still trying to track down the precise combination of genes responsible and we did discover that language and control of your dominant hand tends to be in the same hemisphere of your brain but not always it might be that being right to left-handed is just down to which side of your brain is paying more attention but not necessarily humans are really annoying aren't they not some of them are
