I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. It's the second episode on Infinity! It's... You were really weird as ever getting there. It's the second episode on Infinity! Do you know what Michelle called her sepsides, by the way? Yep. She's a blooded genius that woman. Mm-hmm. Two infinities and beyond. No, I know, it's brilliant. I think that might be her best title ever. She does almost all the work on this programme. And then we turn up and make her life a little bit more difficult. We're the cherries with the cherries on top. If you say so. And some people like the cherries the most. We should come to... But most people like the actual ice cream sundae. Why are you talking about that? That's not a thing! I know. I'm excited because I know what's coming up after this episode and it is related to food. But in the meantime, you've got to wait for that. We've got to wait for that. There'll be restrained. Although there is an orange in the next episode. There is an orange, that's true. She's quite a lot of food. She's doing all of our programmes. So no one is going to have food-based props. Anyway, here comes the programme. Mm. Today we're continuing our never-ending mission to understand infinity. Yes, and it all comes from this question sent in to curious cases at BBC.co.uk from Sory Watson, age 10, and his dad Tom. Is anything in the universe truly infinite? Or does infinity only exist in abstract stuff like maths? So in the last episode, we did the maths. I did the maths. You did the maths. And I looked at the maths. You did. But we found the infinity is thriving in mathematics. In fact, multiple infinities, some of which are bigger than others. A fact that made my brain hurt. In a good way. But in this episode, we're going on a hunt through the universe to see if we can find something that is really, truly infinite. Before we get to the really big stuff, how about the infinitely small? Around 440 BCE, Lucifer's of my litus and his pupil, Democritus, proposed the existence of impenetrably hard things he called Atoms, which means uncutable. Two millennial later, J.J. Thompson discovered the electron and even smaller charged particle inside the atom that gave cathode ray tubes a spectacular glow. Ernest Rutherford, no relation, discovered protons lying at the heart of the atom, which far from being impenetrably hard, turns out in fact to be mostly empty. But in the 1960s, even the proton itself was cracked open to reveal its constituent quarks. And since then, a whole zoo of leptons, bosons and gluons have proliferated to populate a subatomic world that is still growing. So the question is, will we continue to discover smaller and smaller particles? Is the universe made up of an infinite nesting of atomic Russian dolls? That's what I asked Sean Carroll, theoretical physicist at the California Institute of Technology. All the theories that we have right now that work, right? General relativity for gravity, quantum field theory for particle physics and high energy phenomena. All of these theories have the property that, yes, you can get infinitely small. Things could be infinitely tiny. But we think that those theories are not right. They're not the final answer. It's very, very possible that when you put gravity and quantum mechanics together, there will be a smallest possible distance. So, over history, we keep thinking we found the smallest particles, and then we uncover something even tinier. Why wouldn't this just carry on as technology advances? Well, we do think it ends. There's good reason to believe that it ends. The point being that if you put Lego things together to build a copy of the Millennium Falcon or something, the Millennium Falcon is made a little Lego bricks, but the Lego bricks are the fundamental things you're making them out of. Now, you can be a stickler and say, well, the Lego bricks are made out of molecules and so forth, but there's no reason to think that the levels go down infinitely far. That's not to say that they can't, but the point is that you might have expected to see it already. An electron has mass, right? That's right. Electrons have mass. Photons do not. Quarks do. It's all complicated mass. But for something to have mass, then doesn't it have to be made of something? Ah, no. This is a very good question. I know what I dismiss it, but we think of tables and chairs as being made of things, being made of atoms and molecules and so forth, and it's natural for that kind of reasoning to be continued on. What are the atoms and molecules made of, etc? But at some point, you're going to reach the level where you say, this isn't made of anything, this is the stuff out of which everything else is made. Right, so for now, we're discounting the infinitely small then. That we are. Okay, how about the infinitely dense, instead? Like a black hole. Exactly like a black hole. Could we find infinity lurking deep in the heart of a black hole? Well, who better to call on for this subject than our resident curious cosmologist, Andrew Ponson. People still don't really understand what's going on with black holes. They are a prediction that comes out of Einstein's theory of gravity, where if you bring enough stuff together, then the gravity pulling more stuff in gets stronger and stronger and stronger, until eventually all the stuff gets crushed into a point, keeps pulling more stuff in so you pile up more and more and more stuff, and it's all supposedly contained in a tiny point at the centre of the black hole that we call the singularity, that point with infinite density, and people find that profoundly uncomfortable, because we don't know really how to deal with that singularity. But it's not that physicists are saying that infinity isn't there, it's just that what we know starts to break down at that point. Well, I think a lot of physicists would argue that it's so absurd to the idea of infinite density, you know, actually cramming something into a tiny point with infinite density is so stupid that it probably isn't there, that we have this kind of sense that sensible physics shouldn't have the infinity, and let's replace it with something else. We just don't know what to replace it with. In physics, infinity is really beep annoying. In what way? It's like it contaminates your equation. So if you have an infinity lurking somewhere in space, it actually messes up our ability to predict the future. I mean, physics is basically about predicting the future. You say, this is what the universe is like now, what's it going to be like in an hour or a year or a billion years? And as soon as there's an infinity in the universe, it means that predictions really start to break down. Okay, so we're also ruling out the infinitely dense. Apparently so. Well, if only the hunt for infinity had been that easy. Okay, but what about the big one? What about the universe itself? No, it's okay. I mean, we know space is big, really big. You just wouldn't believe how vastly mind-bogglingly big it is. Ah, but is it infinitely big? Well, here's Sean Carroll's take. Again, we don't know, is the short answer. What we do know is that there's a part of the universe we can see that is finite. The observable universe is not infinitely large. But what we don't do is see out to an edge because what we're doing is seeing with light and light travels at the speed of light. So we're seeing out into the past when we look very far away. And the past is finite. The past as far as we can see it ends at the big bang 14 billion years ago. So the fact that we can only see a finite part of the universe is reflection not of the finitude of space, but of the finitude of time. And even then, we're not absolutely sure. There could be something before the big bang. We just can't see it because there's something in the way. Now, this poses a bit of a problem because we can't see if the universe is finite because when we look out with our telescopes, we're also looking back in time. Right, so we're not seeing the furthest reaches of space as they currently are now this second. So sitting here in the Milky Way, we can't see if there's any sort of edge to the universe. True, but let's imagine that we got around this problem by building a spaceship, sending off in one direction to travel through space and look for an edge. Well, if it carried on going forever, then the universe would presumably be infinite. Well, maybe not because it depends on what shape the universe is. And what shape is the universe, please? Well, I'm glad you asked that Adam because there is actually a way to find out. In front of you, you have a piece of paper and an orange. Please draw a triangle as needed you can now on that piece of paper. Here is my triangle. Very good, very good. Now, the angles inside that triangle will add up to 180 degrees. That's Euclidean geometry. Standard school stuff. Absolutely. Now, we should draw a triangle on this orange. Okay, it's a little bit nobly on an orange, but that's, I'm pretty pleased with that. That's not bad, not bad. Now, if you could measure them really precisely, the angles on this triangle won't add up to 180 degrees and that's because the surface is curved. Right, so that's non-uclidean geometry. It certainly is. Now, if you imagine that you send your spaceship off on the surface of this orange, it will never find an edge. It will carry on going forever. And yet, this orange is definitely not infinite. Well, we've established that the orange is an infinite, yes. And in fact, you can use the same method of drawing triangles to find out what shape the universe is, his Andrew Ponson. You can do something similar with the shape of space as a whole. So, if you form a kind of triangle in space, this triangle you're using light coming off different starts? Exactly, yeah. Like, well, it would be more like distant galaxies rather than individual stars. But yes, you're using light from individual objects as sides of a triangle. And that allows you to tell, well, is space as a whole curved like the surface of an orange? Or is it flat like a piece of paper? Or is it flat like a piece of paper? And which is it? Well, as far as we can tell, it's flat like a piece of paper. But there's always some level of imprecision in our measurements. So, it's possible that it seems flat, but actually if you could do more precise measurements or somehow form bigger triangles, you would start to notice actually it is curved. It's just so big that you're only seeing a tiny portion, which is barely curved at all. Okay, so the universe is probably flat. Does that mean that it's infinite? Well, not necessarily because, okay, let's start with a very basic topology. That's a study of surfaces to you and me. If you take that piece of paper where you heard your triangle on it, and now bend it round into a tube. I'm doing it right now. So, now, this is wrapping around onto itself. Your spaceship can still carry on looping round and going on forever. But the angles of this triangle will still add up to 180 degrees, because you haven't done anything to your triangle. This space is still flat. Even though to any sane person with eyes, this paper is clearly curved. Not mathematically, it's not. You mathematicians are weird people. infinitely so, yes. What does this all mean for the shape of the universe? Here's Sean Carroll. To the little person who lives on that piece of paper, everything looks flat everywhere. It's just flat, flat, flat, no matter where you go. It's like if you played video games back in the day, if you played asteroids and you could fly across one side of the screen and you appear on the other side, right? So, that would be an example of a geometry that is flat, but a topology, the global structure would be finite. Right, so that game of asteroids takes place in a universe that we call finite and unbounded. Okay, so it wraps back on itself, gotcha. So, that's one option. What are the other possibilities? Okay, so space could be finite and bounded, so it has an edge, or it could be infinite. So basically, all the options are still on the table. So, that leads us to this final classic question that we receive from Curious Canadian Jean-Francois Aeon. If the universe isn't infinite and it does have an edge, so that's still one of your options, what is outside of it? Right, I put this to Andrew Ponson. And if you think that your mind has been bent already, well, be prepared for the final twist. Well, if it's got an edge, I think most people would agree there must be something outside it, because otherwise, what does the edge even mean? And no one really knows what would be outside it, but it could be some kind of region of space where the laws of physics are different. Something like string theory would lead you to believe that there could be regions beyond our universe where the laws of physics are just different. Could there just be other universes, though? I mean, could space beyond space just be like vastness with loads of little other universes in it? Yes, absolutely. So, one possibility is if you were to go far enough, so imagine somehow you're able to protect yourself from the laws of physics making you disintegrate. And you go off in your spaceship, you go through the region where the laws of physics are different. It is entirely possible if you then went far enough through that region, you'd come to another bubble where the laws of physics are actually pretty similar or the same as the laws of physics in our universe. Now we're in a picture where we've got what we call a multiverse. So it could be that we're actually living in like a gigantic glass of champagne with all these little bubble universes popping up and disintegrating away. Absolutely. And then of course, you realise you've just delayed the question, right? Because you say, well, if we were to find that's the case, you would go, well, our universe is finite. But, you know, maybe there's an infinity of these other universes out there. So you still got the infinity to it. And the infinity to it's actually. So, Dr. Fry, when it comes to whether anything in the universe is infinite, can we say case soul? Well, not really. We're not sure if anything is infinitely small or whether black holes really are infinitely dense or whether the universe is infinitely large. But unlike this programme, our scientific quest to grasp infinity will never end. Except that our programme hasn't entered it because we've got lots more. That's right for the curious. We're going to keep going for as long as my brain can stay in sight, my cranium for. So, last episode we did maths, which I pretty much struggled to get my head around. I mean, there's only two ideas here, right? One is, does the universe, can you hold the universe in your hand, right? This is an oasis lyric. It feels like an ought to be. Is it a disc floating above a turtle? It's a turtle's all the way down, isn't it? Yeah, that I can get my head around. I do think so, for the curious, we, we, I'm not, I just, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not. I'm not, I'm not, I, if I find this stuff hard and it has been very patient with me over the last couple of weeks. And we had a long conversations as which he'd explain things ever increasingly, something simpler and using oranges and pieces of paper. And I feel like I've made some progress. But I do find this hard. I just don't think it's very hard. I keep saying that. And my response is, I'm telling you it's hard. I know, I know. And to be fair, I've like, I've been studying this stuff for decades. So I do understand the way. Whether, though, it's something to do with how your brain sees things. We've talked about this before in a few, few series ago, how you can look at equations and you see beauty and purity and simplicity. And where you can look at a flower and name all of the elements of it. Oh, yes. I'm trying to be generous, spirited here. And she's just, I'm really, it's all, don't try and console me. Don't try and console me like that. You can't be good at everything, though, I don't mean. You're literally brilliant at bloody every day. No, no, no, no, that doesn't, that's no good at all. But don't, don't, don't, don't include that. So look, I do think I've made progress on this. And I think that you explain it pretty clearly, but it is our hard concept. And we also were, you know, assisted by Ponson, who is our first port of call in astrophysics, hell. You know what I liked in that episode? Andrew Ponson said, bleep, he bleeped himself. And the thing that I quite like about that is that he wasn't doing that, especially for the radio. I mean, he does that in all bits of life. I've seen him stub his toe before and just say, oh, bleep. That's brilliant. I also, we should mention Sean Carroll as well, who's a brilliant cosmologist. And the bit that I really was clearest on was when he started talking about asteroids. I'm really good at that game. I mean, really, I can like... So early on when we were writing the script, normally we do it together, but for the last couple of weeks, for some reason, Adam has been less engaged. And when we got to that section of the script, and I was asking him if the way that we'd written it made sense, his contribution was to go to YouTube and just look up videos of people playing asteroids so that we could have the music playing in the background while he ignored me. Honestly, I see that, or Chuckie Egg. That really dates me there. The swearing thing, Andrew Ponds and swearing thing actually reminds me, I'm going to seriously nerd out about language and classics now, which is a factoid that I love. So the word Adam, we talk about it in the script. Adam comes from the Greek words, meaning indivisible. So the Greek word is actually temno, right? And you add an A to the front of it and it becomes indivisible. What temno means indivisible? No, atom means indivisible. Uncutable. What does temno mean? It means to cut. Oh, right. Oh, I see. Yeah, and that's where we get words like, so you know, when you go to the hospital and you have a PET scan or a CT scan, the tea stands for tomography, meaning to slice. Ooh. But it's also the etymology of my single favorite word in English. Go on. Temeces, which is spelled T-M-E-S-I-S. Mm-hmm. And it means to insert a swear word into the middle of another word for extra emphasis. Like apps are beaten, loot-loot. Exactly. Absorbed-loot-loot-loot-loot is a radio for versionally we can do. Hang on. So I see. So you're cutting up the word and shoving something in the middle. Yeah. And it really only works with swear words as well. Of course not. Something that Stephen Pink has written about a lot in his books. Yeah, so Temeces. So what have taken home from this astrophysics and maths is, I'm quite good at asteroids and I'm quite good at swearing. Yes, I think we knew both of those things already. Okay, you know what we're going to do? We're going to go straight on to Cure of the Week. Faster and curious occasion, the least curious, totalingy cheek. Rather than a fries, Cureo of the Week. Okay, don't we've got an extra long cure of the week this week. Do you know why? You've got a big bag of shopping in front of you. I don't like losing arguments. And the argument that I didn't want to lose today was about scones. Do you mean scones? I mean, we'll have to leave the pronunciation of it to one side. So we're pulling out two plates. Yeah. I'm so excited. From BBC canteen. So excited. A jar of medium price strawberry jam. We're going to approach this scientifically and look at this, look at this. So Michelle, who as well as being our well-served cat herder in chief, general producer and editor, she's also a master cook. You may recall the curious cake off from a few series ago where Hannah and I went toe-to-toe, head-to-head and baked a cake. That was set in Michelle's very nice kitchen. It was very nice. Just remind me of what the outcome of that was. You know, I've such a long time ago, it's I've blanked it. Maybe some of the listeners, maybe some of the customers. So what she has done is she has baked a tin of, oh, Lani, those are some seriously fat scones. Now the reason why we're doing this is at the suggestion of Ian Churchill, who sent us an email to say that the only possible solution is for the doctors to try the wrong order of cream and jam on air. And I assume the rest of his email, which has been cut off from this piece paper, is, and thus proved Dr. Fry correct that the cream goes on first. Okay, so we have a nice strawberry jam. That's a nice strawberry jam. We don't have a knife, so we're going to have to go on. You're going to have to go on. Nice one, I've got one. Here we go. Let's slice it off. Now, actually we had lots and lots of letters about this. Possibly more corresponds to what we've had on any other subjects in the history of this program. We've got some serious coated cream there. It's true. So some people had some interesting suggestions actually for how other than just us trying the opposite way around, but for how to solve this conundrum, there was one I particularly like from Imran Khan's mum. Yes, so Imran Khan, not the craicitor now president of Pakistan, is a person in science works at the welcome trust someone known. It's a big cheese. It's a big cheese. A big cheese in science world and he being of subcontinental extraction once posed this this conundrum to his mum who couldn't understand why they were such fuss about whether it's okay less. Which I'm first or cream first and she put spoonful of each in a pot and stirred them up into a jam cream paste and spread that by solving the issue and possibly instigating world peace. So well done to Imran Khan's mum. No, I think we should put her in charge of the global governments. Anyway, the question at stage, just to remind people is that I was insisting that you have to put the jam on first because the constitution of jam is thicker and more gelatinous than the cream and that just makes a lot of sense whereas Hannah was suggesting that that was utter insanity. Well you were okay. Calm, calm. I mean I will repeat my arguments here given that they were so persuasive last time. You want to see all of your schemes, right? So you clearly have more cream on than jam and so you want the jam to be on top so that you can see every element of it at once. All right, so I propose that we just get on with this. Okay. So I'm going to reverse this. You're going to go jam first and I'm going to go cream first. You know, I automatically just was about to put the cream on. Well, you need to modify your behaviour. Why are you doing that? We had possibly the most instructive, thorough and scientifically interesting email that we've ever had and it comes from a professor of molecular modeling at the University of Cambridge. Some pretty serious scientific credentials going on there. A Cambridge professor. Only the best. Gabor Shajni, I think is how it's pronounced. That's my best stab at it. Anyway, that is titled High Altitude Experiments with Soft Matter. Dear doctors, rather food and fry, your arguments about scones, cream and jam on your most recent outing did not overly concern me. Not the best start, but he goes on. Mostly due to the fact that I'm not a habitual consumer of the combination, not out of spite or any negative feelings, rather simply being of different heritage, fair point. This is, until I found myself 10,000 feet in the air being offered, the three ingredients, which is jam, cream and scone, just before casually refusing them, it occurred to me that it's the perfect option. As he's test your respective theories, it would seem to me that this being the first occasion on which I perform this experiment, I am much less biased by early childhood memories than most of you might be. He's removing the subjective from the experiment, very good, Gabor. You know, I have nothing but unbounded respect for this man. He goes on. I had already forgotten which of you professed which order of cream and jam, but I must point out further eliminates potential bias on my part. I want to know which way around he'd be biased. If he could remember. The man is a scientist, he has no biases and if he knows them, he will eliminate them. That's the whole purpose of the SEMA. So he goes on. Just a pick at random, I approached the first part of the scone with cream, which was applied in one easy swoop. It was then topped with jam, which worked well. That's your way around. Just as I was approaching the moment of proof or truth, I noticed the often part of scone, which stopped me in my tracks. On the one hand, if I eat the scone cream jam combination, I would be left with an empty piece of scone. On the other hand, if I put the other part of scone on top of the experimental specimen, the symmetric nature of the universe, conservation of angular momentum, actually, rendering up the same as down would mean I'd be holding the scone cream jam scone in my hand and therefore would not be able to distinguish it from the scone jam cream scone that I would shortly be creating. And this is a stonishing level of detail and it shows you have boring flying internationally must be. Yeah, but hang on one second, though, because here is his summary on my version. It was very nice. I may have inserted a very in there, but he didn't write, but that was fine. He didn't say very, listen, he didn't say it. He said it was nice, but with an exclamation mark. Yes. The jam hits the palette first in a sugary rush that reminds me of a lizard sweet goblin of yesterday. Now, this is where Gabor and I part company slightly because as far as scientific writeups go, I think these are value judgments. I do not think this is scientific language. I think it's brilliant. All right, he goes on not wanting to waste the orphan scone. That's the remaining fraction. Stop doing that. I carefully balanced it on the piece in my other hand and tried to finish it, which didn't quite work because as I mentioned earlier, the scone is crumbly. Having cleaned up the resulting mess, I was glad to be halfway through. If anyone was on that same flight and saw this brilliant molecular modeler messing around with scones, they do let us know. Cutting an equally long story short, thank you. A reverse the application of the soft materials on the other scone. As I remembered from your esteemed discussion, this was not straightforward because the jam is wobbly, not particularly sticky. So putting the cream on top was not less secure. However, when tasted, the cream coats the palette first, and then with about a second of delay, the jam effuses its sweet goodness like a bubble bursting from the sweet goodness. The jam effuses its sweetness like a bubble bursting up from the deep. Very nice explanation. I agree with what you said early about value judgments, actually. I think conclusion. Although harder to manufacture due to adhesive elastic, this go plastic reasons the scone jam cream specimen is likely preferable. Hey! Brotherhood wins. In a scientific assessment. Well, let's give it a go, shall we? Brotherhood and reason. Have you got your wins? Have you got your your your your's ready? I'm going to assemble mine as well. I mean, there's a little bit extra as I'm just assembling your way around, your perverse way of doing this. He says, and just as I write, just in my playing this landing, last bit of scone with no toppings was left over. The transferability of results to sea level remains to be seen, and further studies are called for. I wish you happy experimentation in the festive season, yours as ever, Gabby. You know, I think he definitely wins, Gary. He might win, Gary, the series. This is I mean, he's cured. We've got a couple more episodes to go in this series, but someone is going to have to do some serious work to beat. Yeah, that was that was extremely impressive. I think come on. Now you've got to do it properly, though. You've got to properly dollop it on. None of your half-hearted nonsense. What are you doing? He's spreading it on. What do I do now? Now goodness, he's deliberately sabotaging it by crumbling up the scones. Madness. Look how much nicer yours looks than mine. At which point do I reveal that I don't actually like scones very much? I just don't like them that much. I think two episodes ago would have been useful to be honest with. Okay, we're going to eat this now. Yeah, it is. Interesting. I know what he means about this weakness. You've got to sleep this early. He's a man of science. He's right about them. Cream hitting your palate. But it is a bit like eating boiled sweet from when you're younger. My god, this is like we're having an epiphany. I still prefer that way. Yeah. I feel like I think I'm coming to a different conclusion. Eats cons the way you flipping right them. If I eat any food the way you like them. I think just in general, doing life whatever you want to do. And if you're in Mran Khan's mum, you're a flipping genius for deciding to bypass all this nonsense, by simply mixing the two together. I couldn't agree more. Gab or you are Curia of the week, undoubtedly, and possibly Curia of the series. We'll update you in a couple of episodes. It's going to be another bite. You do. Now, while we've still got our mouths full, I think we'll wrap up there. But actually, this reminds me that our next episode is about bad food. Why does bad food taste so good? So all that remains to say is that if you have any curious cases that you would like us to investigate, please do send them in to CuriousCasesatBBC.co.uk. Michelle, scons are delicious. Amazing. Just like to say, actually, as an addendum to that episode, that after we stopped recording, Michelle came through and admitted that she's changed the way to eat her scones now, because she tried. She used to do jam first thing cream, and then she tried it the other way around, and she said it was way better, so there. And then Nigel asked Studio Manager, Chim Tim, when we offered him one, he said, I don't think we were a dirty scons. I couldn't care less, as he said. He was thinking, you didn't actually say this, he was thinking, what is wrong with you people? Probably fairly. Okay, that really is the end now. Hi, I'm Monty. Sorry for interrupting your podcast. Just give me a minute. I've got something I think you'll really love. It's called Life Lessons. This is a podcast from BBC Radio 4. It's going to be full of the issues that are important now, and we'll hear about them from people who really know what they're talking about, because these issues are at the centre of their lives. We'll be hearing about period poverty from campaigner Amica George, questioning the food we eat from farmer Kate Maul, the Brexit divide from vlogger Jazajan and many, many Maul. Young UK talk about the issues that matter most to them. They're living it so we can learn from it. Subscribe to the Life Lessons podcast. Discover it now in BBC Sounds.
