I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. Welcome to episode three of the curious cases of Rutherford and Flyer. I can't even see my own name. Rutherford and Flyer. And Flyer. Super Flyer. The reason why I mucked up that intro is because we are being watched by... We are. We are. We have guests in the pod. The wonderful Andrew Ponson. Hello, Andrew. Hello. Hello. You're the third time on the curious cases, I think. Is it? It's fourth. Fourth. Third. In fact, we did account for this. Not that long ago, because the only entity that has been featured more regularly is your dog Molly. Yes, indeed. So, why don't you have your dog Molly sitting in this chair then? Because you know fractionally more about black holes than Molly. She's not a great conversationist of the honest. I think you're marginally better. Thank you. I'm going to put that on my CV. And the reason Andrew is here today as a cosmology astrophysicist is because our episode is about black holes. And this is something that you know a little about, Andrew. A little bit. Nobody really knows that much about them and that's why they are so fantastic. That's called niche construction and evolutionary biology. You pick a subject that no one knows anything about and then just fill it. That's cheating. I think you're a real scientist. You do something that everyone is doing. Now, this is pretty good strategy for science in general. They're quite cool, they aren't they? They are very cool and they're the weirdest effects in physics as well. So, not only are they not very well understood, but the bits we do understand, they just kind of expose all the bizarreest bits of physics that you can think of. And we're going to get into that in the program itself. But then also, as has become customary on the curious cases, one of us is subject to experimentation. Abuse. Yes, it is my turn this time. It's your turn. Only theoretically though. Theoretical abuse. Yes. Which is my favourite kind. And it's pretty brutal as well. So, should we hear what we're about to do to you? Indeed. Welcome back to the laboratory of Rutherland and Fry. Well, we attempt to solve your scientific mysteries. And today we bring you the curious case of the Dark Star. Yes, this one was sent into curious cases at BBC.co.uk by Jorge Luis Alvera's. He lives in Mexico City. Yes, and it goes like this. What's in a black hole and could we fly a spaceship inside one? No, this one sounds like a lot of fun. Do you reckon we could do some interstellar field work on this? Still, I don't see a problem with that. Step one, get a spaceship. Easy. I'm just calling that, sir. No problem there. Step two, slightly trickier. We're going to need a black hole. So, let's ask everybody's favourite astrophysic, Dr. Antifoncin, how they're made. Essentially, a black hole is so much stuff crammed into such a small amount of space that nothing can get out, not even light. So, to form one, you just need to cram a lot of stuff into a very small space and then gravity takes over and you've got a black hole. If I wanted to make a black hole, what ingredients would I need? Pretty much anything. If you crush stuff together hard enough, then you will make it so dense that it starts to pull in stuff by its gravity really, really strongly and that can just turn into a black hole. So, you don't need any kind of special material. The main thing you need is that really immense crushing force and the best way we know of to get that is at the end of the life of a really big star. Basically, the star has fuel. It's nuclear fuel that it's burning in its core, that creates lots of heat and keeps the thing from falling in on itself. But when that fuel is exhausted, there's no more energy to stop the thing from just crushing itself into oblivion and that's exactly what happens at the end of the life of massive stars. Oh, the end of the life of massive stars. I still weep for David Bowie. Oh, don't cry Adam. We joined his people now somewhere beyond Alpha Centurion. Anyway, maybe we don't need to make a black hole from scratch because there's plenty of them kicking about. There are an estimated 100 million of them just in our galaxy the Milky Way. Well, space might be brewing with black holes, which we can't see. So how did we find out that they're there? The first person to conceive of a black hole was the Reverend John Michelle, rector of Thornhill, a geologist and astronomer and one of the great unsung scientists in history. In 1783, he conceived of dark stars so massive that even light could not escape their immense gravitational field. But as genius didn't stop there, Michelle was also first to suggest that earthquakes travel in waves and he produced the first artificial magnet. However, it was mathematics that took black holes a step closer to acceptance. While serving in the German army in the First World War, Carl Schwarzschild sold Einstein's field equations and calculated how big a given mass would have to be to give it a gravitational pull strong enough to stop light escaping the radius of a black hole. Even then, astronomers labeled black holes as absurd many refused to accept that a dead star could produce an invisible yet immense puncture in the very fabric of spacetime. To be fair, they are a bit weird. Yes, and if they are by their very nature invisible, how can we ever really be sure they exist? This in my own immense, almost infinite density is a point that I put to physicist and all-round gravitational guru Professor Schiller Rowan. Now, I don't know about you, but I find this all quite difficult to conceive of. So just the notion that somethings can get so big that it begins to pull in on itself is a little bit problematic for me. But how do we, are they real? Are they, I mean, are they things that are out there in space or are these just hypothesized entities because the maths and the physics says they have to be there? Oh, I think we've got good evidence that there are objects out there that behave just exactly as these predict black holes should. From looking at how stars move and how gas moves around regions of space tells us that there has to be a huge amount of mass squashed into a small region of space with super strong gravitational effects, you know, it's strong evidence there's a black hole there. But all the evidence we have is not direct because of the nature of a black hole, that black we can't see them. We can't see them, that's true for various different reasons. Perhaps more direct is the evidence from the recent observations by the LIGO experiment, which for the first time measured the ripples in space time, the gravitational wave signature of two black holes, spiraling in and smashing into one another and catastrophically merging to form a new black hole. So that was part of your experiment, you were part of that project, you must have been pretty pleased that we had some strong evidence for black holes as a result of LIGO. Absolutely, and it was of course a big international experiment and it was particularly exciting that the first signals we detected came from two black holes. Big black holes, one about 36 times the mass over one sun, the other one about 29 times the mass over one sun, bigger in fact than we'd been first searching for. LIGO really is one of the great discoveries of the 21st century, do you think demonstrating gravitational waves exist, confirming general relativity? Yes, and they did it with the observation of two absolutely humongous black holes smashing into each other. Okay, now back to the interseller field work, we set ourselves the challenge of flying into a black hole, Hannah, did NASA come good on the spaceship? Yes, they were surprisingly amazing. Yeah, it's parked out on the roof outside. Now we've just got to this side, which one of us gets to go? I say we flip a coin. Flip a coin, here we go, heads. Equal heads. Heads it is. Boom! I'm going to space. Five, four, three, two, one, and we have liftoff, the hope for the future rests squarely on the shoulders of the first fry in space. Ah, it's nice up here. Now let's just check with Angie Fonson, what's going to happen to me on this super exciting once in a lifetime trip? Actually, the first thing you'd notice as you dive into a black hole is the tidal forces become so strong that they're essentially pulling your head much harder than they're pulling your toes say and you just get what people call it, spaghettified, because you get kind of stretched out. That's the first thing you'd notice. If you were made out of really, really strong stuff, which I'm sure you are, you could, in theory, survive that. There's nothing that says there's no way you could survive that if you could make yourself out of strong enough stuff. You could survive this stretching feeling. There are different theories about what you would find once you're inside the black hole. One of the possibilities that people have put forward is there'd be something called a firewall, which is kind of, has the name suggests, a fiery band of particles that you would encounter and they would burn you to a crisp as you went in. It doesn't sound like a fun thing to do. I'm going to be honest. If nothing can leave the black hole, you wouldn't be able to tell anyone that that you're in there. Yeah, that's the sort of catch-22. You could dive into a black hole, find out what happens, but because you're inside a black hole, you can't send out any light that would get to anybody outside and because nothing goes faster than the speed of light, actually, we think you couldn't send out any kind of information to the outside universe, telling them what you'd seen and just the fact that you needed a bit of help. Too late to back out now, fry. Okay, so I'm not going to be stretched like spaghetti or fried to a crisp. For science, though, but as Sheila Rauen told me, the rest of us watching Spaceship Fry would actually see something completely different. The image of Hannah as she approached, if she was trying to weave to us from the spacecraft, her waving would get slower until eventually as she got right to the edge of the event horizon, it would kind of freeze her and she'd also get dimmer again as the wave length of the light was stretched effectively by the effects of gravity. I don't know what I'm laughing saying right so bad about that. Please, continue in this horrible experiment. The gravitational pull pulls on everything and so it pulls on the information that's trying to escape. So she'd get fainter and dimmer and slower and then be frozen on the edge. If I send it to a black hole, you're telling me that Hannah's going to get slower and dimmer. That's how it would look to us, but to her, it would be a different experience and that's relativity for you. I don't want to do it anymore, I don't want to get slower and dimmer. Hannah, it happens to us all as we get older. Anyway, relativity tells us that the same event viewed by observers at different places may not look the same. What about from my perspective then? What's going to happen as I approach the centre of a black hole? Let's check with Andrew Ponson. Well, assuming that you're still sort of alive despite being spegetified, you would notice that you are forever being drawn further in towards the very centre of the black hole. It's technically called a singularity and it's where all the stuff that fell into the black hole has piled up. So that single point is infinitely small and also infinitely dense. Do I end up as just a string of atoms? Well, eventually that presumably not even the atoms can survive because these forces do just get so ridiculously large, everything gets ripped apart. This doesn't sound like a love one. No, I mean, it's not, it's not going to be good news, but more importantly than the fate of Hannah Fry. Surely not. Yes, it's the fate of physics itself because eventually all our numbers just kind of blow up. We just can't reconcile the predictions of relativity, which is what ultimately is telling us about these forces ripping your partner getting bigger and bigger until they're infinite, versus quantum mechanics, which is supposed to tell us about how small little things actually behave. And so really the worst news from all of this is that physics is in real trouble because we just don't know what happens when you get to the centre of a black hole. Worst news, the my debt. Is that what you're suggesting? Well, in the big picture, you have to take big picture of these things. Which is more important physics or me? Physics. So, Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to the question, what's inside a black hole? Can we say case-solved? Well, the answer is everything that's ever gone into it. But we don't really know what state it will be in. And we'll never know for sure until someone travels inside. The journey will be perilous. You'll either be spaghettified, or crushed, or a combination of all three. But from the outside, you'll just get slower and dimmer. Right, so we've just chucked you into a black hole and had it work out for you. Not so well, as it turns out. I know longer even have atoms. I did love the two of you, because Andrew Ponson is with us in the studio for the pod. I did love listening to the two of you discussing in biological terms what would happen if you were to enter a black hole. And Andrew concluded that you'd be fine if you were made of tough enough stuff. There speaks a physicist of biology, and you sort of just agreed with him as well. It's all about the theory. It's just engineering. You just need to make a tough material and it'll be fine. The idea of spaghetti. I like the fact that if you have physicist sitting around and you know what shall we call this, I know we'll call it a spaghettification. Because you physicists do have quite a good sense of humour when it comes to black holes, didn't you? Oh yes. There are other types of black holes. Or rather a discussion about black holes being hairy or bald. I don't feel like we have to, and there's a sort of age limit warning going on the next discussion in this programme. No, this is totally legit physics. It is completely legitimate. Physics is a big question. Are black holes hairy? What does that mean? It's a question about what does a black hole remember about what goes in? So I mean we could literally take your hair. Your hair? Let's not. No, I mean. It's precious about hair. Let's take Adam's hair. Great, let's do that. Suppose you take a bit of Adam's hair with you while you get sucked into the black hole. Does the black hole somehow remember that it's got some of Adam's hair in it? We say remember, what do you mean? Well, on the face of it, it looks like everything about what falls into black hole gets forgotten. Because the only thing you can really measure from the outside is its mass or in slightly more complicated cases you can measure whether it's spinning and whether it has an electric charge. But there's literally just those three numbers that, at least according to relativity, you could measure about a black hole. So it would seem like your bit of Adam Rutherford's hair has been completely forgotten about. Indistinguishable from anything. Indistinguishable from anything else that you might have put in. So if you took a bit of my hair instead, you certainly wouldn't be able to sell difference. Or like an old fridge or like there's a space. I don't know why. You just had a tiny insight into the mind of Hannah Frye, some hair or an old fridge. But the black hole would increase in mass by the mass of my hair. Exactly. But it would be indistinguishable from Hannah's old fridge. If Hannah's old fridge is that light, I'm not sure it's the best example to be honest. I was thinking of like rubbish in space, you know, building sucked in like in Wally. I mean that's actually my knowledge of space. Why does that make it hairy? And so suppose instead it actually somehow does know that it's got a bit of your hair in it. It knows something about what fell in beyond just its mass. Then we call it hairy. That somehow there's something hidden away in there on the surface maybe that's keeping the record of what's fallen in. And we like that idea generally speaking as physicists. Because in physics, we try to cast everything in terms that you can always go backwards as well as forwards. The fundamental equations of physics in general are time reversible so that it's just as easy to run things in reverse as it is to go forwards. But if a black hole really forgets completely what went in, then obviously that can't apply. It couldn't possibly in any sense regenerate your hair unless somehow it's held on to some kind of remnant information about what it was like. Which is the hair? Which is there? So when you say information about it's information as a unit would be its mass or its electric charge or its spin or something like that. But the atomic structure of a hair or anything or a fridge or whatever Hannah's throwing in there. That's quite a lot of information. How would it, I'm really struggling here Andrew, help me out. How would that information be formatted? We don't know. There's so many things with black holes that is no clear answer to that. But as far as anyone can tell if it is retained, then it's somehow retained on the edge of the black hole, the event horizon of the black hole in some very weird, we think of this as almost like holography that you've taken a three-dimensional object to your hair and stored it as two-dimensional information on the surface of the black hole. And if it doesn't, if it does figure everything, then it's bald. Then it's bald. Now just to clarify, the example of using my hair, is that what makes the terminology hairy or did you just pick my hair up because you're looking at my head? Yeah, we originally picked Hannah's hair. But it's quite striking. It is quite straight. It's more striking than your hair. And I'm sort of in between hairy and bald as well. Yeah, hair is just one example. Is anything including fridges, including microphones and anything else you can think of? Somehow, there must be a mechanism to store that information if physics truly is time reversible. And round the outside. Round the outside. And physicists decided to go for hairy and bald as the descriptors for this binary choice. I can't account for that, sorry. I love the idea of someone sitting in a room being like, well, what can we call it? It's a hole. Shall we call it a hairy hole or a bald hole? Yes, let's go with that. Thanks for this. Let's publish it. Yes. This is, do you ever have it today, Mercedes? What's that telescope that they call it? That telescope? The really big one. The overwhelmingly large well-weather. There are lots of different really big things like that. I mean, there's things like the next generation of telescopes include the European, extremely large telescope. Nice. Which is about 30 minutes. Say what you see or say what you imagine. There's the very large array, isn't there? There's the very large array. Isn't there a super massive black hole as well? Yeah, the super massive black holes at the centre of galaxies. Bigger than massive. In the interview that didn't make it into the programme with Sheila Rowan, I referred to something as being super massive. In the generic, you know, street lingo, this is super massive and she went, well, no, it's not super massive because, and then explained to me, what super massive meant. I know. Killed my dreams, then. But when I say something's mega, I don't mean it's a million. I think you should give a bit of credit though, because some astronomers instead kind of cop out and call things type one and type supernova for instance. Classified as type one and type two. Imagine if you had type one black holes and type two black holes, that would be pretty boring. What could you call type one supernova instead? What do they look like? If you had to say what you see name? Type one A supernova are sort of a constant explosion energy supernova. Let's get the listeners to suggest suggestions for supernova names and for black hole names. We've gone quite niche here haven't we? We've gone quite niche. What about stuff that you could chuck into a black hole? Non-liberal suggestions. You can chuck into a black hole. Send them into curious cases at BBC.co.uk. Also while you're there, you can send us in extra questions that you would like us to investigate. That ended rather abruptly. Should we have an ending? Should we go with that as the ending? And after a lengthy pregnant pause? That's the end of podcast 3, series 6, run by back next week with something epic. Super massive epic. This is the BBC. I'm Tim Harford, the presenter of a program called More or Less. I have a confession. I've been tempted, lured, seduced into the soft embrace of numbers. That all around us politicians, charities, campaigners and corporations know that a sure way to pick up some publicity is to make up an interesting sounding statistic, even if it's nonsense. And on More or Less, that makes us sad because we think numbers matter and the truth matters. So we have two jobs to do. Destroy dodgy data with the rightest fury of 10,000 flaming sums while also celebrating the ways in which honest statistics help us make sense of the world all around us politics, business, health and life. So why not check us out? That's More or Less with me, Tim Harford, on Radio 4, the World Service and available all year round as a podcast.
