Hello, Curios. And this is the 12th episode in the current series, but this is just a reminder that because of this, just accumulates and everything. And wildly around. We were two episodes short for this run, and so we've gone through the back catalog to pull out our very favourites episodes. Yes, and in the last episode was my favourite question that I think we've ever answered about handiness. Some amazing, interesting stuff in that episode. And this episode, Adam got to pick his favourite. And oh, Lordy, guess what he chose. It was your least favourite ever. I think in the five or six years and 80 episodes that would be doing this. All about being scared. And so thanks to Adam and Pritit, that... Now, we should tell you that we are going to be back with a new series in the not too distant future at which point we'll be back up to full steam again. Pending. I don't know, the apocalypse, the end of the world, another pandemic, disease, pestilence, the forehorsesmen. None of which we're rolling out, let's be honest. I mean, we might as well commit to doing 20 episodes if we're going to cut back from there. You're hearing it here. Definitely doing 20 episodes, possibly continuously from some point in 2021. But please do in the interim, please do send us in. Your questions, curious cases at BBC.co.uk, your letters. We read all of them and we really love them. They cheer us up enormously. And also, any entries for Curie over the week, which will again be back in the next series. Well, the doors in the studio could do with some oil. I'm sorry, I'm late. Scarily late. In fact, have you got the script with you? Yes, here we go. The midnight hour is close at hand, and we're here to investigate the things that go bump in the night. You tried to scream, but Tara takes the sound before you make it. Did you write this, Adam? Maybe. Well, we've got a scary episode for you, inspired by this spooky message that we receive from curious listener Heidi Dockty. Yes, she asks, why do people like to be scared? For example, going on a scary amusement park ride and watching scary movies that make you jump. Why do some people like to be scared that should say? Yes. I mean, tell me you're super excited about this episode. Tell me, Hannah. Do you like scary movies? You know the answer to that one, Adam. It is a resounding no, but I have a sense in this that you are going to make me watch one. Quite possibly because today I'm Doctor Tara and to fit in with this scary theme. I thought it best that we'd follow Heidi's question quite literally, and I'd really love to you to experience the same thrill of excitements that I get from a scary movie. Okay, so that took several days of text message exchanges to actually decide what movie we could watch because you, Hannah Fry, had a lot of vetoes. All I said was no knives, no gore, no chain sores, no finger jumping. All of which makes it somewhat limiting for the horror genre. Look, there's a graph. Okay. All right, well, after much ado, we did finally decide on one acceptable option which we settled down to watch at Hannah's house. Are you ready? I just forgot on one thing I need to do. You have been procrastinating. I have been sitting here for an hour now waiting for you to tidy things up and come and I've got to do an email. I've seen you've made yourself comfortable in my house. I'm super comfortable. You got your feet up on my foot store, my dog Molly cuddled at your, she's a bit wuffy. You've got your socks off, I know. I've got the issue as... Shall we watch this film? I don't... Okay. So we're going to watch the woman in black, which stars Daniel Radcliffe. Oh. Is it good? Rated 15 for psychological horror. 15? Okay. Shh. Look, it started. Oh, don't hold on. Before we get to all of that, I'd like to point out that while this might have been a 15, it's also notoriously frightening. Yeah, well, it's a classic Gothic ghost story. So we'll come back later to find out if you actually managed to remove the cushion from in front of your face for long enough to actually see any of this film with Harry Potter in it. Fine. So while we're going Gothic then, I called up Scary Scholar Mateus Cluston author of Why Horror Sejuices and I started by asking him when horror began. If you were to go to a conference for horror scholars and you asked that question, most people would say that horror began with the publication of a book called The Castle of Otranto, around Christmas time in 1764, because that one book written by an Englishman named Horace Walpole is usually regarded as the first so-called Gothic novel, and the Gothic novel is a precursor of what we today would call horror. The story begins as the Prince of Otranto, Manfred is preparing for the wedding of his beloved son, Conrad. The company was assembled in the chapel of the castle, and everything ready for beginning the divine office when Conrad himself was missing. Manfred quickly dispatches one of his servants to investigate. The servant came running back, breathless, in a frantic manner, his eyes staring and foaming at the mouth. He said nothing but pointed to the court, from whence was heard a confused noise of shrieks, horror and surprise. The first thing that struck Manfred's eyes, was a group of his servants endeavouring to raise something that appeared to him a mountain of sabre plumes. What are you doing, Crite Manfred Rothley? Where is my son? A volley of voices replied, Oh, my lord, the Prince, the Prince, the helmet, the helmet. But what a sight for a father's eyes. He beheld his child dashed to pieces, and almost buried under an enormous helmet. An enormous helmet. This sounds like a quest to your monthly bight then, and the beginning to the thriller video. Yeah, I can't stop laughing about the enormous helmet. The story was the origin of so many of the tropes still seen today in horror films. So you've got a spooky gothic castle, an ancient prophecy, supernatural visions. What can we watch that film? Well, the thing is that horror is a product of its time, which is something that I discuss with Margie Curse, who studies fear, and she told me the history of horror is really the history of societal angst. Our scary story is really our mirror of society. So you look back through time, and you look at the stories, the scary stories that people are telling. And you can see, you know, what are the big challenges? What is this culture really frightened of right now? So for example, looking at some of the monster movies during the mid-20th century, and that was happening while we were thinking about going out into space and landing on the moon, and there was a greater awareness of, hey, there's a whole universe out here, what could be there? Right, and if we're talking about monster movies, then I suppose Godzilla's another good example made in Japan. Yeah, absolutely. That was a time right after we dropped an atom bomb, and we didn't know what would happen, how it would change our environment, how it would change, you know, the animals in our environment. So the idea that there could potentially be a mutated lizard, a monster kind of behemoth that was a real kind of threat, and so we see that reflected and exaggerated, and made into a monster that we can then defeat on screen. Again, I think I probably could have handled a 50s B movie, you know, like Godzilla, say. Yeah, well, Godzilla is really not very scary at all. And anyway, like we said, you know, what is scary actually changes over time? So, okay, I guess films like World War Z and other zombie films, you could view those in a new light now, maybe like a metaphor for a pandemic. Yes, definitely. And back in 1897, so, you know, Gothic horrors like Bram Stoker's Dracula were read as allegories for sexually transmitted diseases, or, you know, dawn of the dead in the 70s was a commentary on unbridled consumerism. How about the women in black? That is a very clear political message about, I don't know, not spending the night with black tooth murdery ghost ladies in super creepy decrepit mansions containing Victorian wind up monkey dolls. What's that? There's some really horrible monkeys. Creepy monkey dolls. I saw the dolls are watching. Yeah, everyone's watching. It's in blood. There's blood. Oh, no. Like, very seriously. I don't understand how you mind this part. I love it. It's so exciting. My heart's racing. There is something wrong with you. I don't think there is. This is genuinely one of the joys of my life. Honestly, I just don't understand it. So, as a result, this is what I asked, Danish Horuskoller, Mateus Klassen, why would anyone enjoy watching something that makes them feel terrified? It's the big question. I think it's the one field defining question as the paradox of horror. Why do people voluntarily seek out the kind of entertainment that's explicitly designed to evoke negative emotions in them? So, I've been trying to build what I call a biocultural theory of horror. I think that we're playing with negative emotion. And much of human play has to do with eliciting negative emotions in a safe context. So, chase play or hide and seek are ways in which kids can experience mild, tolerable doses of anxiety, suspense, even fear. And it's pleasurable to them because they realize it's all for fun. There is no real risk. And a similar thing happens, I think, on a cognitive level, when most of us enjoy watching a horror film, realizing that the strong, physiological, and emotional responses do not, in fact, indicate that there is danger. So, we can kind of enjoy and wallow in increased heart rate, sweaty palms, goose bumps, and all the rest. Well, that's exactly why I love that feeling of impending terror and the sort of physical sensations that go with it. Yeah, that is exactly the bit that I don't like, though. Have you ever been properly scared, I don't? Yeah, but it's never really in horror situations. I mean, I got terrified the other day when my dog ran out into the busy road. Yeah. And it wasn't nice, was it? No. See, that's why I don't understand why you want to make yourself scared willingly. Well, it is the thrill, but the thrill with impunity. You know, that sense that makes your heart sort of thump in your ribs and the physiological responses to horror. You know, the most famous one probably is the jump scare. I bit like when you did this in the woman in black. What? Oh! So apologies to any cats that we may have scared out there. I think several minutes came off my life expectancy at that moment. So, I consulted psychologist and broadcaster Claudia Hammond about what makes us jump out of our skins. Well, strictly speaking, this is the startle reflex. And in a way, it's surprise rather than fear, but fear can often be involved. And even babies will do a startle reflex. If they're suddenly surprised by a loud noise, you see that same jumper surprise that we do when we're watching a film. Is the startle reflex heightened when you are generally fearful anyway? Yes. So if a film makes you nervous for a while first and they're building up suspense and you know something's going to happen, something's going to happen, and then like in jagged edge, the arm comes through the window. That's the moment that you then jump and you jump even more because you've been already primed to do that. We've all got this sort of trigger ready to be surprised if something happens. But some people jump much more than others all the time anyway. You know, some people are hyper startlers and they jump at everything. I mean, I jumped in my husband just walks in the room. But for no reason at all. Nobody knows he was there and say, what are you doing? Don't do that. People have done experiments where they've tried to train a hyper startle less. They let off guns beside them. I mean, you know, that's not relaxing really, you think. But they count down from 10 to 0 and they even know the moment the gun is going to go off and they still jump out of their skins. Well, that explains a lot then. I'm just a hyper startler. Yes, and in our next episode of Curious Cases we'll be taking Hannah to a firing range and deliberately trying to startle her. No, we won't. But okay. So that's why we jump fine. But the question still remains. Why do some people enjoy this type of scary thrill while it leaves others cold? So this was my final question for Mateus Klasen. Do we know then why some, I would call them weird, individuals like Adam, really love watching horror films and then other people, sensible people like me, don't? I think that's still one of the big remaining questions in horror research. We wanted to see if there are any aspects of personality that can help us answer that question. And so we did a big study where we recruited close to 1200 North Americans and asked them a whole bunch of questions about their relationship with horror. And we also obtained a personality profile of each of them. And what we found was that people who score high on a personality dimension called intellect imagination, also known as openness to experience, are more likely to be horror fans, which suggests that people who enjoy horror films are people who in general enjoy intellectual stimulation who are artistically aesthetically curious. Hold on a second. Intellectual imagination. Are you saying that Adam's got more intellectual imagination than I do? We'd have to do a personality profile on each of you, because there can be other variables. So what is it about people who don't like horror films? What does that say about those individuals? People who respond very strongly to negative stimuli. The people for whom it's the end of the world if they forget their credit card when they're shopping, they will not be horror fans because they will be overwhelmed by negative emotion. And also conversely, people who are completely fearless will not be horror fans because they will be bored. But statistically speaking, they're likely to be actually better educated. We found to our surprise a negative correlation between horror liking and education. Intellectual imagination aesthetically curious. I'm liking this guy. Yeah, I'm better educated though, then. Let's call it one or two. We're on a quest to find out why people like to be scared. And why I don't. We've explored horror films. You made me watch the women in black. And you nearly jumped out of your skin with the fright scare. Look, I'm a hypostatic. And we know that horror charts the evolution of societal fears. But to be fair, we haven't really answered the curious listener, Heidi Dockty's question, of why some people like it. You mean why I like it? Now, Heidi didn't just mention horror films. She wanted to know about going on scary amusement park rides too. I know what this means. Look around. Where are we? We're in Thought Park. And I'm not sure if we can find any other scary amusement park rides. I know what this means. We're in Thought Park. And I'm not sure if we can find any other scary amusement park rides. Look around. Where are we? We're in Thought Park. And I'm not going on that massive rollercoaster over there. Why would you willingly submit to yourself to being terrified? It's absolutely mad. Wrong. You have nothing to fear, but fear itself. I should probably point out at this stage listeners that alongside my fear of horror films, I'm not mad keen on heights or falling or anything fun at all. Actually, I was going to say blood. Well, that one is not unreasonable. But anyway, once again, we had a very long trek around the whole theme park to select the optimal ride. Not too high. Not too droppy. Not too twisty. It's basically Goldilocks and the three rollercoasters. Anyway, we've finally selected one that fits Hannah's very specific criteria. Not not at the front. Now we've got to see the front. Pick them. Oh my god, it's super uncomfortable. And how are you feeling right now? Actually, not great. Not great? No. I haven't actually slightly scared now. I can tell when you want to genuinely look when you're putting it on. And you're not putting it on. And now we're moving. Oh, and Crikey, that is quite a steep business. The birth of the rollercoaster has been tracked all the way back to the 18th century in St. Petersburg in Russia. During Winter Festival, giant wooden ramps were covered in snow to make a thick, slippy sheet of ice. Catherine the Great was even a fan, clambering up dozens of steps and into a hollowed out sled carved of ice before careering down the steep slope with only a piece of rope to hold onto. She loved the exhilarating ride so much that she commissioned one of her own, adding wheels to the sled so she could ride all year round. By the mid 19th century, Russian ice mountains were so popular in courtyards and upper-class homes that writer and publisher Robert Sears noted, the sledges are made of ice, dexterously shaped into ships, and they are enjoyed alike by prints and peasant. In every town and village, these slippery declivities are crowded with youths and maidens, rushing down with the swiftness of arrows. French soldiers visiting during the Napoleonic Wars also grew fond of the Russian ice mountains. They brought the idea back home, and the first rollercoaster to have cars fixed to the tracks was built in Belville, France, in 1812, and named Le Montagne-Rousse. In fact, in fact, fans, even today in Spanish, Portuguese and Italian, rollercoasters are still known as Russian mountains. But it was in America that the rollercoaster, as we know it today, really took off, according to sociologist Margie Kerr, author of Scream, The Science of Fear. In the US, the real popularity of the rollercoaster started with the invention of the electric trolley car, designed to move coal and industrial material from one location to another. So they were set up on rails. It's very kind of Indiana Jones, but the operators realized that they could make money just on selling tickets to people to just ride from one place to the other, and they found that people really enjoyed the hills and the turns and the twists, and from there it just kind of took off. Right, whilst Russian ice slides and swirving trolleyes do sound like a lot of fun, it doesn't sound incredibly safe. No, it's absolutely unbelievable to look back at some of these structures and just to try and imagine what was going through people's minds when they thought, yes, let's throw our bodies down a hill to break next speed. There was no modern mechanism of safety keeping you inside the carts. It was really depending on centrifugal force. It was incredibly unsafe. People would fall out. And today, thrill rides are extremely safe. I mean, statistically, it would be, you know, like an in-hip-by-lightening to be hurt on most modern thrill rides, but back then it was incredibly dangerous. Yeah, slipping down an 80-foot ice ramp in a sled made of ice with only a rope to hang on to does not sound like my idea of fun. What, well, you should be grateful then that I only made you go to the park where we had finally settled on a roller coaster called The Swarm. Okay, so the Swarm is like a winged roller coaster. You're strapped in and your legs are dangling down with nothing beneath you. Yeah, I wasn't keen on that bit, partially because I was wearing my favourite trainers that day. Yes. As you told me, when we were about to be catapulted from 0 to 4.5G. Yes, and it was at this point, this nurse, that I was starting to regret my initial hubris. Oh, that's quite esteemed. Yeah, what are we doing? Is it going to take a break? I don't know. Oh, no. Oh, goodness, it's slow. Oh, no, that's very slow and I'm so down and I'm feeling it. I don't want to go to the Lord! What? Yeah, not so brave now, Adam. Yeah, I'm really sorry about the screaming there listeners. Including you. And I recall, Adam. But while we're on the subject of screaming, it turns out that the science of screaming is a fascinating scientific mystery in itself. David Popple is a neuroscientist who's been trying to get to the bottom of why we scream. And why we do it in so many situations. You're born and you emit screams. You have pain and you scream. You're surprised and you scream. You can scream and joy when your football team wins. Or you can scream and pain when your football team loses for that matter. Such a ubiquitous vocalization, right? What other kind of vocalization do you use in so many different situations? There is no culture in which there is no screaming. There is no human who hasn't screamed at some point. We understand very little about it, which is a little bit surprising. We dedicate a lot of effort to all kinds of other stuff. But this very fundamental thing is still a surprisingly new area of research. But as for listening to screams, if you want to work out why they generate fear, first, you have to try and capture the screams of willing volunteers in the lab. You put them in a sound booth just like I'm here right now and you either ask them to scream. And you'd be surprised. Some people are incredibly good at this. I mean, there are just blood-curdling screams that we've recorded from people. But you can also make them afraid, right? So suppose in a transparent plastic box, I suddenly put a huge spider in front of your face. You might just scream. And it does cause for some consternation in a lab when people walk by and they hear absolutely scary screams coming from lab in the corner of the building. But the acoustic feature that's typical of fear screams is the feature of roughness. I mean, it literally was be called rough because people, when you ask them what does it sound like they say, it sounds kind of rough. Right. So how rough are we talking here? Okay. Well, here is a scream that has a low amount of roughness. And here is one with a high level of roughness. Right. Yeah. I get it. That one definitely sounds more sort of fluttery. And in fact, rough than the other. Indeed. Hence the word. So what is the actual difference between those sounds? Well, so the second one has got a higher modulation rate. That's essentially how fast its loudness goes up and down. But actually, they also recorded and measured people speaking sentences as well as screams. So here is one with a fairly high level of roughness. It's right behind you. Yep. I would run away from that. And here is a sentence with low roughness. It's right behind you. That one is much more panto than Halloween, I'd say. Oh, no, it does not. The interesting thing about roughness is that it is also a quality that we find in other manmade sounds as David explains. Car alarms, fire alarms, sirens and house alarms also have the same acoustic feature. Signals that are supposed to tell you something alarming is happening, even if they're synthetic, also have that. Now, the people who designed the sounds, they arrived at this insight intuitively. So it's just by playing with sounds that they arrived at what is a really alarming feeling signal and they hit exactly on roughness. Now, when the research team put participants inside the brain scanner and played them sounds that are rough, like screams and alarms, they found that this activated a very small part of the brain called the amygdala, which is involved in generating the emotion of fear. So the amygdala tracks roughness directly. So the more rough the sound is that you present to a listener in the brain scanner, the more that part of the brain is activated. So the amygdala tracks, for instance, roughness directly. These signals kind of reach into your head and give you very, very quick pathways to yield a kind of frightening experience. No! Meanwhile, back at Thought Park, I was having my own frightening experience, giving my fear circuits a workout. Alone, it turns out this was a terrible idea! Oh, no, it's that. That's quite funny. My shoes! I really like these shoes! Oh, dude, no! It's actually amazing! Why wouldn't you do it? Yeah, consider that payback of making me watch that horror film, Nancy. I really didn't like that at all. But maybe I was lucky on the rollercoaster ride of Terra, because other historical research methods have been even less enjoyable as psychologists and broadcaster Claudia Hammond told me. There have been all sorts of experiments done in the lab with fear and trying to induce fear in people. But there was one called Albert Axe, and in the 1950s he wanted to measure how the body reacted to fear. But he needed it to be a genuine reaction. So we actually put electrodes onto the back of people's hands and gave them mild electric shocks. But then suddenly there's a bang and there's sparks flying, and the experimenter pulls the plug out and looks really panicky and says that they must get out straight away and they think it's all going wrong. They then go into another room and another confederate in the experiment shouts at them for a while. Tells them that they shouldn't have left the room and that they've done it wrong. And then they hook them up to a lie detector and say they're going to find out whether they're lying or not so that they basically have a really terrible time. And then in fact what they're doing is trying to measure the physiology of what's going on and trying to look at things like their galphonic skin response, the sweating in their fingertips. You never job getting that past an ethical committee today. Yes, you can't do these experiments now. You have to rely on when they were done before. Even with the ethics at Wellhouse of Kiltzer, did it actually work? They did say that they were really scared. One volunteer said that he was repairing himself to die. And the other said he was so upset. He was ready to punch the scientist on the nose, but luckily it got sort of stopped at that point. But he did discover that fear has certain effects on the body or these things that we know about now, that it increased adrenaline, that the heart rate goes up, that your skin temperature drops, your pupils dilate, and our tolerance to pain increases, which of course is useful if you're about to fight. Now Heidi Dockety's question was, why do we actually enjoy being scared? It is a chance to get an adrenaline rush and to feel certain physical experiences that might be pleasurable and that are certainly different in safe circumstances. So you can go on the roller coaster and you're not actually going to die, but you can have that feeling of something really scary being about to happen to you and you can try it out in safety. And of course it's control that it takes whether something is a thrill or a really hugely traumatic experience. I don't like that so much, you may just go twice, I didn't like that one. I loved it. I feel dizzy. I've lost vision in my left eye as well. So Doctor Fry, when it comes to why we like being scared, can we say, case sold? Not really Doctor Mother Bird, I still think you're a bit unhinged. Horror charts the evolution of societal fears. I mean why would you do this? But some people, you are hypostartlers which makes them more easily shocked. And scare cats. And when we scare the heart rate goes up, but pupils dilate in our tolerance to pain increases, all of which helps prepare our body for fight or flight. Screaming has an acoustic roughness that stimulates the amygdala in our brain and makes us feel afraid. But we can stimulate all of these powerful scare responses in our body in safety by watching horror films or riding on roller coasters. And now I'd like to add his revenge. Let's go back to the natural order of things where I experiment on you.
