Hello, Curios. Welcome to our Christmas special, even though by definition you are podcast listeners and you're almost certainly not listening at Christmas. Yes, indeed we're not even recording this at Christmas. We're actually recording this in the middle of November and by the time this goes out we've got no idea what the world's going to look like, no idea. I mean given 2020's track records, it's probably a meteor. No, I'm going to. It's going to come hits. A disaster is going to be flawless. We also have got a very Christmasy snack table in front of us that our producer, Fee has provided us with BitRandom, we'll explain why. Marmite crisps. No thanks. Cheese? No that. Yes, okay. Has it been in the fridge today? Some of the time. I think that was sitting on your desk for a good eight hours today. Got to let it breathe. Yeah. There's also, I noticed that it's migrated towards you rather than from the centre of this table, a nice bottle of wine. This mail may not feature in the second part of our pod chat, but first enjoy the show. I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. I like it. Welcome to a special festive episode of Curious Cases today and to really get us into the holiday spiritus, we are joined today in the studio by a plethora of good things. Yes, we've got a delicious platter of cheese, of wine. We've got a single packet of Marmite crisps and some mushroom patty. Well, that sounds delicious. I think I've probably passed on the mushroom patty there if that's okay. Did you bring these things in Adam because nothing says Christmas more than joy and indulgence and good times with the people that you love? No, I brought them in because nothing says Christmas more than mold. Mold? Yes, we know it's your entire joy in the Rutherford household when we bring the fungus out. I think you and I might have a different idea of fun. No, this piece is all to do with today's question from Paul Glaster sent into Curious Cases at BBC.co.uk. Here you go. You read it. Okay, given Adam's ponch on for cheese at the end of a meal. I don't remember ever revealing that in public, although it is true. I mean, same as the rest of us, Adam. Question is, which mold are harmless to eat or even helpful and why are some molds harmful slash potentially deadly? Yes, we're doing molds and funguses and I'm excited. What is a mold? I don't know. Okay, should we ask some experts? Yes, that's what we do when we don't know things. All right, let's start at the beginning. I spoke to LinBody who's a professor of microbial ecology at Cardiff University. She calls herself a decomposition ecologist. We'll get to that a bit later. But she also knows a thing or two about mold. Mold is just a colloquial name, I suppose, for fungus. So it's a rather a woolly term, I think. Although all what we were called molds are fungi, that's not to say that all fungi are mold, so you wouldn't call mushroom-forming fungi molds. Okay, so fungus, that's a big umbrella term, and then under that you've got what we colloquially call molds and mushrooms and toadstools and yeast. Okay, so in terms of all you brought it in, I kind of get the wine. Formenting. I mean, I'm happy. I'll keep that. Thank you. Put that in the middle. I get the cheese, cheese, especially. Get that. Yep. Marmite crisps. Well, Marmite is yeast extract, and yeast is in the family fungus, Sacramices cerevisii. Okay, but what is a fungus, Adam? Well, it's the phylogenetic kingdom, so that's in the taxonomic rank, just below domain and above phylum. Yes, but what is it? I don't just say more Latin words. I don't really know. It's complicated. I asked Bryndentinger, he's a mycologist, so he studies funguses, and he's at the Natural History Museum in Utah. A fungus, it's many things, and it's nothing at the same time. So traditionally, fungi have been classified as organisms that gain their nutrition through absorbative processes, and they tend to be microscopic, often filamentous, but it turns out that they don't all derive from a single most recent common ancestor. Right, so when we talk about the kingdom, we've got animals, we've got bacteria, we've got archaea, we've got plants, and then the next one is fungi. Yeah, well, it's actually a way more complex than that. It turns out that they represent an incredible amount of evolutionary diversity. So when we talk about plants and animals and fungi, we're really only scraping the surface of that total diversity of eukaryotic life. Right, is that more clear? Well, okay. What I notice there is that Bryndent describes funguses by what they do rather than what they actually are, and that makes me think he doesn't know what they are either. I'm sure he does, but I like that. I think that's a really good thing to do in biology. You actually say what something does rather than try and describe what it is. Yeah, it's not exactly a definition though. Is it? No, it's not a definition, but as you well know, I don't approve of any definitions. Unless they're in Latin. Okay, all right, here's a nice Latin question for you. One thing to get straight at them, is it fungi or fungi or funguses? What is the plural of fungus? Well, it's fungi as well. I definitely don't know, but I think all the experts use all of them interchangeably. Shall we just agree for the next half an hour as two non-experts that we're going to say, funguses? Okay, yeah, all right then. Okay, so we don't know what fungi are and we don't know how to pronounce them. Our investigation is going great, but we do at least know what they look like. Here is Lin. One thing that really sets fungi apart from all other organisms is that they have these fine filaments, which are called hyphae, and together these hyphae are called mycelium, and they form a network. That's the main body of the fungus. Now you might think of a fungus as being a mushroom or toadstool or a bracket, but actually those are the fruit bodies. It's rather like how with plants, plants, how flowers, but we know that's not the only thing they have the leaves and the roots and the shoots, and the fungal equivalent is the mycelium. That's what I call the business part of the fungus that grows and feeds and effectively moves around. Those hyphae, can you see them with the naked eye? Well, the filaments are finer than a human hair. They're microscopic, so individually you can't see them, but you can see them on mass. So for example, if I was in the lab growing them on a petri dish, we'd be able to see a whole mass of them with the naked eye, or you could see them, for example, if they're growing on the surface of jam. Right, finally we're getting somewhere. Yes, we are. Okay, all right, next question Adam. Do you know where fungus has come from? I do know a bit about this because you know how I like talking about sex. I had noticed in that double episode that you made us do, yes. Yeah, well fungal sex is wild. Okay, go on. So you know that in animals and humans there are two sexes, there are males and females, but in funguses they have 20,000 sexes. Actually, I mean, I can be more specific than that. There's one species called skitsafylum commune, which has 23,000. It's not just male and female, it's like one, two. Yeah, there's lots. I mean, they're not really sexes in the same way that we have sexes in the animal kingdom. They're mating types. So what it means is there are so many different variations, genetic variations, which mean you are sexually compatible with another fungus. So think about it like this, right? If you go to a party and there are men and women in this party, you've got a 50% chance that one of them is going to be sexually compatible and you can procreate with them. Right. But that's fine for humans because we can walk into a party and if we don't like what's going on, we can walk out again and go somewhere else. Go to another party. Exactly. The point is that if you're in mushroom and you're growing at a rate of one cents per month, if you turn up at a party and you're not sexually compatible with anyone there, get my coat, guys. No, you're in. You're not my people. So it makes sense to be as compatible as possible with all of your possible sexes. I mean, the thing I'm mainly wondering about is just how complicated fungus Tinder must be. Okay. All right. This fungus sex is well then, but in terms of that question of where fungus has come from, actually, if you go back a bit further in time, this is something I was talking about with Lynn and I think that you will like this Adam. Fungi probably came on to land about 900 million years ago. Plants came on much later than that. Now, if you think about the early plants, they were unicellular organisms, bathed in water. They had nutrients all around them. They could soak up those nutrients very easily, very different matter when plants tried to colonize land because for one thing, it was a very desiccating environment and how do you get those nutrients that are stuck there in those primeval soils? This is where the mutualism between fungi and plants starts to form. Fungi, because of their filamentous form, can get to places other organisms cannot get to. They could get into those newly forming soils, extract the water and extract the mineral nutrients and pass those to the plant. And the plants, on the other hand, they can photosynthesise and make sugars and provide the fungus with those sugars. So this relationship together was the start of plants colonizing land. You're right, I did like that because it really does demonstrate that sort of interconnectedness, web of life and that you can't have plants without funguses and that there is a total network of living organisms that are totally dependent on each other. You know, there's a, they've got a phrase for this. Do they? What's the phrase? The phrase is the wood-wide web. Whoever came up with that is a genius. Let me just check though, is it an actual web? Yes, it's like a network of funguses under the surface of the soil in woods. In woods? In woods? In woods. Wood-wide. Does it sound an entire word? I haven't checked the edges, but yeah, it really works. Is this just an extent? Do they just accidentally grow into each other? No, I mean, the way that the interaction between the funguses and the tree roots is how tree roots exchange foods, you know, sugars, they actually excrete them into the wood-wide web. No, actually this is something that I was talking about with Lynn because I think it's not just food that they exchange. I think that they can actually exchange messages too. If a plant is attacked, say, by a pathogen or maybe fed upon by some avids or something, then the plant makes chemicals which are messages which it sends around its own body, effectively telling other parts of the plant to have the defensive mechanisms ready. But as well as sending them around its own body, these messages can go through the my cereal network to an adjacent plant which could forewarn that adjacent plant but there is some threat coming. And then they can run away? No, they can't. They release chemicals and hormones and defense mechanisms. This is a nice idea though. This symbiotic relationship between fungi and plants. And I guess in a lot of ways, that means that if we didn't have fungi, we wouldn't have plants and hence we wouldn't have animals and hence we wouldn't have us. And I think as a sort of badge of honor for fungi, I mean that's quite an impressive feat. Completely agree. But you know what's even more impressive? They are massive. Well, some of them. Some fungi are absolutely tiny but they also can be the largest organisms in the world. So they experience this indeterminate growth where as long as there's adequate nutrition and environmental conditions, they will just keep growing and growing and growing. And in fact, the largest organism in the world, which has been known as the humongous fungus, covers an area of 8 square kilometers in eastern Oregon in the US. This fungus that covers this vast area of forest and attacks trees as a parasite. Yes, I have questions. How do you even determine that something which is 8 square kilometers is the same organism? Oh, wait, I know this one. Do you take it on one side and see if it reacts to me? Stop it. Pay attention. So that's really tricky. You take isolates from the field and then you grow them together in culture and if they fuse, that means they're from the same individual. That's the traditional method. There are problems with that, of course. But the other way is just to identify them genetically. And this has been done and it's been shown that you can see genetic mutations occurring over time across the body of the individual because they're so massive. And I mean, given how slow moving fungi are in general, if you've got an organism which is several square kilometers in area, I am presuming that these are pretty old as well. And that's what we assume also. But if you were to calculate the growth rate of the humongous fungus and then trace it back to the center, you can then get some true estimate of the age of the organism. And that estimate is approximately 1,500 years old. Whoa, surely that puts it in the top tier of all living things in terms of age, doesn't it? Yeah, there are some older plants. Of course, the plants are much easier to age. And so it might be that this is much older than you think. Yeah, this is getting quite interesting now. Okay, so fungi, biggest organism. Check oldest organism. Probably check. Claced your organism. And I think that's one of the categories. Any other top fungus that you got for me? Alright, check this one out. Funguses may be the most numerous. Go on. Well, we think that there are between two and 12 million species. See, you're hedging your bets there with that number range, basically may as well have just said, between none and many. It's definitely in the ballpark. So about 150,000 have been described so far. But we don't really know because some of them are really, really small. And scientists are also just discovering new ones every day by the bucket load. Get this. Recently, 200 new species were found living on one single beetle. A single beetle. One single beetle species. Still disgusting. Yes. But this is why pinning down the number is so hard because, you know, people like Brin, they're finding new species of funguses wherever they look. And that includes in the local corner shop. I have been a specialist on a group of wild edible mushrooms that were the porcini mushrooms. And these are globally traded. So they're collected all over the world and sold worldwide. And I went to a supermarket in London when I lived there and purchased a packet of dried porcini. And then I took out 15 pieces from that packet. And I sequenced the DNA barcode origin from those 15 pieces. And when I looked at the DNA barcode origin, I found that there were three species. And none of them had names. So they were all new to science. So you were actually by say, porcini that you might put in a, I don't know, a risotto. They maybe undescribed by science as you put them in your mouth. That's right. And you may not want to go this part, but I have done a follow up study recently where we went to the supermarket and bought a number of different products that were listed as containing wild mushrooms of them. And then we figured out what was exactly in these things. And very few products are actually labeling the contents, honestly. Most of them use cultivated mushrooms in place of wild mushrooms. And in one case, and this is a bit alarming, in one case, we found a packet labeled as porcini mushrooms. That contained about 12 different species of mushroom in this packet. Two of which are known to be poisonous, one of which has been attributed to delayed onset renal failure in humans. And this is stuff you can buy through a large online retailer whose name shall remain private. Yeah, I'm feeling more and more positive about my decision to pass on that mushroom pattern. It does look revolting and that is a bit troublesome. But that is where the figure of 12 million comes from because basically everywhere we look, we find funguses. You can find fungi almost everywhere on the planet. So they live in marine environments, they live in fresh water environments, they live in terrestrial environments, they live on rocks in the most erud deserts in the world, they live in Antarctica under glaciers inside of glaciers, they live a mile under the surface of the earth, they are literally everywhere. And I understand there's even been some fungus discovered on the International Space Station. Yeah, sure, that might be surprising to you and your listers, but it doesn't surprise me when bit. Fungi are literally everywhere. I mean, they're floating in the air at every breath you take, you're breathing in fungal spores. So I'm sure that the fungi and the International Space Station arrived on or in their hosts, the humans. Wait, do that again. Are you, when you said every breath you take, you're breathing in fungal spores. You mean every breath you take? Yes, I think the average is about 10 fungal spores with every breath. Well, this is all taken in a laming turn. So it's a moldy Christmas special on curious cases and so far we are majorly standing for funguses. Yes, except maybe fungus in pate for. Except pate for version. And as our question of Paul hinted, there are certainly some fungus downsides too. So the reason that funguses are everywhere is because they're so adaptable. They can eat through soil, they can feed off radiation, they can even burrow through rock. Yes, and unfortunately, they can also burrow through your house. As my collegeist Lynn Body found to her amazement. As a student, I was living in a basement of an old house and it was there that I first really encountered fungi. I tried to open a chest of drawers one day and I couldn't open the drawer and then we all pulled and it opened and there was this mycelium attaching the drawer to the rest of the chest of drawers and then in fact attached that chest of drawers to the wall. And of course, it turned out to be the dry rock fungus, circular lacrimounds. So the dry rock fungus, the name actually is a bit of a misnomer because like all fungi, it needs water but what it can do and why it is such a nuisance is that if it has a source of water somewhere, maybe I don't know a leaky downpipe, something like that, it can move that water, it forms these mycelial cords, these packages of high fulfilments which have grown together to form rather larger structures which can grow through masonry and brickwork, grow into the next house even and transport water with it. So even if those other regions of dry it can take water with it, it can grow into this desert until it finds more wood which you can then break down. First off, I love the idea of viewing in a student house, realising you're living with dry rocks and that being the moment that starts your lifelong love with fungi, that's amazing. But what happened, what was the end of that story, how did you get rid of dry rocks? Well, what happened was we moved house but it's not an easy matter to get rid of dry rock because if it's just the tidiest bit still there and there's still water then it will grow so it's a very difficult thing to get rid of but the crucial thing for keeping fungi in control in your homes is to remove water supplies. Gosh, quite a job, is that what they had to do in your student flat? Well, I don't know, we've gone. We've gone left it there. Yes, the stuck together chest of drawers. Absolutely. Yes, I have complete sympathy for Lynn because I have also experienced really devastating dry rocks. You've had dry rocks in your house? In our previous flat, we're in bed one morning and my very young son came in and he looked over the edge of the bed and said, Dad, there's a mushroom on the floor and I was like a bit cross because I thought someone had been eating mushrooms in our bedroom and I looked down and I was like, it was eating mushrooms in your bedroom. I don't know why, I wasn't thinking straight but there was this giant, what looks like, half a portobello mushroom sticking out of the scurting board and it wasn't a giant portobello mushroom. Someone eating mushrooms in our bedroom would have been much better than the outcome, which is that we had dry rocks and they basically just ripped the house apart and had to you know, nuclear strike this because it's so resilient. Wow, that's incredible. I mean the thing is, there in a lot of ways, decomposition, that's sort of what fungus has done. Yeah, but this is what dry rock is, it was eating a building. Okay, all right, you mean I accept that but still decomposition, you know, chomping through dead plant matter where or not it forms an important structural part of somebody's boat is probably the most important thing the fungus has do for us. Basically, our planet wouldn't work if it were not for fungi decompose if fungi are really important because they break down dead stuff. This is crucial because apart from the inconvenience that if there weren't any fungi, we'd be up to our armpits and dead stuff, locked up in that dead stuff, arm mineral nutrients and if they remained in dead stuff, eventually the ecosystems would run out so fungi release those nutrients so that plants can carry on growing. Okay, now I just want to pick you up on something you said there which was that we would be up to our armpits in decomposing material where it's not for fungi. I wonder, forgive me for dragging you into my comfort zone here, Len, but I think this is something we can calculate, isn't it? How deep would the material actually be if we didn't have fungus to break it down? Well, Hannah, I think this is one for you to try to work out. Perhaps if I gave you some facts and figures. So if we think about the amount of plant material that is produced every year and we know that an equivalent amount would normally be broken down so let me give you some figures. If we were thinking about a temperate forest so forest in the region in which we live in the UK, I suppose that those trees produce something like about 12 or so tons of new material per hectare every year. If we were thinking about tropical forests, it would be double that, you know, something like 22 tons per hectare per year. So that's how much new material is made, that's how much would normally decompose. Then I suppose you need to know something like what the density of the wood is. We know that the wood has a density, well, if there is dependent on species but let's say 0.7 and from that I guess you can work out some volumes and areas. I'm passing this over to you now, you're better at sums than me. You did it, didn't you? I did it. Go on then, do it. What would happen if there were no funguses eating everything? Okay, all right. So for the volume of dead plant material that needs decomposing a year, you're looking at something like 63 trillion meters cubed. That's a lot of meters cubed. It's a lot of leaves, a lot of junk. And if you didn't have funcuses, that basically equates to about 40 centimeters of dead plant material per year, covering all land in just a beautiful blanket swamp of gross leaves and half-eat-infraint vegetables around the globe, which I think brings you up to your armpits in about three years. Yes, that is absolutely disgusting. Basically, the most important thing that funcuses do is decompose plant matters. What you're saying here, because otherwise, the planet would be a huge vegetable swamp. Yes, pretty quickly too. Unfortunately though, funcuses don't just sit around and patiently wait for plants to die. Funcuses actually can cause incredible havoc when it comes to our crops. So things like wheat, stem rust, riceblast, soybean rust, and potato, like all of those, they're caused by funcuses or fungus-like organisms. And the amount of plant material that gets destroyed as a result every year could feed millions of people. Right, so funcuses don't just get into crops, they cause diseases in us too. So, you know, athletes, fruits, there's ringworm, fungal toenails, thrush. As a technique, to know the details of your private doctor's environment. Right. Well, given that we breathe in up to 10 fungal spores with every single breath, lung diseases also are really big problems. So here's microbiologist Ada Hagen from the University of Michigan. The invasive fungal infections that can infect healthy people are known as primary fungal pathogens. So these pathogens tend to cause lung diseases. Fungal infections are very hard to diagnose, and they are often misdiagnosed as another kind of infection. But current estimates show that invasive fungal infections are collectively responsible for killing up to 1.5 million people each year. So that makes fungal infections, one of the most deadly among all infectious diseases. And the problem with treating these invasive fungal infections is that the number of antifungal treatments we have is very low. Many of them can be treated effectively, but not always, and that treatment relies on them being diagnosed appropriately. But then there's the upside for medicine too, which is that we use molecules from funguses every single day to treat common diseases in the form of antibiotics. Penicillin and sephalus foreign are probably some of the most commonly thought of medicines derived from fungi, but that isn't all. The fungi and the chemicals that they make are incredibly diverse. So we also have fungal compounds that can treat diabetes, such as acarbose from the actaplenis species, and what this does is it blocks sugar absorption, helping to treat diabetes. Statins can help with high blood cholesterol levels. Cyclosporin is a therapy for organ transplants and autoimmune diseases because it's an immune modulator. Another one is desphiroxamine. This is an iron key later that can treat iron overdose by scavenging excess iron. Lastly, a chemical produced by claviceps perpera known as Ergot has been used as a migraine therapy to prevent excessive blood loss and by midwives to induce labor. There's quite an interesting picture emerging here. You know, fungi, they decompose plant material, which is sometimes good and sometimes it's bad. They interact with our bodies, which is sometimes good, sometimes bad. Right, and the same is true with our food, because if you open a jar of jam and there's a mold on it, that's not great, but funguses can do very tasty things too. These are hugely important to humans, both in terms of civilization, Western civilization in particular, but even in human evolution, so it has been proposed that the ancestors of humans early on developed a gene duplication that allowed them to process ethanol so that they could eat fermented fruit, bough the forest floor, which enabled them, then to take advantage of a resource that other animals were able to eat, because ethanol is very toxic to animals. So our history with yeast and ethanol is a byproduct of yeast fermentation. May go as far back as pre-human history, may be literally written into our genes. But today, yeast are hugely important in the manufacturing of all kinds of foods, bread, fermented beverages. It's also super important in industry, and in fact, as a model organism in many molecular biology labs, the world over. So yeast has always been, but even today has become one of the most important organisms outside of our bodies that has shaped our culture and our society. Well, absolutely. I mean, we could talk about wine, we could talk about cheese, we could talk about mormite, other yeast extracts are available. That's just not true. There is only mormite. You could talk about corn. Well, there's vegemite. Well, we're not Australian, and we don't have a panda to that. But, well, I note on your CV that you have an interest in both brewing beer and distilling whiskey to interests which are quite close to the top of my list, too. Yeah, so it has been proposed that farming agriculture first was established as a way to reliably produce beer. It bred was a happy byproduct of that process. So, I subscribe to that, whether it's true or not, I don't care. It's true to me. Agreed. It is now true. Yeah, and that's one of my favorite hobbies is brewing beer at home, and then if you distill that beer, you have whiskey, and concentrating all of these really amazing flavors that are the byproducts of yeast, all the different yeast strains, all the different environmental conditions that can give rise to different flavors. I find that endlessly fascinating. And I think that is a fascination that dates far back into the origins of human civilization. Yes, absolutely. And I have to point out a legal disclaimer as my producer has whispered in my ear distilling your own alcohol is in fact illegal, and you must not do that. I'm just trying to think that are there any food groups, anything that we eat which don't have a direct connection to some sort of fungus? I'm struggling to think of one. There's not a single food that you could propose to me that I couldn't find some kind of fungal connection to. It may not be directly related as much as, say, yeast in lemon bread, or other fungi involved in the transformation of foods like to produce miso and soy sauce and that kind of thing. But nonetheless, fungi are so integrated into our lives that they are somehow always involved in the production of food. Maybe it has to do with them, the pathogens on our crop plants or mutualists on the roots of those plants, but in some way fungi are going to have a connection to everything that we eat. And this is a festive issue. If you're listening live or around Christmas time, I'm just thinking, what are cheese, wine, beer, chocolate? I mean, this is basically having a fungal Christmas here, aren't we? Absolutely. I always challenge my students and my classes to come up with all the different ways that fungi have contributed to their Thanksgiving meal and their Christmas meals. And it's a lot of fun to do that. In fact, one of the fun activities I do in my lab is I have my students isolate wildeasts from their backyards or you can even isolate it from your own body. And then we grow that up and I bake them bread that I then serve at the end of the course. So, you know, that would be a fun activity. This Christmas holiday is to isolate your own yeast and make a bread out of it to serve to your guests. I'm sure they'd love that. Yes, I'm now making a face and it's a good job. This is radio because it made me immediately think that if it's possible to bake bread from fungus that you've wiped off your armpit, then does that mean that you could also make cheese from that? Well, cheese utilizes different fungi. Different groups of fungi are involved in cheese production and the yeast that you get off of your body. There might be some shared yeast, but the yeast we're talking about, the yeast used in bread making and fermented beverages. That's a yeast known as saccharomyces cerevisiae. And it's a domesticated fungus that turns out. It's one of the few domesticated organisms outside of our crop plants. So, there you go without funguses. We wouldn't have wine. Yeah, although actually we wouldn't have grapes either because of course plants would, they only exist because of fungi. Right, but we wouldn't have cheese. Yeah. Again, cows wouldn't exist if we didn't have plants with they say. And we wouldn't have sourdough bread or chocolate. Yeah, I mean, I think the whole not having plants thing is probably the game changing. Okay, thank you Dr. Fry. Finally, we need to get back to the original question, which is why some fungus is good and why some are bad and the answer is whether they're harmful or helpful is all about your perspective. And really these organisms are just opportunistic. They take advantage of whatever resources they can and sometimes that might be at odds with human interest. It's sometimes that might be to benefit human interest. They are just doing their thing and we just have to accept that and live with that. We can't live without them so we have to live with them. So, Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to funguses, can we say case sold? Well, kind of, but there's a ton of stuff that we don't yet know. Science doesn't really have a clear definition for them. We don't really have a clear count of them either. And we certainly don't agree on how to say the plural of them. But without funguses, there would be no plants, no civilization, no antibiotics, no cheese and no wine. So enjoy your happy Maldi Christmas. Look, so there we go. I really enjoyed making that programme. The fungus is just a bit of biology that I am in awe of while simultaneously knowing almost nothing about. You know what, I don't mean, but wine, I've eaten a bling of blue and corkscrew. If I have seen video on the internet that says that you can open out a corkscrew with a shoe, oh, this is already troubling me. Jonathan, do I? Yeah, go on. Jonathan, you've got a corkscrew, Charles R. Studio manager. He's got shoes though. It's okay. I'm going to use my trainers. That might not work. So, Charles has seen the same videos of me. You have to go on the wall. You've got to go on the wall, right? That's a hollow wall. It's a hollow wall. I have real anxieties about this. The walls in our studios are made of polystyrene to baffle the noise. Now, I've looked around. I mean, I am really keen on this wine, but I've looked around and basically, oh, you've got, is hollow walls or glass. I don't even understand how this can be a thing. It's quite clever. What you do is you put it inside a shoe and then you bang the shoe onto the wall as it's a hammer and then the pressure that gets built up inside the bottle from the collision, just like pushes the cork ever so slightly. That way until it pops out. Okay, make it happen. I can't know this. I don't know. I don't know. I don't think it has to be on its side. Do I sound desperate? I need you to open the wine. Look, I can open the cheese at the same time if you want. Okay, all right. Go on. I'm going to do it anytime. And how do you feel about this mushroom patty? I think I've made my feelings pretty clear. Yeah, it actually looks bad. I'm sorry if mushroom patty is your thing, but she's doing it. She's really doing it. Is it moving? I tell you what, you don't get this on in our time. You don't get one of the gash standing up, taking their shoe off. Just smashing it. It's pretty chained open, some wine. It's smashing the bottle against the door. Yeah, okay. I think it might. It's a nice sourdough and a few made as chocolates, which are delicious, but I've eaten them already. No wine for us. One of the things that I love to bring saying was that not only is all civilization based on our utility of yeast, fire, bread, and beer and wine, but he couldn't imagine a foodstuff that wasn't immediately connected with some fungus at some point. Basically, planet of the mushrooms. Planet of the mushrooms. Oh, it's Matilda. Matilda, you're the best human. You're the best human. Off to jiles. Go on, I'll do it because it got my shoe on it. It's got my shoe on it. Well, you might as well stay for a drink. You know what, though? You know what that means. We're according curious cases. Chris was episode. Chris was special. I know it. I know it's November. Yeah. You know, in theory, right? When someone says, did you ever get that shoe thing to work to open a bottle of wine? Technically, it did work because it's just sort of struggling so much. She took pity on us and said, someone's going to get a corpse crew. So, I mean, that counts as a win for my technique, doesn't it? We're caught at a score draw. I think we deserve this on a Wednesday in November. You pretend it's Christmas. I'm coming over to get my glass. Oh, you know what? It just smells Christmasy. Cheers. Cheers. This is a treat. So, at this time of year, even though it's November, because we're recording this early, we give each other presents. We do. It's like an age-old tradition. Age-old, you're the one who does it over there. Oh, thank you. It's mine and here is yours, which comes in bubble wrap. Okay, thank you. We genuinely don't know what these are. Previous years' presents have included, well, there was one year where I thought I was being absolutely hilarious and got Adam a gigantic box that looked like it was going to be the best gift ever and inside was just a teeny tiny satzima. And I thought I was so clever and hilarious. Until it turned out that Adam had got me the most sweet and heartfelt gift when he'd like, gone through and got loads of pictures of us together and put in an album and I find such a jerk. But actually, I forgot last year's present. It was remained in my... I did give it to you subsequently, but it was that Irish accent spray. But you don't need, because you do the most amazing Irish accent, any? We didn't have an episode of Christmas last year. That's why we didn't give it to you. That's right. The year before that I made you a bat box, a dog detector. Do you remember? I do. Who's going to be the first? I don't know what it was. You've started opening, so you go first. Okay, here we go. Okay, so I've got what it's bubble wrap. Keep it nice and safe. It's very neatly wrapped at one of the firsts. Not by me. Very neatly wrapped. Oh, it's a book. It's going to be a book. It's a little book. Little book. Is this my book? I've made some edits. I thought I couldn't prove it. Oh, I'm not. There's some context for this. I think I might know. I don't think you will. Well, maybe not, but I think I have an idea about... Go on, give me the context. Well, we both Hannah and I like sciencey books and we also like old things and we sort of quite like I collect first editions and things. Anyway, so there's a program we did about gambling. Yes, we did. A few about probability. A couple of series ago. Oh, you've got me a really nerdy maths book that's really old. I've got your really nerdy maths. It's a little bit... It's in German. Oh my god, that's so exciting. It's a book by Cantor. But wait, it's not that Cantor and that's my error on it. My massive error on it. So I was looking at books of mathematicians that I thought you'd think were really cool. And I was like, oh, there's a book there in my price range by Cantor. The guy... Remind us who Cantor was. Gregor Cantor. He's just a reminder to you Cantor. Okay, he's like a really big deal mathematician. He did loads of stuff about some of the most fundamentally important mathematical theories. And he had a really weird like deviant lifestyle. Incredible life, incredible man. He was great. This guy. Cantor Moritz. No, I knew he was. Thank you. That's... But thought we counted it. Your initial reaction, I wish you hadn't opened it. I get over my present now. So my present is a reinforced faith in box and... It's probably because it's been a few days there. I can't. She's got some scissors. Now we know, listeners, that Adam has a pawn shop for Latin. And we know that he is a biologist. We know that biologists take naming. This is a very serious one. Oh my lord, what's that? We know. This has a manifest. Oh, you are such a terrible person. It is the most beautiful etching. Number 368,400 of some sort of flower, which has been labelled. And if you spell out the words on the label, it says, who cares? Oh, it's really beautiful. I'm also really offensive. Yeah, I don't put it up on your wall. Do I have to? Am I obliged to? You are. Yeah, it's like a proper traditional biological thing. And you look at it at a glance. You're like, oh, that's a very traditional botanist. They love that. It's just who cares? Who cares on it? This is like... Oh, I mean, that's like when I start lecturing, isn't it? This is what you're thinking. I'm saying, this is the statement. And this is the... It guess. It guess. Literally, you can thank you. That is lovely and properly offensive. And this is lovely. And almost a great presence, but just the wrong canter. Thank you. Merry Christmas. You don't have some cheese. I can't get into it. I can't open the packet. This is a nightmare. We've got like a blue cheese. Anyway, while we're doing this, there was another part to the question, which I think we should address, because we do have a blue cheese here. And part of Paul's question was about pregnant women eating blue cheeses. And not the government advice being not to eat, particularly blue cheeses. Now, we should address this as a question, because this is not an unserious issue. No, it's not. And actually, having recently had two children, I mean, you get quite worked up about it in a lot of ways. So, you know, just accidentally eating some blue cheese. I remember an entire long conversation about how melted fetter needed to be on a pizza before it was okay to eat all of that kind of thing. Yeah. But actually, this is not to do with fungus as a tool. This is to do with Listeria, which is a bacteria. And Listeriosis is the disease that can affect pregnant women. But what she's not to do with the fungus is to do with the milk not being pasteurised. And there have been outbreaks in recent times. So, do follow government advice. Yeah, the other thing that happens a lot is people say, well, they don't do it in France. All right? Don't, don't believe in, they're not, they don't have to stay away from soft cheese in France. Well, we can't travel to France in a moment. So, if there are any French listeners, do what your government advice is. Enjoy your, they test regularly, though, which is, I think, the key difference. Can I tell you one more mold based fact? Yes, please. I found out something that amused me this week when we were searching for the show. We were looking up some stuff on Fleming. Do you know what Fleming's original working title was for penicillin? I don't. Mold juice? I can't believe it didn't go for that. I can't believe it didn't go for it, though. I'm guessing Josh doesn't say I've got a bit of infection. Have some mold juice. Mold juice? What you need? Some leeches. This cheese is very nice. It's quite delicious, isn't it? Hmm. Quite delicious. Should we dig here of the week? Let's do Curio of the Week. Rather for the fries Curio of the Week. Okay, so Curio of the Week this week comes from Dr. George Inglis, who writes, did us rather than fry. I am currently working in a neurodevelopmental research lab in Phila Delphia and I enjoy baking in my free time. Often joke. But if academia doesn't work out, sorry, that cheese for piecing on you. The reoccur and the combination of reoccur and a hard cheddar. I'm having a good time to be honest. He says that if academia does not work out, I'll open up a science themed doughnut shop called PH doughnuts. Ph-D-O-Nuts. PH doughnuts? No, it's not on the way. PH doughnuts. PH doughnuts? No, it's not on the way. PH doughnuts. Let's not roll this out. It's a good idea so far. I've been on the page. I've actually manifested as a Halloween costume a few years ago. And in the time since I've done a few pop-ups, I was actually done it to try out some new doughnut recipes. This is amazing. When I heard your conversation about how the human body has seven question mark holes, it's not clear with that question mark is aggressive. I don't remember it being seven. I thought we decided it was two. No, because I forgot about tear ducts, remember? And your nasal, your nose, nasal passages connecting up to your esophagus. But ear holes are not a hole. Ear holes are not a hole. Eye holes are not a hole. But it's the tear ducts. Because they connect up in out. And for listeners who have literally no idea what we're talking about, it was when we were trying to work out the topology of human body. I think this is one of those things that's spread across a number of episodes. Because why are we talking? We were trying to work out the topology of the human body, because previously we'd said that all humans were doughnuts. And then someone wrote in and said, no, we're not doughnuts. We said that we were doughnuts because you said all living things are tubes. Yeah, that's right. And tubes are bits on them. We were topologically identical to our doughnuts. Yeah, now I got lost because then you said T-shirts only have one hole, which is clearly untrue. And then you said coffee cups only have one hole, which is also... That is true. Is it? Yes. Where does the coffee go? None of this makes any sound. How many losses a bowl have? None. I mean, you still managed to hold your soup, don't you? I don't like soup. Why I think that's going to be the basis for all important scientific research? Correct. Right. Back to George's email. Anyway, if you listen back to our backcast log, we had this whole conversation about how humans are seven-hours, and we did it much better, and Adam was much more on board than he was in that roundup. So George says that he thought he might be fun to try and make a humanized doughnut. Whoa. And ended up crafting a curious case, his pop-up menu for pH doughnuts. Now, he's sent a photograph over the doughnut that he's created, and it is indeed a seven-hold doughnut, and it looks absolutely delicious. And I am never short of all an amazement at the incredible level of effort that our curious put in towards being curious. It's astounding. Only one problem. He didn't send us one to eat, so you don't get a badge. Exactly. No badge. No doughnut. No, I'm waiting for it. It is Christmas. It is Christmas. But I mean, he does actually point out that it might not bear a transatlantic travel. Probably worth trying, though, is it? It is probably worth having. Sort of an import license required. I'll be worth trying. Well, George, you are our Curio of the world. Christmas Curio of the Week, no less. Which is a special new tier of Curio badge. It's not really. I just like to say to anyone who wants to be Curio of the Week, I realised that the standard has been quite high recently, but don't feel put off. Don't feel bashful about sending in your stuff. We will also accept any old crap. You don't have to... You don't have to set up your own doughnut company, the WinGurio of the Week. We'll, you know, just a nice letter. We'll do it every now and then. But we will leave it there. That is the end of this week's Curious Cases. Send us in your questions, your Curio of the Weeks, and all other thoughts and comments to CuriousCases at BBC.co.uk. And we'll see you next week. You're an amazingly professional, just then. Do you need to be somewhere? Rapper, I want to fish my wine.
