Ladies and gentlemen of the Academy, for your consideration, today's curious case of the counting horse, featuring Adam Rutherford as a horse. Yes, it was my debut performance in an equine role, and I've taken inspiration from such famous film horses as that one from Blazing Saddles. Black beauty? Black beauty, of course, and other horses. Horse with sprains? Was there a horse in that? I don't know, I'm seeing it. Horses on film, though, generally. There have been a lot, and if I could just take a moment to compose myself... Yeah, very, very. I thank you, thank you. That was remarkable. That was remarkable. Thank you. I'd like to thank various people. It's just so believe... I mean, I believe that I was there in the Stables with you. Yes. There is some relevance to my amazing horse... You're not in the horse impression there. It wasn't just any horse. I was there. I was embodying. Reenacting. Yes. Clever hands. The very famous German counting horse from the turn of the 19th into the 20th century. And because today's episode is all about Count Animals Count. I was really struggled with it. I ended up suddenly like Shaggy from Scooby-Doo. That was my best one. No! That was pretty good, actually. Yeah. I think I'm a good actor. Why did I ask Count? But she was too busy. She's above horse-naing. You're right. I'm better than that. I am not. I consider horse impressions beneath me. On with the show. Today, maths and biology meet in a classic tale of counting creatures. Yes, indeed. Retired school teacher Leslie Marl e-mailed curious cases at BBC.co.uk with the following. Can horses count? I think they can. What a rutherford and fry think. Well, what do we think? And she goes on to ask, any ideas about which animals can count and which can't? So in today's curious case, we have chicks, parrots and counting eights, not just Hannah. And it all starts, of course, with horses. Because there once was a horse that was famous for counting. And this was back in the early 1900s, and his name was Clever Hands. Clever Hands was a stallion owned by Wilhelm von Osten, a German maths teacher, amateur horse trainer and mystic. Wilhelm coached his equine protégé, until he was ready to unveil Hans' amazing abilities to the public. Which I imagine went something like this. I Clever Hands, what is nine minus six? Wilhelm wrote the sum on the blackboard. But Hans and numerical talents were even more extraordinary. I say, what about three quarters minus one quarter? Not only could Hans do maths, but he could also spell recognised colours, tell the time and understand German. This was one pretty clever horse. However, as his fame and talent grew, so did scientific skepticism. Could a horse really calculate the square root of 36? Well, in 1904, a committee of 13 experts called the Hans Commission was summoned to investigate. But Clever Hands wowed the naysayers too. Experts committee decides that the horse actually reasons. The remarkable horse named Clever Hands has just been examined in order that a decision might be arrived at, whether it is a horse possessed of extraordinary brain power, or merely, like many others of its tribe, particularly adapted to learning tricks from patient trainers. The commission has issued a statement declaring that it is of the opinion that there is no trickery whatever in the performances of the horse. So everyone was convinced except for a psychology student called Oscar Pfeunst. To test Hans, Oscar took control of the Blackboard and hid it from the crowd. But he'd sometimes write a different sum to the one the audience had asked for. So Hans always answered the question correctly, but only the one that was said aloud, and not the one that was written on the Blackboard. But rather than the trainer just pulling a fast one, it seems that the horse had been picking up on body language or other signals to indicate when he'd reached the right number. In terms of being socially savvy, he was being incredibly intelligent. But as cognitive psychologist Claudia Ulla from Kingston University describes, this episode had a devastating effect on the entire field of animal intelligence. After the Clever Hunts disaster, in a sense, researchers fell into much more tame exploration of what animals were able to do. So in this regard, it was very negative to the field. Undeterred 100 years later, Claudia and one of our students devised a new numerical test, which they tried on some horses in ethics. We presented the horses to buckets, and then we dropped apples into the bucket's plastic fake apples, not real apples, not to give away all factory cues to the horses. And then we approached the horse with the buckets, now baited with the apples for them to make a choice. We know that animals go for more, animals in general, including humans, we all go for more, and we found that the horses do, so that showed to us that the animals were actually contrasting the two sums and making a selection. All right, so horses can identify the number of plastic apples in the bucket, and they could choose the bucket with the most in it. But I don't know, does that mean that they're actually counting? Well, I don't think it's quite that simple, because the horses can tell the difference between one or two or three apples. But if you ask them to choose between three or four apples, then the horses will choose at random. So that means that horses can count up to three? Well, no, it tells us that they can distinguish between groups of apples that differ by a large ratio, but that's not really the same as counting. I think you probably need to do a bit more of that, John counting, Adam. Well, that's fine, because you are not the only mathematician in my life. My name is Marcus DeSoto, and I'm a professor of mathematics at the University of Oxford. Right, now this might seem like a ridiculously simple question, but what is counting? That is quite a deep question you're asking, because what is number? You're really asking. So counting is observing perhaps that one set of things is larger in size than another. So if I have two eggs or three eggs, then we give a name to the difference between two eggs in an nest and three eggs in an nest. Now, the interesting thing is, well, does a bird do that? Does it name those things? Well, probably not, but it still has an idea of the difference of number, because we know that birds respond to an egg being taken out of the nest. They know that something has changed. Is that counting, though, or is that just having a sense that there is difference between what was there before and what is there now? I think counting probably means going a bit further and naming things. It's having a sense of magnitude, and that's actually absolutely important for any animals evolutionary survival, because whether you're going to fight or fly depends on if you're in a tribe and you see another pack of animals. If they've got more animals than you, you've got to fly. If you've got more than them, then you can fight. And so I think the brains have evolved in animals to be able to assess the difference in magnitude between two different objects. And that is the beginning of mathematics. So it seems there are two ways in which animals can count first, subatising. And that is where, if there are small number of things, you instinctively know how many there are without having to count them out on your head. Instinctively, really, we can do that. For example, how many fingers am I holding up? Four. Yes, did you have to count them? No. Well, then you're as clever as a horse. Thank you very much. The other way of counting is just by recognising these big ratios. But there have been some studies which show that given the right amount of training, some species can develop some pretty nifty number skills, introducing Alex the parrot. How many green block? Or a good boy. Good parrot. How many orange wall? Very good boy. Okay, we'll get you that note. Alex was an African grey parrot. And the better his mathematical skills became the more nuts that he would scoff. But his trainer, Dr. Irene Pepperberg from Harvard University, found Alex's incredible talent went even further. He knew that six blobs of something was six. We then trained him independently that this squiggle was also called six. We would hide small sets of objects under the cups for Alex. So there'd be two nuts under one cup and two nuts under another cup and one nut under another cup. And then we'd say how many total and he'd say five. And this, we never trained him on this. It was pretty exciting. Then when we had the Arabic numerals, we decided, well, what would happen if we put Arabic numerals under the cups? And he could still do it up to eight. Right. So Alex, the parrot could add up and then not only say the right number, but he could actually identify it with the correct written symbol. Yeah, and that does really take things a step further because he's not only demonstrating real counting here. He's also associating a quantity with just an abstract symbol. That's pretty impressive. But this all brings us to an interesting question, which is, to the brains of humans and other animals, do we have an innate sense of number? Are we naturally mathematical? So I asked Marcus to so-toy. My favorite example is the fact that chicks actually order numbers along a number line in exactly the same way that we do. I want you now to imagine the numbers, one, two, three, four, climbing up on a number line. Now, is that going from left to right in your mind's eye or right to left? Most of us, I think, arrange that weirdly from left to right. But why is that? It's nothing to do with the way that we write our language, because if you're writing Arabic or Hebrew, you still have a number line which climbs up towards the right. It doesn't matter whether you write language right to left. The number line still goes left to right. Exactly. Now, we think it might be something almost innate about the brain, because we've been able to do experiments on chicks, which shows that actually, if they get used to seeing five objects, and then you stick eight objects either to the left or the right, the chick will go towards the one on the right, because it regards that one as the correct one, and will know that the reward should be behind there. And this is chicks of three days old. So this isn't a learnt behaviour. This seems to be an innate property of the brains of these chicks. So the chicks, it seems, have a number line, which goes in exactly the same direction as ours, which is absolutely amazing. That is baffling. That's baffling. That's as the token biologist on this programme, that is causing that. Go on, explain that now. No, I don't think I can. More work needed by you. Yes, quite. Inateness is one of those things in biology that people struggle with a bit. So I want to be a little bit more cautious about whether this is innate or not. OK, but even more difficult for biologists like you to explain is perhaps the most accomplished animal mathematician that I've come across. Her name is I, and she's a chimpanzee trained at the Kyoto Promet Centre in Japan. Here's Claudia Uli again. I is able to count items in a way that is better than human undergraduate students from Kyoto University. For example, in one task, imagine the computer screen divided in a grid of nine squares. And in each square, a number pops up in a random order. And after they disappear, she has to tap in order those nine numbers. And she does incredibly better than undergraduate students. And not only that, I has been able to teach, are you more her son without human interference what she has learned? That is amazing. OK, so I guess the question is, are these just incredibly clever individuals which have been trained patiently for years by the handlers? Or does this reveal that I, and all chimpanzees, or Alex and all parrots can actually count? Yeah, I think the jury is still out on that one. But I like to think anyway that we're all naturally mathematical. Yes, being able to perform simple mathematical tasks is just vital for animals to survive. And a really obvious example is weighing up how many predators in front of you and knowing whether you should fight or run away. If you get your sums wrong, you're going to end up as somebody else's dinner. So, Dr. Fry, is that case solved? Yes, we can conclude Leslie Marve that animals, including horses, do have some rudimentary mathematical skills. And that some particularly clever individuals given the right environment and training can even perform better than humans. Or at least better than you, Adam Rutherford. Thank you, Hannah, for describing me as clever as a horse. I feel like I'm the patty in this relationship sometimes. A little bit, a little bit. I've got nothing to say to that other than that it's true. You are as clever as a horse. Well, look, this was the last episode in season two because we were referring to them as seasons now, aren't we? I mean, the Academy Award that's winging its way to us right now is only further proof of that. I will acknowledge the various people involved in my soon-to-be Oscar. Victory, including BBC Future. BBC Future, Michelle Martin, our outstanding producer who fact checks everything we say. Also, the people who made our beautiful animations for us. Which you must go and see online at BBC.com slash future. Or you can just search using your internet fingers. Yes, indeed. And if you can't wait for the next season, which is coming up in this autumn, then you can catch us at the Cheltenham Science Festival when we will be doing a live version of the curious cases. God knows how that's going to work because we won't have weeks of research and the internet. While people ask us questions and reveal quite how little we actually know about these subjects, but it's about to be lots of fun. We should probably work out some kind of backup that we can do when we don't know any of the answers. We plant Michelle in the audience to ask questions about genetics and maths. That's a very good idea. My curious case is, what is the role of Choc's 10 in the development of the mammalian retina? Oh, well, I'm glad you answered that one. I'm interested in low Reynolds number flow. Well, I'm glad you asked that one too, because I happened to have written several papers on that subject. It's been fascinating. Yeah, because that wasn't fascinating. After Cheltenham, though, and before our next season, in fact, essential to our next season, please do send us your everyday science mysteries first to investigate, and the address is... BBC, no, it's not. I do that every single time. I do address them. Yes, it is curiouscases at BBC.co.uk. Just send them in. Yes, and we will see you in the autumn. Bye!
