Hello, the Curios. This is the magnificent return of Brotherhood and Fry series. We don't even know the number now. Must be. You stopped counting off to 16, I think. It's many, many numbers. We have not been around for a while. We've been, well, it's been a bit, pretty uneventful years. I'm sure everyone can agree. Yeah, yeah. Nobody's going on. What have you been up to? Just sitting around. You? Sitting around. Trying not to die. Trying that did successfully not die. So that was bonus for me. You know what, though, because you the Curios have waited such a long time for our return. We have decided to reward your patients with not only our new-ish 30-minute formula, but this time around, we are going for not six, but 12 episodes. That's scheduled 12 episodes, but bearing in mind, current form of 2020 could be anything? I mean, exactly. We don't trust 2020 by now. We're aiming for 12. Might be one. That might be it. That's my idea. But it is still, it's 100% more in theory. In theory, yes. 200% of the original. And here. 4 billion percent more enthusiasm. Oh, okay. I accept. All right, whatever. Here's the show. I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your every day mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of science. Science. Science. I like it. What is that? It's a hamster wheel, obviously. Why do we have a hamster wheel in the studio? Well, my furry friend, today's question comes from Duda in Virginia in the US, who asks, how many hamsters on wheels would it take to power the city of London? Yes. I did see that question in the inbox. Curiouscases at BBC.code.uk. And thoughts, are we really doing this one? Oh, come on, Adam. It's going to be fun. How many hamsters have to suffer to satisfy your absurd maths desires? Lots, but thankfully they're all imaginary ones. But look, you know what, there are some good science here, Adam. Hamsters at animals, that's your domain. Agreed. Biology, yeah. And they spin wheels, which we can use to generate electricity. So that's physics and biology together. This is our best only vaguely persuasive. I knew you'd come round. Anyway, as I was saying, most electricity is created in basically the same way. You've got a magnet and a coil of wire. And when you spin the coil in the magnetic field, you induce a current within. How you get that coil to spin, that's completely up to you. You can use water, you can use steam or wind. Or pointless furry fat mice. Well, here's being cruel to animals now. Anyway, we are going to need to plan our hamster grid quite carefully because London has a very particular history of how its electricity is supplied. And for that, I'm going to need to take you back in time to the war of the currents. This is a story that involves two of the big cheeses in electricity in the 19th century. Entrepreneur and renowned ideas, the Thomas Edison and Nicola Tesla, Polyglot and inventor of the electric car. Did he? No, and neither did Elon Musk. Anyway, in the 1880s, Edison has two power stations, one in Lower Manhattan in New York and one in London, a steam generating power station in Holman, Viaduct. He was using what is called direct current or DC, which has one key disadvantage. Sending electricity down power lines loses energy as heat, which means your power stations have to be very near to their users. Right in the centre of cities. Enter Nicola Tesla, who briefly worked for Edison's company, Machine Works, but went on to invent something that would spark a war with Edison, the alternating current motor. So a quick AC-DC recap, direct current DC, is a steady one-directional flow of electrons. Alternating current, AC, the electrons go back and forth. And Tesla's big advance was to make a motor that worked with AC, not DC. You know, you actually managed to get through that without making an AC-DC, so I'm very proud of you, I don't know. Well, thank you. Anyway, this spat was set on a highway to hell. No, you got ruined it. Because the big advantage of Tesla's AC system was that you could step up the voltage and transmit electricity across much longer distances, meaning that the power stations could be far out of town. But Edison wasn't the sort of man to let a demonstrably more sensible approach to providing energy to a population beat his idea. Oh no. He set about on a campaign to smear the name of the AC system to discredit Tesla and his financial backer George Westinghouse. We're going to come back to him in a second. First, Edison supported some experiments to show what happened when stray dogs were electrocuted with both DC and AC power to prove that AC was more dangerous. The experiment was then repeated on calves and a horse, all of whom were killed. Yeah, can I just chip in with my horrifically unethical claxon going off over here? Mm-hmm. It gets worse too. Edison then wrote a letter to the inventor of the electric chair, suggesting that he used George Westinghouse's alternating machines for the job. And then someone suggested that the term Westinghouse could be proposed as a word for electrocution. Yep, ethics claxon still going off kind of heading over drive. Yeah, I'd say so. However, eventually the war of the currents ended and AC was the very clear and obvious winner. Edison left the electric side of the business and now the world over, AC is the dominant supply of electricity. And in London, where we are going to put our hamsters to work, we are at 240 volts and 50 hertz precisely. So we're still doing this. We're still doing this properly. We're still doing it. And to do so, first we're going to need to know how much power London needs, which brings us to Lin McDonald. She is a smart grid engineer at UK Powernetworks, helping to keep the lights on for 8.3 million homes and businesses across London. And first, she gave us a quick lesson on units. A gigawatt hour is 1 million kilowatt hours of electricity. And that might be familiar for some of the listeners, because when you look at your bill, you can see the kilowatt hours. And that's how much you've used. So if we were to assume that a household is about, let's say, 4,000 kilowatts, and if you use that in an hour, that means a gigawatt hour can be easily power 250,000 homes for that full 60 minutes. They go then. So a kilowatt hour, that's what you see on the electricity bill. But gigawatt hours there, what you need to think in when you're talking about the hold of London, much bigger unit. And what the hell is a gigawatt? Okay, a gigawatt at them is equal to 1 million kilowatt, which is 1 billion watts still with me. Let's say that a gigawatt might be enough power to turn on a billion tiny LEDs, but not for any lend of time. A gigawatt hour is enough energy to keep them a light for 60 whole minutes. Yeah, this better be going somewhere to do with Hampsons pretty soon. All right, come to hand, Dr. Fairy. The joint is, London uses a lot of electricity in a year. Lynn told me about the city's annual consumption. That's about 38,000 gigawatt hours. So we know the annual consumption of London, but we probably need to address what our hamster friends are doing. So everywhere to assume our fluffy friend running in a wheel equipped with a generator could generate up to half a watt of electric power, enough to power a small LED light bulb. And everywhere to assume our hamster had infinite stamina for their waking hours and on Google Check, I think that's about 16 hours. That means our one furry friend of the hamster per year is producing three kilowatt hours. So during that simple division, that means we need 13 billion hamsters. 13 billion infinitely powered hamsters. So you might ethical treatment of animals, Clakson, has just exploded. I don't see what you're probably going to say, but okay, fine. You know what, you want to give them some downtime? We've got that covered. I'm sure like myself you're an animal lover and I've just realized I've not given our hamsters very much of a break. We probably should only have them doing an eight hour working shift. That means we need 27 billion hamsters for London's annual energy consumption. Now stick with me because I know that that sounds like a lot, but remember that 38,000 gigawatt hours, that is London's total energy use added up for an entire year. And we don't need all of that much in one go. We're going to be using different demands of energy at different times of the year. Electricity demand is subject fluctuations on a seasonal basis. In the summer, some of us, me included, I turn on the earquen. Or as we are now drawing into colder months of winter, we put on our heating and we have our lights running for longer. So looking back in 2019 and looking at Inner London, we saw a winter peak demand on the first of February at 5pm of five gigawatts. And that was where the temperature was zero degrees. So that's clearly evident that everyone on the first of February at 5pm had got home. They're putting their lights on and ranking up the heating. Yes. I feel like we're skirting around the issue of how many is a reasonable number of hamsters, the answer to which, according to my highly experienced ethical committee, is let me just check. It's none. It's no hamsters. Patients, patience is linn again. We do need to consider our customers' needs and they do at times have a higher consumption need for electricity. So that's, for example, when a lot of our customers are all coming at home and maybe reaching for the kettle, are all turning on their favourite television show. So considering the Inner London maximum power demand, which is about 4,400 megawatts, that's 4.4 million kilowatts. And with our hamster on their wheel running and turning this energy out, that means at any given time we need 9 billion hamsters. There you go Adam, 9 billion hamsters, you just got to work them into the ground. Hi, okay, I'm going to just park my pro hamster rights issues and play along. Am I right in saying, Hannah Fry, that part of your academic expertise is in examining the mathematics of cities and spatial analysis. So you finally looked at my bio? I have indeed. Where are you going to house at least 9 billion hamsters in one of the most densely populated cities in the world? Okay, well, I've actually done the maths on this. I had a little look online and I quite like the look of the hamster heaven Syrian hamster cage, Luxurious. Of course others are available. But they're about 80 centimetres by 50 centimetres, non-stop luxury for the hamsters. That is quite a lot of space for one hamster, especially at London property prices. I want them to enjoy their life powering the city. But okay, if every hamster gets one of those each and you lay out all of those cages on the ground, you're going to need an area roughly twice the size of London to power the city of London. Cairo, instead of Cairo is about right in terms of area. And I think it's a simple step to just sway to all the people of Cairo to upsticks and leave and give up their city to hamsters. Yes, yes. This seems like an absolutely terrible idea. Why are you laying them out on the flat anyway? Can't you just stack them? You can. They're still going to give you in total roughly a cubic kilometre, which is quite big. I mean, you could plonk it on Canary Wharf, I suppose, because that's about the right size. Yes. And this is 9 billion, which is the absolute minimum, as Lynn said. You'd probably need more like 27 billion if we're going to allow the hamsters to have short breaks for water and going about their hamster business. So all in all, I mean, it's a genius plan. You know, I'm finding your lack of faith, pretty disturbing here. We could spread out these hamsters if we wanted to. We could put them in the basements of our buildings. And if we did that, there might even be extra benefits. Extra benefit? I feel like you've lost your mind. Well, not according to Professor of Chemistry. And very important person in the case of the hamster defense, Andrea Seller, who has thought all of this through. Remember that a house, you know, we're not just talking about the electricity. We really have to think in countries like ours about the heating. And so maybe we should actually cite the hamsters inside the house, especially in winter, to keep it warm. Now, you're going to have to ventilate it because the hamsters, in those numbers, will probably get a bit smelly, right? But again, what you would need is to have heat recovery ventilation. And so that means that you have a healthy indoor environment with fresh air. But also your entire house is warmed by thousands upon thousands of hamsters. There also going to be a bit noisy in the drought, right? It's going to be quite hard to sleep. So I feel that these hamsters would probably be confined to the basement. And you can have thermal insulation on the one hand, but you can also have acoustic installed. I'm sorry, I'm stumbling all over the place now. So this is just getting a little bit silly. No, it's not. We're having such a highbrow discussion here. Definitely. I love how much you thought this through. All right, so this question from Judah in the United States, how many hamsters in wheels would it take to power London? Bear in mind, I still think this is absolutely ridiculous. But I am entertaining Hannah's slightly worrying enthusiasm for the idea. Hamsters though, may I suggest, are simply the wrong animal. They're too small, they're too smelly, they're too utterly pointless. Let's ask an actual animal expert for her opinion, shall we? Zoe Davis is a researcher at the Royal Vet College, and her expertise is in animal movement. There's a few ways to look at how animals move, some of which involve things like video analysis. So looking at how long a stride they take, how long their feet are in contact with the floor. And we can also look at things like how much force they exert on the floor by putting force measuring devices in the ground. In my head, I'm thinking of a horse on a treadmill, or is that just ridiculous? We do have a horse treadmill in our lab. That is, that is a thing. That is quite funny though, isn't it? It's very noisy. They can go full speed on the treadmill in the lab. It's got a giant fan in front of it, so that they can still feel the wind in their hair when they're running. So you just throw me, you have a fan there to make the horse feel like it's running properly, so it doesn't get too confused. Yeah, stop it getting too hot as well, but it's quite weird if you're used to running fast and feeling wind moving past you, and then suddenly you don't. I cannot overstate how much I love this. A horse on a treadmill is a real thing. That it is. With its main blowing in the wind. It's a beautiful image, isn't it? You know what, it's going to fill my dreams tonight. Just one second though. Why is your beef with hamsters? Well, I just think that 27 billion hamsters is too many. In a basement stacked up in Cairo, it's too many hamsters. There has to be something better, maybe bigger, maybe a dog, no, a cat, no, a bigger cat. Right, so cheaters do run super fast, but not for a long period of time. They are the real sprinters. They have huge power output and they run super super fast, but yeah, not for very long at all. They would probably fit in a wheel quite well though. But cheater, it would be a massive way. You keep distracting. It would have to be a big wheel. And they're very, very unmotivated animals. Cheaters are. Yes. Oh, well, that's cross cheaters off for a list then. And you claim to be an animal expert at a mother's first? Okay, fine. But Zoey's found in her research, race horses are actually really efficient at using their energy for running. They have these big elastic tendons and their legs to return some of the energy back from their muscles so they can do their galloping repeating strides. So if you want a really, really economical animal, something like a horse is super economical, they are entirely built for running at a decent speed over long distances. They're very, very efficient. Also, not great for wheels though. Oh, you're making this really hard for me. I know. If you want something that's going in a wheel, so running a wheel is kind of running uphill essentially. When bigger things run uphill, it costs them a load in metabolic cost. If you're a runner yourself, you notice how much you are drained by running up a hill, particularly small animals and really, really small animals like ants and cockroaches. Don't seem to see an increase in metabolic cost running uphill. So they would probably be quite good at it if you got some tiny weenie wheels. It's not a surprise to me there, actually, that Zoey thinks smaller creatures would be better. Do you know about something called Climbus Law? No, I don't. So Climbus Law is this idea that as animals get bigger, they get proportionally weaker. That essentially power doesn't scale linearly. If you double the size of an animal, you don't quite double its power. Elephants famously weak and small animals. Yeah, but you always hear things like, oh, an ant can lift a zillion times its own body weight. And if a flea was the size of a human, it could jump over the moon. And it's not true. Ants and fleas can do those things because they're small, not in spite of them. Is this the sort of scientific answer to the eternal and very important question? Would you rather be attacked by one horse-sized duck or a hundred duck-sized horses? Basically, yeah. I mean, I accept that the beak is a mitigating factor in that situation. But the power of a hundred duck-sized horses, you would expect to be greater than that of one horse-sized duck. So that's the answer to that question? Yeah, I mean, when it comes to generating power, you want as small as possible. But surely creatures like ants or cockroaches, Zoey was saying, surely they're too light. They don't actually have the mass to turn the wheel. You'd have to have bazillions of them. Which means you need to scale up a bit, right? You maybe want something that's, I don't know, it's like the size of your hand. Maybe furry. I mean, we're basically back to hamsters. Oh, my God, you're obsessed. To be fair, though, I did ask Zoey this and she came to a similar but not hamster conclusion. I'd say there's maybe better rodents than a hamster. One animal is a kangaroo rat and there've been lots of experiments done on them running in wheels and they can run really far about 50 kilometers over approximately 48 hours, which is very, very good. All right, let's just settle this. I also, if she had to pick one animal, what would it be? There are ground running birds that are also pretty good at running. The highest muscle power that's been recorded, really, is in quail muscles. Admittedly, they were their flight muscles but I'm going to assume they're not massively different everywhere else. So a lot of ground running birds seem to be able to run pretty well and are very good at just mindlessly running in a straight line. Right, how are they going up hills? Because they tend to fly if they need to go up a hill. You'd have to have a chat with them and ask them to only stay in the wheel. Right, I mean, we do need a long checklist here because so far we've crossed off horses, two big cheaters, two not going to go in a wheel. Ants and cockroaches probably not going to turn the wheel but you think quails is a good bet. I mean, I think your kangaroo rat is probably your best option so far. Ultimately, if you want to be completely ethical, then you should probably have some appropriately paid consenting adult humans. Oh, you think people would be the right way to do this? I think people would maybe be the ethical way to do this. I don't necessarily suggest that they would be better than animals when it comes to running in a wheel but maybe it would be slightly more ethical if they could consent and be paid. So there you go. Forget hamsters, Anna, best animal for ethical reasons would be us. Humans. Humans. Wait a minute. I've seen this movie. Isn't this exactly the plot of the matrix? Yes, it is. Robots, a whole robot ecosystem powered by humans in pods. And how did that work out for humanity? Really badly. Humans aren't exactly great to tap into for energy, are they? Look, it's basic physics. It's energy in, energy out. If your energy output is less than your input, then you're just going to get fat. If your energy output is more, then you're going to waste away really quickly and you will really need to sit down and sleep quite often. So as in, you should just power your house with whatever you're eating instead. Or maybe use the system that we have already in place and abandon this insane idea. No. Organisms are terrible, are terrible at generating energy. You know what, though? Humans need to exercise anyway. Why don't you just stick us on a treadmill to power our house? You're inventing a solution to a problem that does not exist. What's wrong with a national grid? You know what, though? I know the perfect way to ask about this. It's chemist Andrea Seller. If you think about a human, a human has a metabolic rate of about 100 watts. So if you think about 10 people in a small office, of course, the small office gets really quite warm because you have a kilowatt of heat, which is warming the rum up. If you now start thinking about the useful sort of work that people can do, it's only about two or three times that. I mean, in the Tour de France, the average power output of the riders is somewhere around 300, 400 watts. So I would define human power as being somewhere around 250 watts. How does that compare to what you need in a house? If I had a little bicycle out back in my garden, would I be able to keep my house going? That's really quite an interesting question and one that comes up again and again. So we've said that you could probably sustain generating about 200 watts on an exercise bicycle. Well, you know what? You're a pathetic one-fifth, in fact, one-tenth of a kettle. I think you're fine, too. Yes, you're one-tenth of a kettle. And humans are actually pretty measly when it comes to powering our appliances. The steam age didn't happen without reason. So you need 10 people just to have a cup of tea. So in order to make your cup of tea, you probably need 10 people on bicycles and they'll get tired after a while. If you use a power shower, whoa. The whole house is going to be a bit tricky then with the power shower and the energy hungry kettle. What about if we go a bit smaller than what? But if we're talking about just the laptop on my desk, could you power that by, I don't know, running on a treadmill, perhaps? I think you could definitely run an ordinary laptop without too much difficulty. The real problem with the treadmill idea is the typing on the keyboard and running at the same time is something that really only power users are going to be able to accomplish, but maybe with a recumbent pedal bicycle. So here I would simply say that maybe what you want is to take a holistic view of your life. And that is that your laptop is not simply a communication and work tool, but also a fitness accessory. So in conclusion, A, we don't make that much power. B, sometimes I like to be able to sit around and watch Telly. I can't calm down, Adam, because I've thought of this. There's a solution to this too. Batteries. Battery technology has been moving really swiftly. There's been such a drive to push things. So you could of course have lots of AA's, but there are other ways to store energy. We know of course about all these lithium batteries, vanadium batteries, sodium sulfur batteries. I've seen home batteries for sale on the internet, so they're sort of going your wall, these giant things that attach to your wall. What kind of batteries are those? Those are typically lithium batteries, and the great thing is that they're modular, and so you can scale them very nicely, depending on what the power requirements of your house are. This is something that I suspect is going to grow and grow, because in the last few years, we've really seen that batteries can make absolutely huge differences to the grid. Everyone has been worrying for a long time, and in fact the naysayers have been saying that wind power and solar power will never really work, because they vary from one minute, one day, one hour to the next. And yet interestingly, a clever grid management, but the other thing is just bringing in different sorts of batteries along with managing demand, is the way in which you're going to be able to deal with this. Probably put simply a smart grid is an electricity network that enables the two-way flow of electricity, because now consumers in this new world can actually generate from maybe their household rooftop solar panels and using their domestic storage battery, and provide that onto the network and they get paid for it. So I think certainly where we are now is you've got a more decentralized, digitalized, and democratic system. Big AC, so soon. So one humongous issue, on top of these 73 other humongous issues we've already been through. You hate hamsters. That is not it. I'm indifferent to hamsters. It's the grid, right? A hamster or a kangaroo rat or horse-based energy generation wheel system that really was a sentence I don't think I'd ever have to say, would how shall I put this? It would not integrate well into our multi-billion pound national grid infrastructure. Yeah, but do we need a grid? My feeling is that you do not want to abolish the grid. I mean, this idea of going completely off grid is something that I find extremely disturbing, because what you're really talking about is an extremely selfish way of living, and actually the grids as with the water distribution network, as with the sewers and so on, are actually really a monument to us as a social species. You know, you cannot survive. No man, no hamster is an island, right? And we are all interconnected and we need each other. And so I think if you've got your hamsters generator in your basement, it really should be connected with other people down the street by sharing in that way. One of the things we do is we increase our security. I think that's an important point, Nedrow, but there are countries where they don't have a national grid already. And in that kind of situation, could you imagine something like this or similar actually being a good first step? Well, I think this is incredibly important. And yes, of course, we have the luxury of the grid, our energy systems were set up in a time when, in a sense, there was an almost paternalistic, but also quite seriously business-minded approach if we make the grid then we will get customers, right? And there's a kind of whole economic model there. Now, of course, in countries which don't have the grid, and if you think about developing countries, I think unquestionably putting in village hamster sponges along with solar panels, you know, wind turbines and so on is brilliant. But ultimately, I do think it's really important not to imagine that you can really develop a society on the basis of isolated off-grid systems. So, Dr. Rutherford, when it comes to the absolutely brilliant and totally realistic question of hamsters powering London, can we say K-Sold? Yes, Dr. Fry, I'm going with a hard no. They're too small, too inefficient, and it would take literally tens of billions of them. Horses are too big, cats are too cat. And humans want to do annoying things like live their lives instead. In fact, animals overall are a really bad way of generating electricity. But one day, I will command an army of hamsters. You mark my words. Well, there you go. Hannah's weird obsession with hamsters. You got a hamster. No, no, I don't even like them. I think they're horrendous. Oh dear. Maybe that's a bit strong, but I mean, they are sort of pointless. They don't really love you, and they make a lot of noise, and they get lost in your house. And don't they like chew stuff? Anyway, do we just do meeting notes from today's recording? OK, yeah. For starters, we had to stop and pause our recording at one point and go out to tell off a man standing directly outside our studio who was speaking exceedingly loudly and add him with all of the bravado he could muster went out to be very aggressive. And then as he got there, he realized it was actually Clive Anderson. Internationally famous lawyer and broadcaster, Clive Anderson. Could you just keep it down a little bit? You actually said, excuse me, I'm sorry. Sound just bleeding through to the studio. You became really posh, you're hilarious. Some other meeting notes from this particular episode. We were having great fun looking at the battles between Thomas Edison and Nicola Tesla. Edison, man. I mean, not a fan. I would say, you know, I think they're a bit of people. We also spent some time looking at Tesla, Nicola Tesla. One particularly interesting article that we found. Yeah, apart from his, you know, astonishing contributions to electricity research and induction motors, you know, all sorts of all of those amazing things. The thing that we found most exciting about him was that he had exceptionally large hands and very big thumbs. And normally sized thumbs. And normally sized thumbs is what someone had said, which... There you go. That's the image that you can have in your mind of Tesla from this point. I'm looking at a photo of him right now. Can you see his thumbs? I can see one thumb. Gunter's been around. That is... It's quite big actually. That is quite big thumb. OK, we were quite silly in that program when we enjoyed being silly. But there was some really, really interesting biology that underwrites a lot of this, which we did talk about and then couldn't really include, because this program would have gone on for four hours. But the fact that animals are powered by voltage is sort of... It's so fundamental to biology. I argue in one of my books that it's actually the most fundamental aspect of biology. What do you mean that we're powered by electricity? Well, there's a fundamental aspect of our metabolism. So I want to say hours, it's every living organism as far as we're aware that has ever existed, which relies on there being a charge differential between one side of a membrane and the other. And it's called chemosmosis. And it is by the flow of hydrogen ions across this membrane that actually generates all the energy that all organisms have used. And you know, some people, Nick Lane, in particular, at UCL, whose books you might have read, thinks that this is the first step in the generation of life on Earth. This is the transition from chemistry to biochemistry. What is the inclusion of this movement of charge particles? Yeah, yeah. And also the fact that he thinks that is so fundamental, I agree, also gives you a location for where the origin of life occurred, which is in hydrothermal vents at the bottom of the sea. Because there's a natural environment where you're getting charged hydrogen ions being pumped up through cracks in the sea floor in the form of hydrogen sulfide. And you've got various currents where there's a very hot water and very cold water. And actually, you're naturally generating charge on one side and negative charge on the other. And that flow is where we think. We hypothesize metabolism begins. So it's not with DNA and genes and the flow of information from generation to generation. It's in something's ability to extract energy from the environment. Are you saying in some way, then, that biological organisms are just gigantic machines for moving charge particles around? Yes, we are powered by voltage. The molecule involved in humans, which is called ATP. I think we shift our current exact number and someone will write in. But I think we turn over something like four times our own body weight in ATP every single day. What? What do you mean turnover? Well, because ATP gets transfigured. It's adenine trifosphatine. It gets turned into adenine. You have a hand as face now. It's the face that I see quite often with her, which is, I really regret asking him this. And internally, she's saying, in a minute, he's going to start talking about Darwin. To be honest, Adam, by now, I know you're well enough that it was much shorter than a minute as I was expecting. It's just suddenly getting into the... I mean, you've already... I should have a bingo card, and I had a rather bingo card. Origin of life, you've already ticked that one. Some science fiction thing. I mean, I think there was a Star Wars quote that you snuck in in my side made me say, ACDC, I mean, honestly, we should definitely make Adam one. You're the one that brought up the matrix. Only because you wrote that line in the script. Should we do Curio of the Week? Brotherhood and prize Curio of the Week. Now, we received this email from Lan Hall to Curious Cases at BC.co.uk, subject a wannabe Curio of the Week, to Dr. Rutherford and Dr. Fry. I'm a 13-year-old who has been a Curio for about a month now. 12 and a half is a very good age to take up Curious Cases. Yeah, after discovering the world of podcasts and in amongst it all yours, I've enjoyed my summer break. So one of the few people on Earth who did enjoy the summer. I'm glad they did. I'm glad they did. And naturally after listening to many episodes, this is the correct way to do it, by the way, listeners. I'm an urge to be Curio of the Week. So I like that. After hearing the Snaps Big Etty story, which still makes me shudder, you should hear about what Adam and other producers for pizza bases, by the way. I'll tell you that another time. Inspiration for my Curio of the Week submission came. It's non-bred, by the way, non-bred in the oven with pasta sauce on top. No offense, Dr. Fryerford, but I am on doctor's mind. They were good. And it also... When it comes to the story, because when I help my mum make this, I usually have great difficulty finding a way of putting this spaghetti in the pan of boiling water without burning myself. And your way sounds like cheating. Wait a minute. Who's way? You're saying, am I always cheating? You're always cheating. Anyway, I hope you enjoy my submission. Thank you, Lennie. And with some luck, you might do me the honour of presenting me with the Prisdigis award that is the Curio of the Week badge. Now, what I will say is that not only am I extremely keen to give Lenn the Curio of the Week badge just for slating your spaghetti, disgustingness, but... We don't just give them out for a quest. No, no, no, no, Lenn has created something truly remarkable as part of their bid to be Curio of the Week. Now, attached to this email, R1234567 images, Lenn has drawn the most astonishing graphic novel of us and the spaghetti incident, which we will post on the website. It's honestly amazing. It's honestly amazing. It starts off with a full colour image of me with my red moustache and a pipe dressed, ready to eat spaghetti. There's a plate in front of me. There is a red-checked tablecloth, too, as you would expect in the finest of Italian restaurants. You've actually dropped your pipe out of your mouth and out of shock. I was about to transpire. We then have a number of pages. Essentially, what Lenn's done here is play out of Motherfadbingo. This is exactly what I was talking about. Got a slide of you thinking about Star Trek, a slide of you dreaming of pies, a slide of you thinking about wasps, which is brilliant. Lenn covers the space burrito episode as well from the last series. There's a picture of a satellite with some burritos in it. And it says, Dem burritos are smoking. This is really funny. It should be our catchphrase from now on. Dem burritos are smoking. Anyway, then we go through in graphic novel style, the whole series of events of having pasta, Adam snapping the pasta, and then me getting extremely angry about it and smashing the table. I mean, honestly, Lenn, it's like you were there. It's exactly like you were there. Hannah's in this depiction. That's ripping off a shirt to reveal Hulk-like muscles. You know, really, really ripped abs. Excellent abs there, it's amazing. And then the final image, it simply says. And from then on, no one ever served Hannah Fry's snapped pasta again. Lenn, how right you are. Yeah, you're undoubtedly curi of the week for the new series. I have some impressive work. That's very good. We have the best listeners. We have the best listeners. All right, that's all for this week then. If you want send us in questions or submissions for curi of the week, which can be thinly veiled or not, as Lenn has proven, then send them into curious cases at bbc.co.de.uk. And we will see you next week, unless 2020 stops us. I'm highly likely. Well, that's why we're going to do it. Don't forget to download to the next week. We'll tell you something. We'll show you every week. Don't forget to download. Well, that's why we're going to do it. We'll tell you something. We'll tell you something.
