I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. MUSIC OK, so it's a second part of why we... I say we, why I enjoy being scared. You hated it. The last one, horror. This one, adrenaline-right. Amusement parks. MUSIC Yeah. It didn't start well, did it? And went downhill from there. Much like a roller coaster. Very good. Indeed. Well, as well as a highly doctorate sent in this question. We should, I think, is important, given honour we mentioned to Amalese Narciss who you might remember sent in her raccoon man picture last series. Because she also wrote in with a question, why do people enjoy roller coasters? I am a thrill seeker and I am always terrified before riding a roller coaster. But I enjoy the ride itself. I would like both of you to ride a roller coaster if possible. So, dear listeners, dear curious. Q. Fifty-hole-minutes of Adam and I screaming because Amalese, your wishes are command. MUSIC Welcome back to this, the second part of our examination into the science of fear. It was all inspired by this question from curious listener Heidi Dockty who wanted to know why do people like to be scared? For example, going on scary amusement park rides and watching scary movies that make you jump. Right, so in the last episode you made me watch a scary movie that made me jump. Yes, and it was super fun. And that meant for this week's frightening experience, Heidi really only left us with one other option. MUSIC MUSIC Look around, where are we? We're in Thought Park and I'm not going on that massive roller coaster over there. Why would you willingly submit yourself to being terrified? I was absolutely mad. Wrong. You have nothing to fear, but fear itself. MUSIC I should probably point out at this stage listeners that alongside my fear of horror films, I'm not mad keen on heights or falling or... Anything fun at all. Hmm. Actually, I was going to say blood, I don't know. Right, well that one is not unreasonable. But anyway, once again, we had a very long trek around the whole theme park to select the optimal ride. Not too high. Not too droppy. Not too twisty. It's like basically Goldilocks and the three roller coasters. Anyway, we finally selected one that fit Hannah's very specific criteria. MUSIC Not, not at the front. Now we've got to sit at the front. Pick them. OK. MUSIC Oh my god, it's super uncomfortable. MUSIC And how are you feeling right now? Actually, not great. Not great? No. I haven't actually slightly scared now. I can tell when you want to genuinely when you're putting it on and you're not putting it on. And now we're moving. Cracky, that is quite a steep, isn't it? MUSIC MUSIC The birth of the roller coaster has been tracked all the way back to the 18th century in St Petersburg in Russia. During Winter Festival, giant wooden ramps were covered in snow to make a thick, slippy sheet of ice. MUSIC MUSIC Catherine the Great was even a fan, clambering up dozens of steps and into a hollowed out sled carved of ice before careering down the steep slope with only a piece of rope to hold onto. MUSIC She loved the exhilarating ride so much that she commissioned one of her own, adding wheels to the sled so she could ride all year round. MUSIC MUSIC By the mid 19th century, Russian ice mountains were so popular in court yards and upper-class homes that writer and publisher Robert Sears noted. The sledges are made of ice, dexterously shaped into ships and they are enjoyed alike by prints and peasant. In every town and village, these slippery declivities are crowded with youths and maidens, rushing down with the swiftness of arrows. French soldiers visiting during the Napoleonic Wars also grew fond of the Russian ice mountains. They brought the idea back home and the first rollercoaster to have cars fixed to the tracks was built in Belville, France in 1812 and named Le Montagnarousse. In fact, in fact fans, even today in Spanish, Portuguese and Italian, rollercoasters are still known as Russian mountains. But it was in America that the rollercoaster as we know it today really took off, according to sociologist Margie Kerr, author of Scream, The Science of Fear. In the US, the real popularity of the rollercoaster started with the invention of the electric trolley car designed to move coal and industrial material from one location to another. So they were set up on rails. It's very kind of Indiana Jones, but the operators realized that they could make money just on selling tickets to people to just ride from one place to the other and they found that people really enjoyed the hills and the turns and the twists and from there, it just kind of took off. Right. Well, while Russian ice slides and swirving trolleyes do sound like a lot of fun, it doesn't sound incredibly safe. No, it's absolutely unbelievable to look back at some of these structures and just to try and imagine what was going through people's minds when they thought, yes, let's throw our bodies down a hill at breakneck speed. There was no modern mechanism of safety, keeping you inside the carts. It was really depending on centrifugal force. It was incredibly unsafe. People would fall out and today, thrill rides are extremely safe. I mean, statistically, it would be, you know, like an inhypid lightning to be hurt on most modern thrill rides, but back then it was incredibly dangerous. Yeah, slipping down an 80-foot ice ramp in a sled made of ice with only a rope to hang on to does not sound like my idea of fun. What, well, you should be grateful then that I only made you go to the park where we had finally settled on a rollercoaster called this swarm. Okay, so the swarm is like a winged rollercoaster. You're strapped in and your legs are dangling down with nothing beneath you. Yeah, I wasn't keen on that bit, partially because I was wearing my favourite trainers that day. Yes. As you told me, when we were about to be catapulted from 0 to 4.5g. Yes, and it was at this point, this one, that I was starting to regret my initial hubris. Oh, that's quite steep. Yeah, what are we doing this thing in the dough? No, it's not. I don't know. Oh, no. Oh, goodness, it's slow. Oh, no, that's very slow. It's flowing down and I'm feeling. I don't want. Good, look at the hud. Yeah, not so brave now, Adam. Yeah, I'm really sorry about the screaming there, listeners. Including you. And I recall, Adam. But while we're on the subject of screaming, it turns out that the science of screaming is a fascinating scientific mystery in itself. David Popple is a neuroscientist who's been trying to get to the bottom of why we scream and why we do it in so many situations. You're born and you emit screams. You have pain and you scream. You're a surprise and you scream. You can scream and joy when your football team wins. Or you can scream and pain when your football team loses for that matter. Such a ubiquitous vocalization, what other kind of vocalization do you use in so many different situations? There is no culture in which there is no screaming. There is no human who hasn't screamed at some point. We understand very little about it, which is a little bit surprising. We dedicate a lot of effort to all kinds of other stuff. But this very fundamental thing is still a surprisingly new area of research. But as for listening to screams, if you want to work out why they generate fear, first you have to try and capture the screams of willing volunteers in the lab. You put them in a sound booth just like I'm here right now and you either ask them to scream and you'd be surprised. Some people are incredibly good at this. I mean, there are just blood-curdling screams that we've recorded from people. But you can also make them afraid. So suppose in a transparent plastic box, I suddenly put a huge spider in front of your face. You might just scream. And it does cause for some consternation in a lab when people walk by and they hear absolutely scary screams coming from lab in the corner of the building. But the acoustic feature that's typical of fear screams is the feature of roughness. I mean, it literally was be called rough because people when you ask them what does it sound like they sounds kind of rough. Right, so how rough are we talking here? Okay, well, here is a scream that has a low amount of roughness. And here is one with a high level of roughness. Right, yeah, I get it. That one definitely sounds more sort of fluttery and in fact rough than the other. Indeed, hence the word. So what is the actual difference between those sounds? Well, so the second one has got a higher modulation rate that's essentially how fast its loudness goes up and down. But actually, they also recorded and measured people speaking sentences as well as screams. So here is one with a fairly high level of roughness. It's right behind you. Yep, I would run away from that. And here is a sentence with low roughness. It's right behind you. That one is much more panto than Halloween, I'd say. Oh no, it does not. The interesting thing about roughness is that it's also a quality that we find in other man-made sounds as David explains. Car alarms, fire alarms, sirens and house alarms also have the same acoustic feature. Signals that are supposed to tell you something alarming is happening, even if they're synthetic, also have that. Now, the people who designed the sounds, they arrived at this insight intuitively. So it's just by playing with sounds that they arrived at what is a really alarming feeling signal and they hit exactly on roughness. Now, when the research team put participants inside the brain scanner and played them sounds that are rough like screams and alarms, they found that this activated a very small part of the brain called the amygdala, which is involved in generating the emotion of fear. So the amygdala tracks roughness directly. So the more rough the sound is that you present to a listener in the brain scanner, the more that part of the brain is activated. So the amygdala tracks, for instance, roughness directly. These signals kind of reach into your head and give you very, very quick pathways to yield a kind of frightening experience. No, meanwhile, back at Thought Park, I was having my own frightening experience, giving my fear circuits a workout. Alone, it turns out, this was a terrible idea. Oh, no, that's not right. That's not right. That's not right. My shoes, I really like these shoes. No, that's really amazing. Why would you do it? Yeah, consider that payback for making me watch that horror film, answering. I really didn't like that at all. But maybe I was lucky on the rollercoaster ride of terror because other historical research methods have been even less enjoyable as psychologist and broadcaster Claudia Hammond told me. There have been all sorts of experiments done in the lab with fear and trying to induce fear in people. But there was one called Albert Axe, and in the 1950s he wanted to measure how the body reacted to fear. But he needed it to be a genuine reaction. So he actually put electrodes onto the back of people's hands and gave them all the electric shocks. But then suddenly, there's a bang and there are sparks flying and the experimenter pulls the plug out and looks really panicky and says that they must get out straight away and they think it's all going wrong. They then go into another room and another confederate in the experiment shouts at them for a while and tells them that they shouldn't have left the room and that they've done it wrong. And then they hook them up to a lie detector and say they're going to find out whether they're lying or not so that they basically have a really terrible time. And then, in fact, what they're doing is trying to measure the physiology of what's going on and trying to look at things like their galphonic skin response, the sweating in their fingertips. You'd have a job getting that past an ethical committee today. Yes, you can't do these experiments now. You have to rely on when they were done before. Even with the ethics at Wellhouse of Kielter, did it actually work? Well, it did. I mean, they did say that they were really scared. One volunteer said that he was repairing himself to die. And another said he was so upset. He was ready to punch the scientist on the nose, but luckily it got sort of stopped at that point. But he did discover that fear has certain effects on the body or these things that we know about now that it increased adrenaline, that the heart rate goes up, that your skin temperature drops, your pupils dilate, and our tolerance to pain increases, which of course is useful if you're about to fight. Now, Heidi Dockert's question was, why do we actually enjoy being scared? It is a chance to get an adrenaline rush and to feel certain physical experiences that might be pleasurable and that are certainly different in safe circumstances. So you can go on the roller coaster and you're not actually going to die, but you can have that feeling of something really scary being about to happen to you and you can try it out in safety. And of course, it's control that it takes whether something is a thrill or a really hugely traumatic experience. I don't like that so much. You made this go twice. I didn't like that one. I loved it. I feel dizzy. I've lost vision in my left eye as well. So, Dr. Anford, when it comes to why we like to be scared, can we say case solved? Well, Dr. Friu, when we're scared our heart rate goes up, our pupils dilate and our tolerance to pain increases, all of which helps prepare our bodies for fight or flight. Screaming has an acoustic roughness that stimulates the amygdala in our brain to make us feel afraid. But we can stimulate all of these powerful scare responses in our body in safety by watching horror films or riding on roller coasters. And now that you've had your event, I can go back to experimenting on you. We had a very nice press officer from Thought Park, uh, a followers round for the day. Initially, when we arrived, I genuinely, I take a, I take a bit of a warming up. I don't want to do it at all before it begins. And then the moment it starts, it's actually generally it's okay. So, you know, I have been to amusement parks for pleasure before. The, um, the, the, the lovely press officer that came along in the beginning, she was like, goodness me. These people are going to be here all day because I was vetoing everything along the coast. And then by the end of the day, even though we could clearly, we're clearly recorded more than enough tape to fill an entire series. We were still insisting on going other rides with her helping us to shortcut the cues. That's right. It wasn't the, um, I know it's not polite to gloat about this, but man, jumping the cues, that is the best way to go to Thought Park. Oh my goodness. Just straight to the front. It was, it was, I did feel a little occasionally bit bad for people when you actually saw their faces as they'd been queuing for 40 minutes. Mm hmm. And then a team of Thought Park workers just pushed us in front of them. And then there was one, we're going to hear from another ride that we didn't put in the program in just a minute, but we did have to delay this because when we got to the front of the cue, they had to shut it down because someone had vomited while on the ride. This is the saw ride. Yeah. Yeah. I think it's important to play this one for starters. I think that other person's reaction, I think, does really illustrate that this one was not, well, it was vomit and juke. I mean, as ever, it's by the fact that someone did it was vomit and juicing. It was literally vomit and juicing for that person. Literally vomit and juicing. But I think it also points out very clearly that, it wasn't a universal day of fun for everyone. I think I'm like just close to my eyes throughout. It's very dark. Oh, it's really not sure about the taste of the dark. It's not very nice. It's not very nice and rotating blades. Oh god. It's pitch quack. Oh my god. Oh no, that wasn't pleasant. That was deeply unpleasant. You didn't like that, did you? No. Oh, that was quite a good fun because that was a horror thrill. That was not nice. Oh no. And now it's a vertical time. That's properly vertical. But that was interesting because that was like a horror film. The darkness and then the not known what's coming. That was good. No, I like that a lot. That's not cool. That's not cool. Not mad if you know me. This is vertical. That's kicking on its part. How did we do this? Oh god, no, no, no. No, I did not like that. Okay, I'm a painer over there in the bar. Oh my lord. Criking. That was brilliant. Yeah, I did not like that. I like that long. I know. That was my favourite of the day. Was it interesting? Yeah. Because of the horror thing. I think so. You put people you're going. Oh, that was super exciting. You want to do that again. So that was the sore ride at Thorpe Park. And that's based on the film sore. In fact, it's about 11 of them now. They're all pretty bad films. This is like gory horror. And I've got to say it's low quality stuff. That ride was better than almost all of the films. You know, the real reason why I get a little bit nervous when we arrived, certainly about the bugs, is that when I was writing my book, a Hello, Well, Don't Like to Bride, got a nom-note for two extremely impressive words. But whatever. By the by. Michelle's going to cut that. When I was researching my book, I was looking at this idea of who should be in charge, right? Automation or humans. And the thing is, there was a crash at Alton Towers a few years ago, where there was an error light that came up to say that there was a problem with the ride. And two people fought for various reasons. A kind of series of events happened to lead up to that. But two people working on the rides decided to override this error message. And across a desk, both had to separately turn their keys to override this automated process. And as a result, very famously, a group of people were very badly injured as a result of that. So I spent a long time researching that crash. And you can't help but it played in your mind, even though you know that, probabilistically, it's just not likely. But that was the reason why I was absolutely adamant. I can't possibly go to the front of the ride. That's why you did want to sit the front. Yeah. Are you sure you're not just post-hawk rationalising the fact that you just don't like it? No, because I used to. I used to be fine going to the front. But I think it was just, yeah, I don't know. It's funny how the brain works there, isn't it? Because I understand probabilities, right? I understand, as they said, you know, in a clip in our program, that you're more likely to be hit by lightning than be injured on one of these things. Although, have you said that, actually, I have been stuck on a unride at all to towers, in fact, we went as part of a physics trip with school, right? Yeah, we went with justification for that being almost as valid as the justification for us going to thought part for Radio 4. It's true. Anyway, we went for this trip, went on a blivian, the ride at all towers, got right to the top, yeah, right at the very high bit, and then the ride broke and we were stuck. And we were stuck up there for so long, so I had to ab-sail, but they like climb up and then ab-sail down to come and talk to us. I mean, it's like the accentuating on that bit. But it was raining as well, so we completely drenched, but it ended up being the best thing possible, because by the time we eventually got down, they gave us some KFC. Hello. I'm not gonna say that, other chicken is available. And a pass that meant that we could jump the cues for the rest of the day. Amazing. The best thing ever. Amazing. The school trips that I went on to, one of them, the only memorable one was we went to a sewage plant in Suffolk. This is absolutely true. We did a- Are you serious? It was a sewage plant. It's supposed to be in one lesson. This is just like a school trip. The whole year went to the sewage plant, and I mean, I've got these very clear memories of A laughing at Poos, because when we were 14- It was a sewage plant. But also, interesting fact, loads of strawberry and tomato plants everywhere, because they don't get digested, so that was just like- What do you mean they don't get digested? The seeds and strawberries and- What? Yeah, so it's just like strawberry plants going everywhere. What are you joking? No. Where? Like in the back. Just everywhere or in the back. And you see it? In the vats. But like around everywhere, there's just like strawberries and flowers everywhere. That's so weird. Who's it? Yes. The idea that you've got these oceans of poo. But scattered by these beautiful little red strawberry plants. It's like a metaphor for something- Not sure what, mate. No, I don't really understand metaphors. I'm not saying the whole point of seeds is that they're supposed to pass through the digestive system. Maybe one of our curious ones to send us a question in about seed dispersal. Okay, I need to ask you a question about birds eating seeds. Yes. Do birds digest the seeds? No, they don't. That is how seed dispersal works. But then- So if you look at- I mean, yeah, but then what- What- How do the birds survive? Because the fleshy bit of the fruit, the sweet bit that we like, the tasty sweet bit. But they only eat the seed bit. No, they swallow the whole thing. So we've got a cherry tree in our garden. And they eat all the cherries just at the point where we're about to pluck them and make cherry jam. They eat every single one of them. And then for the next few weeks, we just find cherry pips everywhere in amongst the bird poo. What about like sunflower seeds? Because I used to have a coca-couture and we used to feed it sunflower seeds. They crunched them up, don't they? Yeah, and what happens there? I am no seed expert and I'm quite close to the limit of my seed dispersal knowledge. So I'm going to call it a day. I'm going to bring it back to fear now because the- The point of going on that sort, the sort, we've done movies and there's a movie, there's a scary movie in- In Thorpe Park that we went on the sort, the saw ride. But- Because we were talking about screaming with your neuroscientist David Popper. Oh, we were. Right. And- And I- I- I- I- way to link all these things back together because you know- I'm a bit of a film-led. You've never mentioned it. I haven't, haven't I haven't. But one of the most famous sound effects in the whole of cinema history is a scream. It's called the- Theville Helms Scream. And it sounds like this. BOOOOO! Yeah? Is that it? Yeah, that's it. Right? Okay, tell me the list of films that are in. So you will have heard this scream in probably dozens of different films. Because the- It's a lovely story. This- it- basically, it was recorded as part of a- um, cab-boy-film called Distant Drums in 1951. And then somehow it became part of the studio's audio library and then got reused in loads of other films over the next few years. Most of which- no one's heard of. One of the more famous ones is it was used in- A Star Is Born, the Judy Garland version. It's not the- Not the Lady Garg- Not the Lady Garg-Gar version. I don't know, maybe they did. It's quite possible they did. Because then what happens is that in 1977- this guy Ben Burt who is the sound designer for a small science fiction movie called Star Wars. I think that one will do well. Right. He pulls it out of this archive, just finds it, and uses it in Star Wars as- I think it's when a stormtrooper is falling off a gantry, the one that- uh- Luke Skywalker and Princess Lear then swing across, right? Famous scene. And from that point on, the Ville Helmscream gets used as a sort of in-joice, a cinema in-joke. And it gets used all the time, it's in every single Star Wars film, until the last one, interesting, I am really nerding out about this. I first came across it aged about seven, when it's in Indiana-Joke, the first Indiana Jones film, which is Rated to the Lost Star, where it gets used twice. Okay, okay, okay. So- But hang on, so it wasn't- It was just, you know, broadly used, until Star Wars used it, and then people used it, knowing that they were using one because it was in Star Wars. Exactly, and now it gets referred- It's like an editor or a film effects person's in-joke. You can identify the Ville Helmscream in this. And it's- You will have heard it in dozens and dozens of films. My children, because I pointed it out to them when they were quite young, they know it. It's in all the toy story films. Is it? Yeah, almost all of the Pixar films, I think. Really? All of the Star Wars films until the most recent one- Wait, play it again, play it again. Awww! See, it's ridiculous, isn't it? I mean, it's such a bad screen. Why is it called the Ville Helmscream? It was Ben Burk from Star Wars, who named it the Ville Helmscream, because that was the name of the character who screamed it not in the original, but another one that was called the Charge of the Feather River. It says here on this website. Says someone who definitely has not just Googled this, it's a factual information. Sure. Yeah, okay. He gets stabbed in the- In the- It says here- He- A soldier gets stabbed in the leg with a spear. Actually, it's used three times in that film. I mean, that's just lazy, isn't it? It does sound like it kind of has a feeling of pain, you know, within it, rather than just- It's not very convincing though, is it? Is it rough? How rough is it? Oh yeah, play it again. Gone. Awww! Oh, it's ridiculous. Anyway, that is one of cinemas' great in jokes. So, it's basically rap. It's tying together. I feel like it's tying together this whole double episode. In a nice, neat little bow, ready to send out into the world. That's a lovely thought to end on. Here's Curie the Week. Rather than a prize, Curie-O, of the week. Oh boy, that stash of gold Curie-O badges is about to get depleted. Because we have got a letter in from Rosie Paulsett, who is aged 30 and a half. And here's what she has to say. Dear rather than a prize, I made these models of you doing your stuff. I spent many days making this while listening to all of your previous episodes. I hope you like it. I have forced a friend or two to listen to the podcast. Fost being the opposite way. I'm kind of a friend. Sit down while I tie you to this chair. Well done Rosie, that shows true commitment. That would be a Curie of the Week. I totally agree. I enjoy singing along to your theme tune and the Curie of the Week song. Thank you very much for all the trouble you and everyone in your team go to to please us the Curieos. I'll be honest with you Rosie. It's not really that much trouble. It's more a pleasure than anything else. We love it. She sings off Yours Forever, Rosie Paulsett, which is I think how everyone should sign off all their letters from now on. Now what she's actually sent in is it's a thing of beauty. The bar is just getting higher and higher for the quality of applications for Curieos of the Week. Because what Rosie has done is she's sent us six photos of the diorama made of Lego of us making the Curieos cases. Yeah. We put them on the website. It's amazing. It's amazing. So each of us have our own Lego character. Adam has a mustache. Yes. I have long-lived hair. Thank you very much. Michelle actually looks quite a lot like the real Michelle, which makes me wonder, how has she found out? Well, you look like Michelle. How does she know where she found you? She's also wearing a, um, people who are familiar with Lego will know that there are dresses in Lego, which are actually just sort of big blocks with a, with a slope down the back. Michelle has got a very large, which I think must be a Victorian dress on, which... Wait, I can't see that where. Yeah, there's not legs as that's a dress. Oh! Does that mean that if you're, if you're wearing a dress, you can't move your legs independently. That's right. You've got a skirt on. I've got dungarees on. But yeah, Michelle's wearing a Victorian dress. And listeners, that is what Michelle wears every day. It's scarily accurate. Yes. She also wears a hair exactly like that. Yeah, it's true. I mean, I'd be a bit worried that Rosie's been around your house and then peeping in your window, Michelle. That's what I'm saying. So the bottom half is from, I think it's from the Lego movie sets and it's when wild-styles dressed in cowboy gear. How do you have time to do anything else if you're watching this many films? And the top half is, I think, an astronaut's outfit, which is appropriate because in one of the photos we are interviewing and actual astronauts. Yeah. Oh, yeah. And it's a female astronaut, which I particularly like. I'm going to guess it's a Sneeter Williams. That's going to be my guess. I think so, because I have met Sunny Williams and one of the pictures is the side view of me talking to said astronauts. Next to a rocket ship that Rosie has built, there's also shots of us in the studio. Is it brilliant? She's just had the side view of you messing around on the podcast. I'll have you know Rosie. There is no messing around here. No messing around. We are very serious and important. And the details here, so we've got microphones each. We've got a little script in between. We both look... Actually, I look quite stern in one of the images. Michelle's laughing. That mostly is... Far own brow. Mostly it's the other way around. Yeah, let's be honest. Michelle looking slightly stern as we are. Definitely not messing around. That's true. One minor accuracy detail. So we're going to put this on the Curio's image gallery for all to Peruz. But Rosie Paul's, you are Curio of the Week forever. Gold star. Gold star. We're handing these out really nearly now. This is earned. Right, that's it from us this week. As ever, please send in your questions. Because otherwise we wouldn't have a show to make. Yeah, and that thing that we absolutely hate doing, but it makes such a big difference, which is that if you listen to the show, which you obviously are because you're listening, can you subscribe to the Curio's cases podcast? Which you obviously are doing because you're listening to me now, saying these actual words that you're listening to. In your ears. Right, so that's it for Fear Part One and Fear Part Two. As Hannah says, things are going to return to me being tortured. I expect very soon. Not next week, though. True. Because next week we have a very special question that has come from Rutherford and Fry and Fry. Find out later. Who might that be? Here's a question. A man escapes from one of the world's most brutal dictatorships. He's risked everything to do it. But once he's free, he digs a hole, and he tunnels straight back in again. Why? I'm Helena Merriman and I'm a man who's got a lot of money. I'm a man who's got a lot of money. I'm a man who's got a lot of money. I'm a man who's got a lot of money. I'm a man who's got a lot of money. I'm a man who's got a lot of money. I'm Helena Merriman and over the past six months, I've been investigating an extraordinary escape story for BBC Radio 4, a story involving a tunnel, a spy, and an American TV network. To subscribe, search for Intric, Tunnel 29 on BBC Sound.
