Hello and welcome to episode four, four of Curious Case of Season Two this week. It's a little bit rude. It is quite rude. X-rated almost. It's not X-rated. It's just biology. We're talking about body hair and we were, the question was specifically about leg hair, but I got to interview Alice Roberts, the delightful Alice Roberts since she was talking about evolutionary biology and anatomy and inevitably we got to talking about what she described as islands of hair. The interview for which I'm very sorry that I wasn't present for, mostly consisted of Alice Roberts seeing just how far she could push Adam Rutherford before he lost all professionalism and crumbled into a heap of giggling mess on the floor. I've got to say that I've done a lot of interviews over the last few years, mostly with scientists and that was really one of the hardest because I could tell she was toying with me a little bit like a cat with a sort of wounded mouse and every time she mentioned some hairbrains, thick hairbrained hairbrain theory about why we have particular regions of body hair, I knew she was trying to get me to do that. Anyway, if you would like to hear Alice Roberts say some things that we could not put on Radio 4 at midday during half term, then please listen on to this ex-rated special cut podcast which has those delights there for you to behold. It's not ex-rated, it's just biology, very naughty biology. Today the curious case of the hairy hominid. Hannah Monti from Edinburgh emailed curiouscases at BBC.co.uk with the following conundrum. How does leg hair know that it's been cut? It doesn't seem to go continuously but if you shave it, it somehow knows to grow back. Yes, hair is a bit of a strange one when you stop to think about it. How hairy are you Adam Rutherford? I think that's a very personal question. On one to the Yeti. One to Yeti. I'd say I'm about a six. Okay, I think that guys have it quite easy when it comes to hair removal. Really? I have to shave every day. We do have to shave every day but there's epilating, threading, waxing, all of that stuff. I don't know what two of those things are but surely waxing can't be that bad. Are you putting yourself forward for another little experiment here? Yeah, all right. Well, why not? Okay, all right. I'll hold you to that. How bad can it be? Yeah, okay. So we agree that you're getting waxed. Really, did we? And we agree that body hair is weird. And sometimes annoying? Yes, agreed. So the question is why do we have it at all? What possible evolutionary purpose could body hair provide? Well, here's an atomist and broadcaster, Professor Alice Roberts. Well, actually, Adam, I think the more interesting question is why don't we have body hair? Because we are remarkably naked compared with most other primates. In fact, all other primates are very, very hairy compared with us. Now, we're not completely naked because I don't know whether you've noticed, but even in areas where you kind of look at yourself and you think, well, I look naked. If you look really carefully, you're covered in very, very fine hairs. They're not that fine on me. They're not so fine on you. So there's a lot of variation within humans in terms of body hair, but still we are relatively naked. And the really interesting question is when we lost our fur and why? Lots of different ideas have been put forward for this. Was it because we had an aquatic phase in human evolution and needed to lose all our fur? Well, that argument has never held water as far as I'm concerned. And seals and sea lions are covered in a type of fur, aren't they? And otters and water voles and platypus. And most animals that spend a lot of time in water do have fur. So I don't think that works at all. Another interesting suggestion is that we became naked in order to rid ourselves of parasites. It's much easier to see fleas and ticks crawling around on you and to pick them off if you lose your fur. Right. Now that sort of makes sense. Except for the fact that we retain tons of body hair. Yeah. I've got more than you, I presume, but you've got long head hair. Yeah, there are still islands where the parasites can hide out, certainly. Islands, that's a nice season, isn't it? So I think the best explanation is one that ties into something else in human evolution. And that is a change in body shape around two million years ago, which seems to be to do with endurance running. So the development of long legs, very strong elastic ligaments at the ankle and at the back of the neck. And that if you are involving yourself in endurance running in a hot environment, you need to be able to rid yourself of heat very, very quickly and easily. It's not easy to do that if you're covered in fur. So fur does give animals some advantages, keeping warm in the winter and being able to hunt at night when it's a bit nippy. But a fairy coat can severely limit your ability to cool down quickly. That's right. So cheaters, for instance, they need their coat for the cold, savanna nights. But can only run at their top speed around 60 miles per hour for less than a minute before they get too hot and have to slow down, have a nice rest and a good pants. If we had a luxuriant fur coat, we'd get heat stroke within minutes just from wondering around on hot day. That's right, and instead we regulate our temperature by sweating, which cools down your skin as it evaporates. And by wearing nice warm jackets when it gets a bit of parking. All of which eliminates the need for panting. So why do you do it so often, Adam? Which makes us more adaptable to different climates, Hannah, than if we had a more permanent fur coat. We may not have kept our thick pills, well, some of us anyway. But we have retained some of our body hair in rather strange places, which brings us back to Hannah's question. Yes, how does leg hair know how long to grow and what happens when we shave it? For that, I consulted dermatologist Dr. Season Holmes from the hair clinic at Southern General Hospital in Glasgow. Each hair follicle in the body has a hair cycle. And for most of that hair cycle, the hair is growing. It has a short transition phase and then there's a ranting phase. And at the end of the ranting phase, the old hair is pushed out and the hair follicle starts to grow and you hear. The length of the hair is pretty largely determined by the length of the growth phase. What kind of difference in time we're talking about the hair? So the head is years, presumably. Yes, so on the scalp, the growth phase can be between two years up to maybe six or seven years. On the upper lip, it might just be four weeks. But it doesn't matter how much you cut it. This maximum length is still fixed for the individual. So the hair shaft is dead. So the bit of hair that's out that we can see is dead. And cutting it does not change what's happening at the the hair root. So there is a set period for hair to grow, stop and then fall out. And this varies all over the body, depending on what type of hair we're talking about. But do we actually know how long a leg hair cycle is? Yes, it is between 19 and 26 weeks. That's very specific. If that's only though, if you are a young Japanese man, because that is who they used in the study. Right, I'm guessing that Hannah Montiath is not a young Japanese man. It does seem unnightly. However, this hair cycle is the reason why you'll only ever be able to grow your hair to a maximum length before that hair naturally falls out. And that's why some people have much longer head hair than others. They have a much longer hair cycle. Okay, so when you shave or when you pluck out your body hair, or indeed when you have it waxed, which doesn't seem like such a big deal to me, it's always going to grow back to the same length. Right? That's why you can't plat your leg hair. Yes, that's true. However, hair follicles will retain their original characteristics, even if you transplant them to different areas in the body. So there are some people who have had hairs taken from the base of their scalp and then transplanted into their naturally quite rubbish eyebrows. And it retains the original characteristics of scalp hair. So if they don't cut it, they end up with these ridiculously long eyebrows. So you could theoretically, in that specific situation, actually, plat your eyebrows. I personally wouldn't want to. I'll say that. But when it comes to hair cycles, there is another important difference between us and our furry friends. In animals, the hair follicles are synchronous, so they are here, cycles run together. So for instance, at the end of winter, horses start to lose their thick winter coat as the days get longer. So for animals, it's the photopirio, the length of daylight, usually, that seems to stimulate the old coats to come out and the new lighter, shorter, summer coats to come in. Right. So this is important. Animals molt because their hair follicles are all synchronised. Absolutely. But our hair cycles are random, so we're shedding all of the time. And apart from a few hairs down the plunkhole, you probably don't notice. Unless you're the one who has to fish it out of that plunkhole. And don't forget, though, Adam, about the promise that you made. That, yes, I haven't forgotten about that. There you go. Right. All right. Is this the place? Mrs. Phil Goods Beauty Lounge. I'm in East Dullage in London, and seriously, it's Mrs. Phil Goods Beauty Lounge. And Hannah and my producer have really conspired to maximise my humiliation here. I'm beginning to have a little pinch of regress about this. My biggest concern is that I actually teach as a school very close to here. And if any of my pupils see me doing this, they are never, ever going to let me forget it. So I think I better go in quite quickly. Oh, yeah. Hi, Adam. I'm not comfortable. Why waxing? You've probably some pain, basically. Have I? Don't say that. You've come for some pain. Are you sure that was a beauty parlour? Yeah, I did wonder about that. Anyway, there's much more of that later. But first, if humans are remarkably naked compared to other animals, why haven't we done the whole hog and lost all of our fur? Why have we retained those islands of hair as Alice Robots puts it so euphemistically dotted here and there? These islands of hair that we retain. Yeah. They seem like an evolutionary puzzle to me. They are. They are. Why do we have armpit hair and pubic hair? It's what I'm alluded to. pubic hair, I think, is more interesting. And there are various theories about why pubic hair. Why does it exist as a thing? Is it to hide the genitals seems a bit strange? It certainly hides the genitals and women not so well in men, I would say. Is it to keep the genitals warm? Because, you know, how what an awful thing to have a cold plitter is. So, there's a possibility. But although, all the testicles need to be their external in order to keep them cooler. No, no, no, no, no. So, there's very much in the chat, would it? So, Desmond Morris, in his book, The Naked Woman, referred to the hypothesis that pubic hair could be to reduce friction. Yes, I thought. And that's sort, again, it's the sort of argument you could say, well, there's a small zone there with limbs rubbing it up against each other. You can, you can, listeners have no idea how hard it is to have this conversation right now. And similarly, with armpit hair. But surely, we'd also have little tufts of hair on the inside of our, Elk, what's this area? You're an alathamist, what's this area called? The inside of your elbow. The cubital fossa, you'd have a little tuft of hair there, maybe the back of your knee. Even, I don't know, the gluteal fold, the bit where your butt, butt, buttocks hang over your legs. Have you got any hair in there? That is a very personal question. I'm not going to answer it. But the friction, the friction idea, we rubble over the place. Surely you'd see more hair if friction was a good answer. Yeah, maybe, although it's friction in a very specific setting, so during Qutus in a particular position, I think is basically the argument. It's a hell of an argument. Moving swiftly on, I think there's a better argument. And I think it also applies to armpit hair. And that is, if you have this slightly coarse hair in those areas, it will help to trap ferramanes. And the idea is that actually those odors are quite attractive. We start wearing clothes, we wear tight pants, we encourage bacteria to live in those areas, and the bacteria start to degrade those scents into something which isn't so attractive. But I think that combination of hair and scent might be the reason why we have pubic hair and armpit hair. Now, that does all sound like quite a good idea, but we don't actually really know if humans have ferramanes that are involved with attraction. Are the animals do, they don't they? They certainly do, and we know that from flies to mystic cats, but when it comes to humans, we just don't know. Thing is, Hannah's question was actually about leg hair, not pubic hair, anyway. Yeah, I'm sure it's slightly distracted by that. It was also about hair removal, which brings us back to Mrs. Phil Good's beauty and... No, I don't know what you're making such a fuss about. I was having quite a nice time. Oh, come in. Yeah. That's my therapist, Saraya. Apparently, I'm not allowed to tell her all of my problems. She's not that type of therapist, but she has gallantly agreed to deal with my body hair. So, to the sound of new age whale song and the scent of some pretty fancy air fresheners, I have disrobed, and I'm currently relaxing on a trolley on top of a nice warm fluffy towel. It's quite pleasant, isn't it, in fact? You know, just sort of lying around. Oh, crikey, what's that? The wax. That's really hard. It will be. Oh, that's hard. Too hot. No, wow, it's fine. So, I'm just going to put a strip on. All right, so this is right down the, the small of my bag. Yeah. And how hairy is it down there? This is probably the hairy as a bit. All right, I'm going to rip. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, no, I've reduced to said I couldn't swear, but that was... Oh! It's better to just do it quickly. I cannot imagine having that done in a more sensitive area. Yeah. You only had your back done. It was... I didn't know. I'm sorry, it was quite painful, actually. It's pathetic. It's your back even that hairy. Well, not now. It's like a baby's bottom. You know, eyebrow threading is the absolute worst. That is serious pain. But now, you... I mean, I suppose you know a little bit of the pain that women have to go through. I'm sorry about my bravado early. I'd like to apologise to you. It was quite hurting. Now, I guess this may not be the best time to reveal what dermatologist Susan Holmes told me about what happens to those hairs when they're pulled out. No, but I expect you're going to tell me anyway, aren't you? When you pull out a hair in the resting phase, it seems to short circuit more quickly back into the growing phase again. To the head does come back more quickly if you act it. There is some evidence that when you pluck or pull hairs out, a new hair starts to grow more quickly than it would if you'd just lift that hair in place to be naturally shed than then a new hair to grow again. Huh, so now that I've had my back waxed once, you're telling me that it's going to grow back even quicker. There is some evidence to suggest that, yes. Marvelous. So, Dr. Fry, is that case sold? Yes, the five million hairs positioned around our body are continually growing and falling out. And in each hairy area of our body, the cycle lasts for differing lengths of time from four weeks to seven years. But if you pluck your hair, it may just grow back faster. You could have told me that earlier. That was the curious case of the hairy hominids, featuring me getting my back waxed, which was quite stingy and Alice Roberts talking about very rude things. Well, yes. They wanted to eat rude things that we didn't even make into the podcast. In that interview, when she said there's nothing worse than a cold clitoris, I had to clinch my fist to stop myself from giggling. So, that was the case of the cold clitoris. I'm sorry. Hairy hominid. And you'd like to find out more about curious cases. In general, the slightly less x-rated version, then you can go to the BBC Future website where there are articles, lots of videos, lots of fun stuff about the series. So go to bbc.com forward slash future and search for curious cases. And don't forget to send us your curious cases to curiouscases at bbc.co.uk. We want your science mysteries. We will science the hell out of them. Damn right.
