Hello and welcome to episode three of the podcast version of the curious cases of Rutherford and Fry. And today's case is the oral voyeur. Now we had great difficulty in pronouncing that over several recordings because that phrase oral voyeur. It's technically our oral voyeur. I don't think anyone says that though. I don't know. No one says it. But it needs to be stressed that this was not our doing. No, and it definitely begins with an A. Our oral voyeur. Yes. Hello, this is the voicemail of Dr Adam Rutherford. Please leave your curious case details and I will reply to you presently. Please leave your message after the tone. To re-record your message, he has it any time. Rutherford, why do you never answer your phone to me? I've got a new case and I need your help with it. So please come to the studio as quickly as possible. Rutherford, we have received details of a crime so terrible that nobody would dare admit to it. And yet we all know someone who is as guilty as sin. And the matter was brought to us by a Mr Daniel Serrano from New Jersey in the United States of America. And he is constantly vexed by strangers with the temerity to talk loudly on their cell phones in public places. You mean mobile phones? Just take a look at the correspondence because I think it's fair to say that Mr Serrano is not impressed. Okay, so he says, I have no interest in hearing about people's private lives. I don't enjoy the oral voyeurism. Did he just say oral voyeurism? I think it's our oral. Yes. If people want to say, honey, I'm running late, I'll be home at five. That's okay. But discussing business or worse personal details, keep it to yourself or wait till you get home. The whole idea would have seemed an enathema to older generations. And I think that they would have considered it rude to talk loudly in public. No sense of that in the 21st century. This is the American equivalent of angry from Tumberidge Wells. It is, isn't it? Y-O-Y-O-Y. Dear BBC, why do people talk loudly on their telephone? I'm sick of all the voyeurism. All this oral voyeurism everywhere under train. I can't move for oral voyeurism. Thing is, I think everybody finds it annoying when people talk loudly on their phones in public places. Yes, it is. And yet, people still do it. Yeah, and I think that we do it. Possibly without realizing it. Why is this? Is there a perfectly scientific explanation for why we shout on our cell phones? No miles. This is going to get rather tiring, isn't it? So I feel that to get to the bottom of this, that we have to delve into the inner workings of telephony. Well, let's go back to the very beginning. Who, my dear brotherhood, invented the telephone. I know Alexander Graham Bell. Well, it's actually not quite that straightforward. Because technically, another man, Elijah Gray, submitted a competing patent to the very same office earlier on the very same day. Now, sadly for Gray, his paperwork got stuck in the bottom of the intray, while Bell's application was whisked off and stamped first. A trivial clerical quirk making Bell the rightful owner of the patent. Now, Bell took his invention to the communications giant of the day, Western Union, to strike a deal. And they say, hmm, don't know, it's a bit expensive. This is historian Greg Jenner. And actually, the president of Western Union really hates Bell's father-in-law. And so it gets quite personal. And so Western Union say, now we're okay with fine, actually. And they instead hire Edison, who's the great American genius. And Elijah Gray, the confronted Nemesis, and the two of them start working together on a rival phone. But was Bell's a better phone design? Probably not. It seems that Elijah Gray probably was ahead in the technological stakes. And the really crucial contribution was from Edison, who actually quite early on comes up with a very sensitive microphone, made of granular carbon. And it's so effective that actually you don't really have to yell down the line. So Victorians weren't bellowing down the phone. But it's not only the phones that were in competition. Even what you say when you pick up the phone was hotly debated. Hello, is Edison saying we need a new greeting for the phone? One that you can hear has good strong syllables, but also is a new word so that people know it's for the phone only. Because he believed that the phone would be constantly open. The line would be constantly on. You wouldn't call someone. You'd just talk down the phone. So you'd need a word that people knew was just for the telephone. And so hello, was his contribution. Now, Ahoy is the other contribution. That was Bell's suggestion. It's a nautical term. A Hoi Hoi. And it's why Monty Burns in The Simpsons says a Hoi Hoi on the phone because he's that old. But hello wins out. The interesting thing is that hello is considered very rude, very crass by posh Victorians. Takes a long time to be accepted. And it's only really accepted because the girls in the call centre in the exchange where they basically take your call and patch you through, they're called hello girls. And so hello becomes part of pop culture and gradually people accept the word hello. Hello, but how do we get from hello to... Hello! What? Well, the first phones had a leaky bit of feedback called saitone, which meant that you could hear a tiny bit of your own voice coming out of the speaker. And that turns out to be quite useful. Because you can hear how loudly you are speaking. And more importantly, when you're shouting. Yes, but that is not quite the end of the story. All landlines have saitone carefully designed into them, specifically to avoid bellowing in offices or in your front room. But hang on, our client, Mrs. Arrannett, is complaining about people shouting on their cell phones. Are they the problem then? Do they not have saitone? Mobile. Well, this is a common belief about mobile's, amongst people who like to think they know about these things. I'd be internet. The internet, yes. So I think we need to call a man who actually knows. This is Nick Zacherov, and he's an acoustic and sensory technologist in Denmark. Nick Zacherov? Hi Nick, it's Adam here. Call me from London. Hello. Hi, can you hear me okay? I can. So, listen, I need you to clear this one up for us. Is it true that people shout on their mobiles because mobile phones don't contain this feature we're talking about, which is called saitone. Most mobile phones do have saitones. So it's not it's a myth. Yeah, basically mobile phones have a recommended saitone level. How much of your own voice gets fed back to your ear? Now, one of the issues is that it's not a fixed situation that you're using the mobile phone in. So the saitone needs to compensate for how much background noise you're in, and how well the phone is sealed to your ear. And that's going to affect the amount of your own voice you hear directly, and how loud you then speak. So it turns out that the real problem is that our mobiles are mobile, and we could be speaking on a building site, or in a library. Sorry. And that demonstrates a well known acoustic phenomenon called the Lombard Effect, discovered in 1909 by Etienne Lombard, a French autolaranjologist. Autolaranjologist. Autolaranjologist. Is it colleges or geologists? You know, he's a throat doctor. So the Lombard Effect is our natural tendency to increase the volume of our voices when we're in a noisy setting to match the level of the environment. Yes, and the problem is we automatically set our voices to the volume of the loudest sound we can hear, whether it's a building site or the other person on the phone, meaning if you're in a quiet place to everyone else, it seems like you're bellowing. But that wasn't the end of Mr. Serrano's question, was it? Would speaking loudly on your phone in public have been so horrifying to previous generations? I check with historian Greg Jenner. One of the interesting things about the Victorian response to the telephone is that they are, in many ways, terrified of the invasion of privacy. There are lots of etiquette manuals that are written as soon as the phone comes out, because it's a brand new technology, which is not just magical in a scientific sense, but actually it tears a huge hole in etiquette. Because at the time, the 1880s, 1890s, you have to introduce yourself by letter, or you have to be introduced by someone else, and then the telephone arrives, and you can phone anyone, and just say, good day. Hello. And so the phone immediately causes problems for etiquettes. So right from the inception of the telephone, there's a bunch of etiquette rules which are already being violated and changed as a result. Some of them are fantastically weird. Should a man stand while phoning a woman? Is the one that you get quite often? Goodness. Was it improper to be undressed while on the phone to someone else? Yes, it's the answer to that. Absolutely. The other problem, of course, is that many rule areas have trunk lines, which is a shared open line, so that you can overhear your neighbours. One of the big problems early on was apparently women in particular, and this is what the companies said, were hogging the line, and so they've become a problematic, and that you won't allow to do more than three minutes on the phone. That should be a rule for everyone. That should be enforced legally from the government today now. Make it so. I would like that to be the case. Absolutely. Could you catch diseases down the phone? It was a really common question. Because Jim Theory is only 25 years old at this point, so people are still a bit unsure how it works, what's going on. So they're thinking, all right, should I just wash the receiver a little bit? Should I hold it away from the face? But it's not okay to have a conversation when you're not wearing trousers, so the Victorians got that right. Sure. And also the big question is, is it okay to phone someone while on the loo? No. Good. Quite right. Why do we need to compile a 21st century phone etiquette handbook? So let's start with number one. People must be trousers on the phone. Essential. Number two, no eating, no drinking. No ducking, no diving, no heavy petting. And certainly no oral voyeurism. Absolutely not. I think we should point out for the radio for listeners that oral voyeurism was Mr. Serrano's phrase and not ours. Not ours. Not ours. So before you write it in complain, that was him saying oral voyeurism. We can provide his email address there if anyone wants to write to him to complain. And more importantly, you can send us your phone etiquette rules and any other everyday cases you'd like us to investigate to curiouscases at bbc.co.uk. So, Dr R, can we venture, K-Soft? I think we can. It is a combination of the lombard effect and a feedback system not equipped to deal with the mobiles of mobile phones. And that is why people shout on their cell phones. Mobile phones. Oh, to be quiet. Thank you for listening to the curious cases of Rutherford and Vi. This programme was made in collaboration with BBC Future. This was produced by Michel Martin that the bear bit of a bear to bear with assistance from BbB, BbB, BbB, 47 other people based on an original idea by BbB, BbB, BbB, BbB, BbB, we just did it. Yeah, we just did it. We basically just did it. Just us free in a room. If you dear listener have your own curious case that you would like us to investigate, then you can email us at curiouscases at bbc.co.uk. And if you go to bbc.com forward slash future, there will be posting videos and other things to do with the show. Thanks for listening.
