I'm Dr Adam Rutherford. And I'm Dr Hannah Fry. And you are going to send us your everyday mysteries. And we are going to investigate them. Using the power of... Science! Science! Science! I like it. Oh! Yeah, that was a good question. Michelle, put it back. Surprise! We didn't know it was straights on it. Yeah, it suddenly felt extremely Christmassy. Yeah. Which is because this show went out on Boxing Day and if you're listening to it on the podcast, Boxing Day was four weeks ago. Or four weeks in the future. I'm not sure when... I'm not entirely convinced of the timetable. So, I think... I didn't know. Or in the past, or in the future. One of those three is definitely one of those three. And this is a special sort of overindulgence... Special... Well, we've done food. Yeah. So, we thought the natural next thing to go on to was booze. A lot of questions have come in over the years on alcohol-related subjects. Well, we think that the curious are just basically us to fix their hangovers for them. Yes. And this is our attempt to do just that. Now, I have to say, actually, you must remember to hang around for after the main episode. Because, as last year, Adam and I have got each other Christmassy's presence, which we will be opening in the next episode. I can actually see a little bit of my Christmas present poking out of the bag just there. I don't think I do. I've done the same thing in the eye. It is a different costume, which is that I wrapped it in paper made of your face. I feel so special. Anyway, that joy is to come after the main episode. Welcome back to Curious Case. What? What? Just try being a bit quieter. Why? Well, some listeners might be feeling a bit, you know. What? Delicate. Oh, oh, I see. Right. Yes, the season for eating and drinking and the merriness can sort of slightly expire the next day, can't it? Yes. Well, quite. And today, we're going to be investigating the science of hangovers. Yeah, we've had quite a few questions sent in to Curious Case as at BabesY.co.uk on this subject. And we're going to cover as many of them as we can, starting with this one from Ava Caruso. I have never had a hangover. I'm a 25-year-old Australian and I enjoy going out for drinks. However, the next day when everyone else sleeps in and licks their wounds, I get up early and get right back to my normal routine. Yeah, not winning many friends there, Ava. No, quite. But she goes on to ask, why do some people suffer so badly after a night of drinking? And some people, like me, feel no effects whatsoever. Yes, and now she's really rubbing it in. She's really rubbing it. That's just gloating, Ava. Well, let's start at the beginning. Anyway, with the archaeological origins of alcohol. The most ancient booze on record could be up to 10,000 years old. A ceramic piece of jar found in Jahu and China has revealed remnants of rice, honey and wild grapes, all the ingredients ripe for fermentation. The earliest recipe for beer is found in a hymn to nincarcy, a poem to the Samaritan goddess of brewing. Mesopotamian sculptures show people drinking beer from huge pots with giant straws. The word symposium actually comes from the ancient Greek meaning to drink together, banquets where ceremonial wine was drunk to honour the gods or more in the dead. As for the impact of alcohol, Aristotle's lecture on intoxication compared to the effects of wine and beer thus. Those who become intoxicated from wine fall onto their faces. But those who have drunk the bar lead turn upside down on their heads. Because on one hand wine makes one heavy-handed, while on the other, the bar lead is stuporifying. Far bit for us to criticise Aristotle, but that is some quite spectacular falling over. Yeah, extensive fields that is have re-failed to replicate this description. Well, we are talking about science and only a few scientists around the world actually study hangovers. One of them is Sally Adams. She's a health psychologist from the University of Bath. And I asked her how alcohol affects our bodies. So when you drink an alcoholic drink, it can take between 10 minutes and up to 90 minutes for the effects to be felt. But actually, alcohol exerts its effects very quickly in your bloodstream, it crosses the blood brain barrier, and pretty much interacts with every neurotransmitter in your brain. So some drugs react with very specific neurotransmitters, so cannabinoids and opioids. But alcohol really interacts with every neurotransmitter possible. Right, so neurotransmitters are molecules that connect up brain cells and nerve cells, and alcohol knocks out loads of these signals. Absolutely, which is why we see such strange effects from not being able to speak, not being able to walk properly. So quite early on, we see that there are changes in things such as decision-making and impulsivity, almost after the first drink. But then things such as motor coordination and speech are much later on, because a greater deal of alcohol is required to affect these parts of the brain. Now although alcohol has this impact on our brain, what's really interesting is that our reaction to it is also heavily influenced by things like environment and expectation. This is a subject, their psychologist called Alan Marlatt, investigated in a set of pioneering experiments in the 1970s. Here is science writer Adam Rodgers, author of Proof, The Science of Booze. Well Marlatt figured out something really interesting, which is essentially a drink that he could give people in an experimental setting, where you couldn't tell if you're the drinker whether it had alcohol or not. And that allowed him to test different combinations of expectation and effect. For example, what would happen if you expected to get alcohol that drank a placebo? You would show signs, especially in the initial that kind of first two thirds of the drink. As if you were getting alcohol, whether you were getting it or not, if you thought you were getting it, your face would get flushed, you would talk more, we become more social, even if you weren't getting the alcohol. And he and then the researchers who followed on later came to think that there weren't a lot of predictable physiological or psychological outcomes from drinking other than the ones that you kind of brought with you to the bar, essentially, that the expectancies for the way you saw people drinking when you were a kid or what you saw in the movies, those were the things that would tell you what would actually happen to you as you were drinking more. Right, so if you thought you were getting a placebo but drank alcohol, are you saying you wouldn't get drunk? Well, not initially. Yeah, the alcohol would take a lot longer to have an effect because you were expecting not to feel anything. Okay, but our question was about what happens the day after and why some people get worse, hang out with others. To try to get to the bottom of that, I asked Andrea Sella from the University College London about the complex chemistry that happens inside our liver. When you actually take alcohol into your body, it's essentially something that needs to be got rid of. And what your liver has is an enzyme in it, which is called alcohol dehydrogenase. And what this does is it removes essentially two units of hydrogen from the alcohol, transforms it into a molecule called acid aldehyde. Now, acid aldehyde is actually quite poisonous and so it's very, very rapidly converted onwards. But there are two issues here. When you drink a drink, you tend to take in a lot more alcohol than your liver is actually able to cope with. Now, if you think about a supermarket, a supermarket is a little bit like the liver in the sense that you have a series of check out pills which actually need to process the shoppers. Now, if you take a very small amount of alcohol, then that's very much like turning up at the supermarket at midnight, and there are no other customers. On the other hand, if you go on a heavy drinking session, then what you find is that there are loads and loads of competing shoppers with you, and you've just got to queue. What that really means is that for any given individual, the speed at which alcohol will be processed is really determined by how much alcohol dehydrogenase you've got in your system. This is also genetically determined. Different people have different amounts of alcohol dehydrogenase. What you really want to avoid is having a problem with getting rid of the acid aldehyde. And if the level of acid aldehyde builds up, then you will feel extremely ill indeed. Part of the sensation of illness that you will get when you're drinking to excess is partly related to acid aldehyde. So, some people differ genetically then in how they process alcohol? So, alcohol dehydrogenase is this huge enzyme that processes alcohol, and it's made up of many different parts, and each one is encoded by a different gene. And there's natural variations in those genes that means that some people are just better at processing alcohol than others. Is this enzyme the reason why Ava doesn't get hungover? Could be part of it. Maybe she has a very high alcohol tolerance due to the effect of that enzyme. So, it's all coming down to biology then, essentially? Well, yes and no. There are a few studies that looked at why some people don't suffer as much from hangovers, and you know what the radical answer that they came to and the conclusions was? Go on. They just don't drink as much. That would work. I know, right. It brings us to an interesting point about the science. Whereas there's been tens of thousands of studies on alcohol over decades. There have only been a few dozen on hangovers. Yeah, why is that? Well, that is what I asked hangover researcher Sally Adams. In my previous life, my work was really looking at alcohol intoxication. But recently, I've moved to look at the effects of hangover and trying to recruit for studies where you give people alcohol is much easier than when you have to recruit people to come up to the experimental labs when they're hungover, basically. So, you can't do an experiment where you give people enough booze that induces a hangover the next day and then study them in the lab? So, studies have done that. But the problem is that the alcohol that we can give ethically in the lab doesn't match with what people would administer themselves on a night out. So, it wouldn't be a really good real-life model of normal drinking. It's only in the last few years that even the people who do the research on hangovers have agreed on kind of a set of symptoms that they can have somebody report and say, this is how bad your hangover was. His science journalist Adam Rogers again. What does seem to be true is that you get a set of symptoms that people will recognize. Sensitivity to light and sound, feeling of fatigue, potentially nausea, potentially a headache, digestive issues, a general feeling of malaise. You just feel crummy. And why people have all those symptoms is not totally clear. The best-going theory right now is that it's an inflammatory response. It's essentially an immune response. So, what you do see if you test people's blood or saliva are elevated levels of what are called cytokines. Things that would be elevated if you're sick. If you have ever had a hangover, you might know that it feels a little bit like having the flu. It does feel like you're kind of unwell. You have some kind of infection. But what do we know about the specific symptoms of a hangover and where they might come from? Well, again, it's just not entirely clear at all. Sally Adams told me what we know so far. So, it's quite likely that the hangover headache is caused by dehydration but also electrolyte imbalance. It's likely that you'll lose a lot of water due to going to the toilet frequently but also sweating. These all contribute to the likelihood that you might experience a headache and dehydration. What about mood? Everyone feels pretty lousy the next day and it's not just those physical symptoms. So, there's been very little research that has looked at the effects of hangover on mood. Those that have have shown not surprisingly that hangover leads to poor mood but also increased anxiety. We've just actually got a PhD looking at hang anxiety which is what we're calling the effects of how we call hangover on anxiety. Hang anxiety. Hang anxiety. Oh, I think that one's going to spread from here. I've been quite envious now of our questioner, Ava, who has never felt anxious if that is indeed the case. But while we're on this topic, we also had a question in from John Ottoway on Twitter. Right, yeah. So, John asked us what drink produces the worst hangover? Well, we put that question to science writer Adam Rogers. The question of whether different kinds of booze give you a different kind of hangover is a fascinating one. The answer is it probably doesn't matter. But there have been some studies that try to compare, let's say, a brown liquor to a clear liquor. So, something like vodka by statute and by tradition is just ethanol and water. But something like bourbon, which is what this one study that I'm thinking of used as a comparison, has a whole bunch of other things in it too, just by dent of how it's made. It's made from a grain that isn't distilled as often as the vodka is. It goes through an aging process that pulls chemicals from the wood. So, you end up with ingredients called congeners, which is to say anything that isn't the ethanol or the water. And in one study, people did report that their hangovers that came from bourbon were worse, subjectively, than the hangovers that came from vodka. But nobody knows why that would be. So, in this study that Adam quoted, people said they felt worse after drinking bourbon. But when scientists gave them a cognitive task, they performed just as well, or in fact, just as badly, as the people who drank vodka. So, we don't know if it's just all coming down to expectation again that they thought they would feel worse, so they reported that they felt worse. Exactly. Now, we've just got time for one last question to finish off with. And this is from Thomas Cogley, also known as Johnny Pixels on Twitter. He asks, are there any hangover cures that actually work? Well, as with a lot of hangover research, there's a real lack of data. But here's what hangover health psychologist Sally Adams told me. There's some research, not very much, but a little bit of research that suggests that one of the best things for a hangover could be bacon and eggs, because they both contain amino acids that might contribute to us feeling better. But no, real. No. This is quite speculative. Oh, definitely speculative. Yes. I'm sorry to say that at the moment, the evidence does seem to suggest the only sure-fire way to guarantee that you don't get a hangover is to drink in moderation. There is a lot of research going on in this area, particularly in industry, trying to find something that will alleviate hangover, that it's a big business, I think, if we could find a cure. But it's also a controversial area in the scientific community, because if you could cure a hangover, would you drink more? So it's a real ethical hot potato. So, Dr. Atherford, when it comes to why we get hangovers, can we say caseload? Well, Dr. Fry, we know that the liver converts alcohol into acid aldehyde, which is toxic. And we produce an enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase to purge it, which varies in its effectiveness between people. But I'm afraid the only sure-fire way to avoid a hangover is to drink less booze. Yes. So there you go. In conclusion, one of our less conclusive episodes, possibly, because no one knows anything about hangovers, apart from the best thing for them, is to drink heavily the night before. Yeah. The best thing to prevent them is not to, though, right? Did you say that the wrong way? No, it's fine. I was giving the null hypothesis. It's fine science to it. I see. My bad. My bad. You know one of my favourite things, actually, in research in this episode, was that Mesopotamium sculpture, which I think we should put up on our curia gallery on Twitter, at least, because essentially, it looks like, you know, those big giant goldfish bowls that people drink cocktails from when they're at a henpaste. With straws coming through that. With straws. Exactly like that. It's a Mesopotamian henpaste. It does something like that. And they're going to have an awful hangover tomorrow and full of regret. Yeah, they are. It is interesting, though. I'm really sorry if you're feeling a bit fragile today. Because, you know, if ever I have been in that situation, where I probably a little bit worse will wear, the worst possible thing to think about or hear about is any conversation of booze. Yeah. You just want to avoid it all costs. Yeah, that's absolutely right. It doesn't happen to me, which doesn't happen to either of us very often at the moment, at least. Because you're not drinking much. Oh, yeah. When you're pregnant, it sort of means that you have a free pass with no hangovers for at least nine months. Yeah, and my weekends, from about eight o'clock in the morning, involve standing on very cold football and rugby pitches and driving various children to various activities. And just it's the worst thing in the universe to do when you've got a hangover. So it's just, you know, bed at 10 o'clock. Which is the old face, okay? I know. We're just old and quiet. I'm having an occasional glass of sherry in front of the fire with my slippers on, and that's... I did a talk in front of a brilliant group of women called the Sheffield Women's Lecture Club a few weeks ago. And they're all retired. And I think the oldest person there was, was 98. And I thought, well, you know, I'm not quite sure how to do this talk. When I got there, it was their Christmas lunch. They put a glass of sherry out for me. We drank through the lunch. They were all just tipping wine all over the place. I had to stop in order to be quite sensible. I'm totally imagining a Mesopotamian hip-hop. Right now. It was a bit like that. And then you're at Santa Fung Stage and have all of these women cooling over the great Adam Rutherford. They were a lovely audience, I think, because they were quite drunk. The ones that were awake. Were they shouting strip? I'm actually taking my jumper off in a Saltsbury manner at one point. Right. We do actually, on a more serious note, talking to you. We do actually on a more serious note. We have to address something that we said in the last podcast. Well, I wasn't there, actually. So I am completely taking myself out of this. Yes, you are. You're exonerated from all of this. But during the last episode, we were talking about the fry up that was recorded in the BBC canteen between Adam Rutherford and Mark Meeve Doddneck, which was halted by way of a fire alarm. Now, two people wrote in that said that we were being a bit flippant about the way that we described this fire alarm, because perhaps didn't occur in quite the way that we described it. Yes, I was, I was adlibic for an element of dramatic effect. In fact, it was a fire drill, a planned fire drill. And we did, in fact, have permission not to leave the building. When you're recording, essentially. Because we were recording. If you're in a studio and it's a planned drill, they know that you don't leave. They don't sort of interrupt the today program for a fire drill. Exactly. So, yes. So apologies if we misled you for comic effect. It was definitely Mark Meeve Doddneck's fault. I blame him for everything. Yes. He's a bad man. So, I think in summary, if you hear a fire alarm, take it seriously. There are, you know, this is serious stuff. Okay. Now, back to normal service room. Normal service room. Because it is just before Christmas is the last time we're going to see each other before Christmas. Because we remember last year, I gave you a present, which I spent about three weeks putting together. And I gave you a satsuma. And you gave me a satsuma. And I was a little bit disappointed. So, look, now, I've wrapped this up very carefully with some bespoke wrapping paper. It's my face. Which is a giant picture of Hannah's lovely face that I've had a staple to get. I mean, the actual wrapping is pretty poor. Oh, good. Okay, here we go. It's slightly creepy. I'll be honest with you, to be presented with a blown up. I mean, that's larger than real life. Hold it up to your face. And I'll take a photo. I'm going to take a photo. Okay, here we go. Here we go. You know how people say, oh, I'm going to save the wrapping paper. Don't. I'm not. It's creepy. Better than that. Hang on. Here we go. Here we go. I'm going in. Okay, all there's two things. That's exciting. Yeah, they're both quite silly. Oh, oh. Okay. Oh! That's nice. So, what is it? Okay, sorry. Forgive me. I was just kidding out of the wrapping. Okay, so there are two things. One of them is, you got me a little box of sweets. These particular sweets are lime flavored bogees. Yeah. I just got a very, very lime flavored bogey. I partly got them because I wanted to taste them from the self. Oh, look. Oh, that's absolutely horrific. Yeah, let's pop. Popponsors, it's something you regret this decision. They're mixed up between yellow and green. Explain the second question. And they're saying it. They're a mixture of sizes, as one might expect. Lovely. Thanks Adam. I feel so touched. The second present, though, is a copy of this magazine, which, da da da da da. So, if anyone doesn't know what this magazine is. It's a very, very rude satirical magazine that's been around since the 80s. It contains characters such as Roger Mellie, the man off the telly, and Biffa Bacon and things like that. But you just need to know that in all of Hannah's astonishing achievements, she published a bestselling book this year. She's been all over the hotelies. And this program, of course, you know, just at the peak of her career. I think it's fair to say that the one you're most proud of is... Things satirized in this. Is that how you call it, by the way, it is. I absolutely love it. And this is the second time this year, isn't it? I heard him got a copy of this one, so excited. So I read you what it says. It's a page of 12 Days of Christmas. And it's got a range of different people from Felicia Day to Idris Elbert, David Beckham, and me explaining their festive traditions. And here is how they describe my festive tradition. One Christmas, when I was little, our TV aerial fell down, and we could only get BBC 2, because the man wouldn't come out until the new year. Ever since the whole family has only ever watched BBC 2 over the festive season, and it's a tradition I carry on to this very day in my own home. As a result, over the years, we've missed some great programs, and watched them right on the shite. But it's important that the quirky traditions like these aren't allowed to die out. It's absolutely true, isn't it? It's true. I know it's true. I don't want to even press it. Yeah, I've just got my vernacular down to two. They're absolutely nailed, right? They're absolutely nailed there. And there's a picture of you with a badly photoshopped on hat. Christmas hats. I think it actually, because I posted this on Twitter, and quite a few people didn't realise that it was a joke. I think I had to explain quite carefully. Well, I don't know whether it is. I think your TV is stuck on BBC 2. Oh, I love this so much. It's really good. It's really good. It's great on a... Okay, thank you very much for my present. I don't know. That's very kind of you. Okay, so here is what I got you. I didn't wrap it. Shake it? Well, you forgive me. Is it Lego? No. Okay, for this... No, I'll do it with lights on first, yeah. Okay. Just wait, just wait, just wait, just wait, wait, just wait. They're excited. They go. So, what I thought... I thought I'd go back to the things that we've done together this year. Things that you've achieved. Oh, it's a back box. It's got... Oh, you made this. Did you paint it yourself? Yep. Oh, my God. It says Adam's back detector. And it's got the back band Lego on the top. I'm actually quite excited. And it's got a little window. Yep. What, what do I do? Should I open it? Well, no, no, no, no, don't open it. We've got to go out and be detecting bats. But of course, there won't be any bats in here at the moment, because, well, for one thing, it's bright in here. That's won't... That's won't be around when it's bright. Well, they want it to be dark, wouldn't it? Shall we tell the lights off? It's turned lights off. Okay. Oh, lights off now. Okay. Now, you've got to pretend to be a bat. How do I do that? Do your best batting pressure in front of it? Um... What bat... what bat... What bat... what was that? I don't know what noise... that's so many noises. I think if you like fly in front of it. It says... It's lit off. It says... Might well be a bat or a bat. That's a detent. Yeah, hang on a... It's a detent. Might well be a bat. You know what, then, well, it was a good batting pressure. But, you know, you're only actually in standard mode at the moment, I'm afraid. There is a different... There's an extra sensitive mode. You just pass it to me. I'll turn on extra sensitive mode for you, hold on. Here we go. Um... They go do your batting pressure again. I do bat... I'm... Ha! And I turn it around. There's another wind on the other side. And it says... Probably just a talk. She has to give some context to this. This is in reference to the time when I went on a bat walk. We're Professor Kate Jones from UCL, who's a bat... A curupitologist. And I got confused. She's got some very high-tech bat equipment. And when something went past it, I just went... Is that a bat? And she said it was a talk. And that has made me a bat detecting box, which has a sort of binary output. No, it can be off to... It can be either a bat or a dog. Oh, that's amazing. I need to... Oh dear, thank you very much. Are you pressing my artistic bat on the side? It's really good. Thanks. I reckon you spent at least half an hour on that. It was...it was at least half an hour. It's motion detectors, basically. And a light. Yeah. Oh, I see. It switches the motion sensors. Can I put it so that... Can I see the magic inside the box? Yeah, you can see the magic inside the box. Don't be too impressed. Hold that. It's actually put quite a lot of effort into that. That's amazing. Thank you. Did I make up for this at Zoom, though? Yeah, you did. Yeah, I've been thinking about that all year. But you completely made it up for it. Thank you, Hannah. Happy Christmas. Happy Christmas. Okie-dok. Now. Right. Where were we? Oh, I know. Curie the Week. Only one thing to go. Last episode of the series. Curie the Week. Rather for the prize. Curie the Week. Now, last week, we mentioned that... Each Curie the Week seems to have the potential to be Curie the Series, if not Curie the Orvere the Week. I think we need to revise our standards. They keep going out. They do keep going out. And Doctor Roger Light from the East Midlands has written an email. He's no exception. And he's just raised the game again. Here is his email. Deoccurious cases. I've done some lazy analysis of the questions you've investigated. In other words, I've looked at the titles and tried to categorise them. I ended up with six categories, maths, genetics, space, body, things related to our bodies, but not genetics, a bit of a catch all. Animals and other, for which I couldn't think of a good category. Yes, he goes on to say, and this is where he really hits his stride. The attached, for the were files attached to the C-well, the attached are some graphs that show off what I found. Maths versus genetics, so that's just straight, me, and Hannah head to head, is a draw. You just thought it was. I thought you were winning, but apparently Michelle is like a really great parent circle. She keeps us perfectly balanced like you and Yang. Roger goes on to say, the circles on the graph show where there were double bill episodes. So you're even there as well? He's done a sort of multi-factorial analysis. Just incredible. Just incredible. I do think that the quantity of body questions probably tips the balance in favour of Adam. So perhaps more maths questions to even the balance, please. Well, I agree. Although I think you could say some of the physics ones are quite mathsy. I can't argue with the data, Roger, and you've presented it in an attractive fashion. You certainly have. He's a very beautiful graph. They are. Well, thank you. He's Doctor Roger Lyce as well. We call each other Doctor Fry and Doctor Rutherford, so we should call him Doctor Fry. So there's two pie charts. The first is just the ratio of various subjects. Animals, though. So you know, I would say that animals and body are still biology. I'd say space is maths. Well, yeah. There's a good point. And even then, actually, they're mostly still quite even. Roger, you thought you'd done something, right? You actually called it yet another schism between us. You know, my favourite bit, though, my favourite bit of this is his third graph, his second pie chart, where he has given us an episode rating. He's clearly gone through every episode we've done and ranked it. There are three slices in this particular pie chart. One of them is brilliant, 15.2%. Take that. The second is awesome. It's 36.4%. And third excellent at 48.5%. I'm not entirely sure which one is better. No, but in terms of trying to earn your Curio badge, possibly for the series, but you know, up against everything, all the other amazing Curio of the Weeks, Dr. Roger Light, you are Curio of the Wii. You certainly are. Now, if you want to tip the balance in favour of your favourite subject, or something that we haven't covered at all, then don't forget to email us curious cases at bbc.co.uk. Yes. And remember to subscribe to this, the podcast, so you won't miss our triumphant return. On the fanfare. That's why I want to come back. More music. In March, that's why I want a proper fanfare. I'll do your fanfare. March next year, 2019, for more Curio's cases of her. And more Curio's cases of him. But talking of music, let's round off the series with that excellent new jingle by Lauren Cooper. Bye. Bye. Bye. Hello, I'm Saida Vasi. And I want to let you know that my new podcast is now available on BBC Sounds. I'm sick of Muslim women only being heard if we fit some pre-existing narrative. Either we need to be saved by you or you need to be saved from us. I'm tired of only speaking about forced marriages or polygamy or burkas always burkas. So I've been speaking to seven different Muslim women to hear what they want to say and about the many ways to be a Muslim woman in 21st century Britain. The conversations are intimate, surprising and sometimes shocking. I hope you'll join us and subscribe to How to Be a Muslim Woman on BBC Sounds.
