 You just realized that your business needed to hire someone yesterday. How can you find amazing candidates fast? Easy. Just use Indeed. Because when it comes to hiring, Indeed is all you need. Indeed's Sponsored Jobs will help you stand out and hire fast. With Sponsored Jobs, your post jumps to the top of the page for your relevant candidates so you can reach the people you want faster. And it makes a huge difference. According to Indeed data, Sponsored Jobs posted directly on Indeed have 45% more applications than non-sponsored jobs. There's no need to wait any longer. Speed up your hiring right now with Indeed. And listeners of Mindscape will get a $75 sponsored job credit to get your jobs more visibility at Indeed.com slash Mindscape. Just go to Indeed.com slash Mindscape right now and support our show by saying you heard about Indeed on this podcast. Indeed.com slash Mindscape. Terms and conditions apply. Hiring, Indeed, is all you need. With a Spark Cash Plus card from Capital One, you earn unlimited 2% cash back on every purchase. Plus, no preset spending limit helps your purchasing power adapt to meet your business needs. Jorge Gaviria, founder of Masienda, reinvests his 2% cash back to help grow the business with new products. What could the Spark Cash Plus card from Capital One do for your business? Capital One. What's in your wallet? Find out more at CapitalOne.com slash Spark Cash Plus. Terms and conditions apply. Did you know Fast Growing Trees is the biggest online nursery in the U.S. with thousands of different plants and over 2 million happy customers? They have all the plants your yard needs, like fruit trees, privacy trees, flowering trees, shrubs, and so much more. Whatever plants you're interested in, Fast Growing Trees has you covered. Find the perfect fit for your climate and space. Fast Growing Trees makes it easy to get your dream yard. Order online and get your plants delivered directly to your door in just a few days without ever leaving home. We've just received a white dogwood tree. We've not had a chance to plant it yet, but are very excited to do so. This spring, they have the best deals for your yard, up to half off on select plants and other deals. And listeners to our show get 15% off their first purchase while using the code MINDSCAPE at checkout. That's an additional 15% off at FastGrowingTrees.com using the code MINDSCAPE at checkout. FastGrowingTrees.com, code MINDSCAPE. Now's the perfect time to plant. Use MINDSCAPE to save today. Offers valid for a limited time. Terms and conditions may apply. Hello, everyone, and welcome to the MINDSCAPE podcast. I'm your host, Sean Carroll. Tell me about a complicated man. Muse, tell me how he wandered and was lost when he had wrecked the holy town of Troy, and where he went and who he met, the pain he suffered in the storms at sea, and how he worked to save his life and bring his men back home. He failed to keep them safe. Poor fools. They ate the sun god's cattle, and the god kept them from home. Now, goddess, child of Zeus, tell the old story for our modern times. Find the beginning. Some of you may recognize these lines as the opening of the Odyssey by Homer. The Odyssey, well, translated in English, of course. Homer was writing in Homeric Greek over 2,500 years ago. Homer is known for two poems, the Odyssey and the Iliad, both of which have come to play absolutely central roles in the Western canon, the beginning, in many ways, of Western literature. And, you know, these days, of course, we're very interested in expanding the canon beyond Western literature to other literatures as well. That's very, very valuable, all in favor of it. But it doesn't mean we throw out the existing canon. We can welcome new things with open arms, but the Iliad and the Odyssey are going to be with us and be centrally informative to how we think about literature for a very long time. They're both very different poems. They're about different things. They're both about incidents from the Trojan War, or incident is probably too minor, but episodes from the Trojan War, but in very different modes and with very different atmospheres about them. The Iliad, both poems have many characters, but the Iliad centers on Achilles and his wrath. It's right up there in the beginning of the poem. The wrath of Achilles is the thing that we're going to be thinking about here. The Odyssey also has many characters, but centers on Odysseus, and we're told right at the beginning he is complicated. He is a trickster. He is clever. He is willing to take on many disguises to get what he wants. It's a contrast. The Iliad is based in one place. The Odyssey is, as the word now means in English, a journey that goes over very large distances. And given how formative and important these poems are, the idea of translating them into English is a very important one, because most of us don't read Homeric Greek. Kudos to those out there in the audience who do, but I don't. So how do you go about this project of translating these ancient poems into English? Many people have done it, but you're instantly faced with so many choices when you translate work like this. For one thing, the world was different in Homeric Greece. The ideas about how nature worked, the ideas about how people dealt with each other were different. But also, as you notice while reading or listening to the poems, there are so many similarities. You know, we still have a lot in common with our ancient Greek predecessors. But also it's a poem, right? Poems have meters, or at least they have organization. They have some structure there that prose doesn't have. How do you translate both the meanings of the words, the connotations as well as the denotations, and the metrical spirit of the poem into English? That's one of the reasons why so many people have tackled the problem. One of the most recent and influential is today's guest, Emily Wilson, who has translated both the Iliad and the Odyssey in a way that she aims to make the poems give us the same feeling now that they might have given the audience in ancient Greece. That is to say, not something that is manifestly archaic in form, because it wouldn't have seemed archaic to the ancient Greeks, right? Something that is a stirring story that gets you, that is not colloquial and chatty and sort of cliched, but is modern contemporary how you think people might reasonably talk with their vocabulary, and in a way that lends itself to being read out loud. When Homer, who may or may not have existed as a single person, but as a concept of Homer, when he was writing these poems, they were translated by an oral tradition, right? People spoke them out loud in ceremonies, and only later were they written down. So capturing that spirit is an important part of the translator's interest. So it's a great conversation because we're talking about Homer, we're talking about ancient Greece, we're also talking about poetry and translation, and we're talking about the Iliad and the Odyssey, these two wonderful stories that still have a lot to teach us. The classics, they're classic for a reason, so let's go. Emily Wilson, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. It's lovely to be here. I want to start with, maybe you get this all the time, I don't know. Which is your favorite, the Iliad or the Odyssey? I do get it all the time, and it's hard to say. I mean, whichever I'm working on is my favorite. If I'm teaching the Iliad, then that's definitely my favorite. But I think in my heart of hearts, maybe the Iliad is my even more favorite, but I love both of them very, very much. It's kind of amazing to me because they are so different. And let's, for the audience, just talk about the idea that these are written by a person named Homer, which is probably not true. No modern scholar really believes that it was just one person who sat down and wrote them. How did these two poems come to be? Yes. I mean, there are modern scholars who think it was a single person who composed them, but they weren't an author in the sense that Jane Austen was an author because they weren't making up characters and stories from scratch. There was an oral tradition in the Greek-speaking world for several centuries. So the Greek-speaking world had no literacy after the fall of Mycenaean civilization. So these stories about a great city called Troy and a great expedition of Greek warriors coming from all over the Greek-speaking world to fight in the mythical Trojan War, these heroes called Odysseus and Achilles and Hector, and memorializing them through a particular poetic technique using a meter called dactylic hexameter, all of that was traditional and something that illiterate bards singers had been doing for generations before whoever it was, whether that's a single person or several people, got together to use the new technology of writing, which came about in the mid-8th century BCE. The Greek-speaking world borrowed from the Phoenicians a set of ways of writing down their language in the mid-8th century BCE. So sometime after that, probably in the 7th century, either one or more people composed these monumental written poems out of this long oral tradition. And just to put it in absolute context here, so the poems are written down hundreds of years before Plato and Aristotle, who are hundreds of years before, you know, Jesus and the beginning of the Roman Empire. Exactly. So mid-7th century-ish is the rough date of the Homeric poems. Plato was from the 4th century. And of course, Jesus is, as we know from our calendar, the year dot kind of thing. Yes. So Jesus was a contemporary of people like Seneca, the Roman Empire. And so the idea is... Wait a minute, let me take that back. He wasn't a contemporary of Seneca. Anyway, Jesus was a contemporary, you know, people like the Roman emperors, the beginning of the Roman Empire. Augustus, et cetera, right. Augustus, exactly. So I didn't realize there were still, you know, people who held out for the idea that Homer was one person who did compose in the sense of, you know, put together these poems in the way that they're currently written. Or was it was the idea that Homer was just the last person to have these poems before they were written down? Like he dictated them and then he gets his name on them? Yes. So I mean, the capital H, capital Q Homeric question is a whole cluster of questions about that kind of thing, about was it one individual? Was it two individuals? One for the Odyssey, one for the Iliad? And how exactly was the transition from oral tradition to monumental written poem done? Was it through somebody dictated? That's actually quite a popular scholarly theory that there was a bard who sang the poems to a scribe who wrote it down. Or else maybe there was an oral poet who became literate. I would want to just flag that what existed before these written poems wasn't the same as these poems, because these are far too long for a single occasion performance, right? I mean, I know that you were saying you've listened to the audiobook. The audiobooks of these poems are over 20 hours long. Yes. It's much too long for a after dinner we're having a cup of wine and listening to the poet sing one or two heroic tales. I mean, it seems to me that the existence of the new technology of writing inspired one or more people to realize they could do something different with the oral tradition from what had been done before. And the complexity of narrative composition, circles of patterns within patterns within patterns, presumably that style of oral storytelling where you echo one scene with another scene already was part of the tradition. But to do it on this level of complexity and several hours later, here's a story that echoes the one that you might have heard many hours before. You need writing in order to make that replicable. You can't just do it and then repeat it the exact same way the next day. Can we even talk about something like the intention of the author if this is a bunch of stories that came together in different ways? We can talk about what exactly is going on in the texts we have. I mean, the intention of the author, given that we can't bring them back through necromancy and many time machines. And even if we could, I mean, people talk about whether we can, there's a separation between the intentionality of the living poet and the living novelist and what their text says, right? So it's not that it's a problem unique to Homer. Fair enough. And I guess if we put ourselves back in the world of when Homer was around, what was a typical performance like? Was it a theater that you went to to hear something long? Or was it literally like, you know, this is what we did after dinner. Someone was tasked with the idea of treating us with a few stanzas. Yes. So, I mean, again, this is a much debated scholarly question. And the question is different depending on which period we're talking about. But all over, I mean, throughout antiquity, the Homeric poems were experienced in oral performance and oral performances probably including all of the above. We know that rhapsodes, so a rhapsode is somebody who performs traditional oral poetry, not making it up on the spot, but presumably using a script to memorize and then perform some famous bit or some highlights out of the Homeric poems for a particular performance. And that included performances at religious and civic festivals. We know that from a pretty early date, the Homeric poems were used in poetry competitions. So here's one rhapsode doing his showpiece celebrity performance, doing all the voices. And then here's another one. And now the judges are going to decide who gets the crown, who did the best Homer performance this year. And then also, presumably in more private, the drinking party kinds of contexts. And all of the above, I think, is what I would say about what the contexts were in which people heard these poems. So would the typical Greek person on the street be more or less familiar with the content of the poems? Absolutely. Yes. I think we can very, very definitely say everyone knew these stories. Yes. Wow. I mean, we know that these stories, of course, you know, we get these stories represented on Greek pharses from all over the Greek speaking world. People knew these characters in these stories. Yes. And was it, were they at the time just considered, in particularly the Iliad and the Odyssey, just part of a whole bunch of stories that were common? Or was it already clear, like, this is the best we got? It was, I mean, again, it's the question of when exactly that happened is much debated. But yes, so we're told that at the time of Peisistratus, who was a tyrant in Athens in the sixth century, that Peisistratus instituted that at his civic festivals, it would be the Homeric poems, as opposed to other parts of the epic or cyclical heroic tradition that would be used in the festival competition, in the festival poetry competition. So that suggests an understanding of something. Again, we can debate, was that the Iliad and the Odyssey exactly as we have them? Or were those poems revised, edited in some way or other over the next couple of centuries? But there was a sense, certainly from a pretty early stage, that the Homeric poems are different. And by the time we get to Plato and Aristotle, there's a really clear sense that Homer is special. And so, for instance, in Aristotle's Poetics, he discusses the best kinds of plot and insists that the Homeric poems are different from the broader cyclic tradition of dactilic, hexameter, heroic poetry, and partly because their plots are better. For instance, the Odyssey doesn't tell you every single myth about Odysseus. There are tons of myths about Odysseus. The poet of the Odyssey is smart enough to leave most of them out. Same way with the Iliad. It leaves most of the stories out. So in order to have a really tight beginning, middle, and end and a focused narrative, the Homeric poems, despite their monumental length, are very, very selective about which stories they tell about the whole myth. And they do it in this sophisticated way where it's not, let's begin at the beginning and continue till the bitter end. It's, let's do stories within stories and moving back and forth. A lot of us start the new year saying that we will learn a new language, but it's hard to actually commit to it. Vaple makes it easy to learn one in less time than you think. Vaple's quick 10-minute lessons, handcrafted by over 200 language experts, get you to begin speaking your new language in three weeks or whatever pace you choose. And because conversing is the key to really understanding each other in new languages, Vaple is designed using practical, real-world conversations. What I love about Vaple is you can either dive in deeply and truly get fluent, or you can just master some of the basics before going on a trip. So let's get more of you talking in a new language. Vaple is gifting our listeners 60% off subscriptions at Vaple.com slash Mindscape. Get up to 60% off at Vaple.com slash Mindscape, spelled B-A-B-B-E-L dot com slash Mindscape. That's Vaple.com slash Mindscape. Rules and restrictions may apply. I think actually that's super noticeable to just me. I love listening to the audiobooks of these things. I think that's the way that they were meant to be. And they're good stories. They grab you. You want to hear what happens next. There's Odysseus arriving on Ithaca, and he's kind of lingering. You're like, come on, Odysseus. I want to see what happens. Yes. Exactly. There's some suspense because you kind of know he's going to come out of his disguise at some point. But it leaves you hanging until book 22. It's a very long wait where you're rooting for something to happen, and then it all happens. Which I think isn't always characteristic of storytelling of that time, right? Like they hadn't quite figured out those, you know, Hollywood techniques for grabbing your attention. You know, I think we project back onto antiquity an idea of surely because they were ancient, they must have been primitive and unsophisticated in their narrative techniques. And I really don't think that's necessarily true. I mean, the cyclic poems that we have evidence of, we only have them in fragmentary form, were composed later than the Iliad and the Odyssey. So I don't think there's actually evidence to say at the earliest periods, Greek storytelling or Greek poetic technique was less sophisticated than it became later. I think we actually have evidence of the opposite. Yeah, okay. And of course, the whole spectrum of different things, because, you know, some people are better at telling stories than others. And some people are better poets than others. And that's always been the case. Well, it's still true today. I remember I used to live in L.A. for a long time. A lot of my friends were screenwriters. And one of them said, you know, people wonder why Hollywood movies are so popular compared to like art films or European movies or whatever. And he says, because we follow Aristotle. We do the storytelling techniques that have been known for a long time. Mm-hmm. Yeah. And also that oral thing does affect the words, right? I mean, you'll know better than me, so help us out here. But the style of the poems themselves are written to help people remember them and, you know, have the interesting part of the sentence be at the beginning of it, for example. Mm-hmm. Absolutely, yes. So we can talk about multiple different areas with that, both in terms of the ability of Greek to put the important word at the beginning. So maybe we can just do a sort of case study as the beginning of the Iliad, which begins with the theme of the poem, which is menis, wrath. So menina eda thea, per leia doa ecleos, u lamanen, her muria caeos algea theca. Polas diphtimus psucas aidi proiepsin, herro own autuste heloria duke cunessin. Oio noisite daita, dios deteleo topule, exudeta prota diaste tenerisante, atredeste anaxan dron, cai dios ecilius. Sorry, I didn't mean to do the whole thing. I love it. That's great. That's called the poem. And the Iliad and the Odyssey each do this thing of beginning with the word that's the topic of the poem. So the Odyssey begins, andra moi enepe. I don't have to do the whole thing of that, but andra meaning man. And with the Iliad, it's menis, meaning divine wrath. So the wrath of Achilles is quasi-divine. I feel like I didn't actually answer your question, though, which was about oral technique. So that, what I just said, can apply to Greek that's composed not orally as well. It's a highly inflected language, so it's possible to put the object at the beginning of the sentence. Homeric Greek is a mix of different dialects composed out of traditions from all over the Greek-speaking world. So it's this very artificial poetic language. It has a meter, as I hope you could hear when I was just saying a few lines. It has a rhythm to it. It was designed to be sort of chanted rather than just sort of spoken as if it's a novel. Prose is a later invention in the history of literature. And also it has these formulaic phrases, as you were hinting at. So, for instance, Achilles is usually swift-putted Achilles or Achilles son of Peleus, or both, depending on which position in the line he is, so that it makes it easier to fit the meter. And it also means that if you're composing orally, you don't have to stop and think about, so what adjective shall I use for Achilles this time? Because you've only got two choices. It's going to be Achilles son of Peleus, or it's going to be swift-putted Achilles, depending on which you need to fill up a half line. And similarly, about almost every object in the Homeric universe. So, you know, sponges are porous and ships are well-balanced, or they have rowing benches on them, and so on. And then on the sort of slightly larger level of types of scenes, there are also just things that you can plug in whenever you do a banqueting scene, or an animals-getting-sacrificed scene, or guy on the battlefield going to slaughter a lot of people kind of scene, or an arming scene, or a stranger shows up at the gates, and there's going to be hospitality scene if it's the Odyssey. Like, those kinds of things always have a pretty much preset set of components, now at I believe. And then the poet can decide in each occasion, which of the elements am I going to put in here, and how can I make it fun for the audience by using the conventions, but also every time messing with them in some way. So no two hospitality scenes are exactly the same. In the case of the Iliad, all those battlefield sequences, you don't have the same part of the body pierced twice in a row, right? You know, somebody's going to be stabbed through the lungs, next time you're going to have someone have their tongue sliced off, next time you're going to have to go through the ears. You know, you have to have variety within tradition. Well, I think, and you also answered something that I've been wondering about for decades in my life about, as you mentioned, poetry seems to have come before prose in the history of narrative. And that just always seemed weird to me because poetry sounds like it's an extra layer of constraint over prose. But if you think that it's because we started this as part of an oral tradition rather than a written one, then maybe it makes much more sense. It's easier to remember poetry. It's easier to remember. And also if we think of literature as marked language, and if you're hearing everything out loud, what's marked about how are we talking right now? It's not marked. And so it takes extra levels of sort of thinking through what language is and extra layers of technology to figure out how can we make prose something ornate and marked in the way that poetry has always been, because there are markers of poetry that have to do with meter, with sound, with the speakability and performability of it. Do you find yourself talking in iambic pentameter just by accident sometimes? I sometimes do, yes. I don't know. I'm not going to do it right now. We're not going to show off like that. Not intentional. Okay, very good. Okay, so at this point, I guess we should tell some of the audience, if they're not super familiar, what happens in the plot of these stories. I think that many events in the stories are individually familiar, but the Iliad and the Odyssey just amaze me because they're so different from each other and so compelling in their own ways. So explain to us what the focus is. Yeah, they're both so different from each other and so complementary. I mean, I think they really invite reading together because they're both long poems about the Trojan War. The Iliad is set during the Trojan War, but as we've already hinted, it's a weird poem about the Trojan War because it doesn't tell you what happened at the beginning, how did this war get started. We're assumed to already know that, of course, the mythical Trojan War began when Paris, Prince of Troy, abducted Helen from her Spartan Greek husband Menelaus and took her with him back to Troy. And then the Greeks got together, Menelaus and his brother Agamemnon got a whole bunch of Greek warriors together to make war on the rich city of Troy, which is in what's now Turkey, and sail there, besiege the city for 10 years, eventually sack it using the wooden horse, do all kinds of terrible things in the course of sacking the city, enslaving the women. Then they sail home and the gods, because they've done terrible things in the course of the sack of the city, curse the journeys home. So the Iliad and the Odyssey sort of take that whole body of myth and find what I think already at the time in the 7th century was an original and weird take on it. The Iliad focuses not on the sort of famous bits of the beginning of the war or the fall of the city, but on a time, like a month and a half, that isn't either the beginning or the end. It's the start of the 10th year of the war. And it focuses on a quarrel between two Greek warriors, Achilles and Agamemnon, in the course of which Achilles gets furious with Agamemnon for taking from him the woman that he's been trying to enslave. So Achilles, who's the son of a sea goddess and thinks he should get the maximum amount of honour out of any of the warriors, because he's the best at running and throwing spears, feels he's been dissed in public among his fellow warriors. So he asks his sea goddess mother, Thetis, to help him get his honour back. And Thetis, with the help of Zeus, ensures that while Achilles is sitting, sulking in his tent, refusing to fight, the Greeks will suffer an enormous massacre at the hands of the Trojans. So the Trojan warrior Hector is on the rise for the first two thirds of the Iliad, killing the Greeks. And it's only when Achilles realises very, very much too late that his prayer to have the Greeks be massacred, he wasn't thinking the Greeks would include anyone he actually cares about. But it turns out he does care about just one Greek, which is his dearest companion, Patroclus, who begs to go out wearing Achilles armour as sort of his second self to try to fight Hector off from the ships. And of course, we can sort of see it coming, but it's still heartbreaking when it happens. Hector kills Patroclus. And then, inspired by that grief and by a transformed version of his original rage, Achilles returns to the battlefield to fight Hector and to try to keep on destroying as many Trojans as possible until he himself dies. And the poem sort of ends not with Achilles' death, but with a transformation of his rage into something else, into a recognition of his own mortality and of the temporary value that human institutions of grief can provide. And he has a meeting with Hector's father, Priam, who comes to beg for his son's body back from the person who killed him. And Achilles gives Hector back. So Hector, who's been leaving home throughout the poem, has a kind of homecoming journey at the end of the Iliad, even though he's, of course, dead when he comes home. And so the Odyssey sort of complements this story about a warrior who's separated from his people, but then eventually finds a way back to community, with a focus on Odysseus, who also, like Achilles, has issues with honour. And I said a couple of minutes ago that there were all these myths about the homecoming journeys of the Greeks from the mythical city of Troy. The Odyssey takes the longest possible homecoming journey, which is the homecoming journey of Odysseus, which lasts for 10 years because he spends seven years shacked up with one goddess and another year shacked up with another. And then in the course of his journeys by sea, Poseidon curses his journey because Odysseus has blinded Poseidon's son, the Cyclops Polyphemus. So half the poem is Odysseus trying to get back to Ithaca. And then the second half of the poem, Odysseus is back on Ithaca. But the poem is showing us that a homecoming journey is a lot more than a geographical thing. It's also about re-establishing relationships with every member of Odysseus' household and being recognised in all these different ways. So it's a whole sequence of different recognitions with Odysseus as, in a way, different selves. And that question of what does it mean to come home? What is an identity? What is a person? And how are we different in different communities is at stake in the Odyssey? Whereas in the Iliad, I guess, there's sort of these big themes about grief and rage and isolation and community. There is a movie coming out. I don't know if you're familiar with it, about the last part of the Odyssey with Ralph Fiennes in it. I saw an announcement about that. I mean, I don't think it's available yet. I don't think it's quite out yet. Yes, I'm excited to see that. Yeah, it's one of those, you know, cautiously optimistic kind of things. They could be terrible. Yes, it could be great. Ralph Fiennes is great. Yes, it could be fine. But yeah, so this is... Has anyone suggested that this difference between the two poems is part of the reason why we suspect Homer is not just one person? Because they're so different. I mean, the Iliad, even though they are complementary, just like you said, and maybe it does make sense to read them together, or listen to them together. But the Iliad is very warlike, very masculine. Achilles is exactly sort of the action hero stereotype, but kind of mopey about it. And simple, I think, is fair to say. Whereas the Odyssey... I think Achilles is very sophisticated. He plays the liar. He's singing the stories of heroes. His language is full of metaphors. So he's a poet as well as a fighter. I think he's complex, but in a different way from Odysseus. Completely bare. I guess what I was thinking about is just, he is mopey. You know, he does... When we first meet Odysseus, what is he doing? Well, yeah, that's true. He's also been mopey. He's sitting beside the sea and crying. For seven years, he was, yeah. Yes. Fair enough. Okay, that's a very good point. But the lessons, maybe? I don't know. Is Homer trying to give us lessons in these stories, do you think? So maybe going back to the first question about the complementarity, scholars talk about something called Monroe's Law, which is that the stories don't repeat. And people often argue that maybe that means that either they are by the same person or that at the very least, whoever composed the Odyssey knew the Iliad. Right. So that it's composed with a knowledge that, you dear audience, I don't want to bore you. I want to give you something different. And if you've already heard everything from the Iliad, I want to show you something else. So lessons, I mean, in antiquity, knowing the Homeric poems was an essential part of what was called paideia, of cultural education, both on the level of children sort of learning about narrative from the Homeric poems, orators learning about rhetoric from the Homeric poems, generals learning about military technique by arguing about, you know, did Nestor do the right thing there or how does a council meeting operate? In all of those ways, the Homeric poems were essential sort of cultural texts. But of course, the Homeric poems don't include anything like the Ten Commandments, say, right? They don't have lessons that are sort of directly given as if from a divine authority figure that you can sort of write down and say, oh, yes, that shows that I must, you know, do this. Insofar as there are lessons, they're spoken by particular characters on particular occasions. And of course, one can always debate whether or not that lesson is the right lesson. And, you know, the Greek speakers in antiquity certainly did debate those things. I mean, you probably know, many of these listeners probably know that in Plato's Republic, the semi-ideal republic envisioned by Plato's Socrates includes casting out Homer and the tragic poets from this semi-ideal republic because these poems teach you the wrong lessons. They teach you to sympathize with infuriated or grief-stricken heroes, like heroes in an ancient sense, not necessarily heroes in a modern sense, larger-than-life characters who are doing terrible things and making terrible choices. And the poems aren't necessarily inviting you, you know, to do anything other than feel for them and to have a lot of feelings, which if you're Plato in that text, you don't necessarily think those feelings are a good idea for the balance of the civic polity. This episode of Mindscape is sponsored by BetterHelp. When it comes to relationships, we often hear about the red flags we should avoid. But what if we focus more on looking for the green flags in friends and partners? If you're not sure what green flags look like, therapy can help you identify them, actively practice them in your relationships, and embody the green flag energy yourself. Whether you're dating, married, building a friendship, or just working on yourself, it's time to form relationships that love you back. One of the great things about therapy is by looking inside yourself, you can both learn to take those warning signs seriously, but also learn to be open to new experiences and new things, to know when something might be worth pursuing. BetterHelp is a fully online service that makes therapy affordable and convenient, serving over 5 million people worldwide. You can easily switch therapists anytime at no extra cost. So discover your relationship green flags with BetterHelp. Visit betterhelp.com slash Mindscape today to get 10% off your first month. That's betterhelp, H-E-L-P dot com slash Mindscape. Well, that's a feature of good art, right? I mean, it's portraying complicated people and the lessons, if they're there. So, I mean, you gave the answer that I was hoping that you would give from my perspective, which is that one can get lessons, but it's not because the work of art itself is saying, here's the lesson, you better learn it. Absolutely not. And of course, the lesson is partly about you must go through this journey and you must go through this journey collectively with other people and then you must argue about it and figure out what it means together. And it may mean different things depending on what's the community that's telling the story together and how does this conversation go? And it might mean that it means something different for you than it does for me. And then we have a language to talk to each other about really difficult things through these poems. And it's interesting that so many of the specific issues about honor, duty, whatever, are still absolutely human and familiar to us, even though the world of over 2,500 years ago, 3,000 years ago, is so very different in many ways. Yes. I mean, people still have societies, people still care about other people and also very often feel furious with other people. We still have mortality, we still have grief, we still have loss, we still have, how do we deal with people who aren't like us? And how do we, if we lose something or someone, what do we do? Is there any kind of compensation for loss that is okay? And if there isn't, then what do we do? Do we just go around and kill everyone else because we're so furious? None of those questions have gone away, even though the terms in which these poems set them up are of course completely different from modern terms. One thing you just can't miss when you're listening to the stories is how present the gods are. That's very different, right? I mean, it's not a superhero story. It's almost naturalistic, but the gods are there pushing people around. Is this how Greeks of that time would have thought of the world? Or is that like, oh no, this is a story, so I get it? It's both, right? I mean, there were of course cults and worship and these gods are not just literary fictions. I think we may be tempted to think of the gods in the Homeric poems as this is just made up for the sake of the story in the same way that kryptonite is just there for the sake of the story and nobody has a religious festival in which we talk about kryptonite, right? We know about that only from comic books and the movies. Whereas in the case of Athena or Hera, there are real temples, there's real religious practice, there's real sacrifices and there are real particular parts of the Greek-speaking world where this city has a temple, this island is particularly sacred to this or that goddess. So that also gives particular passages in the Homeric poems a different resonance for some audiences versus others. But at the same time, the question of exactly how literal should we be about the gods are exactly as they are represented in the poems? Of course, one can debate that. And the question also of in different periods of Greek history, there were developing views about the gods. And I also think it's a mistake to, I mean, another common mistake is to think because there are gods who are supremely powerful and yet not omnipotent, does that take away from human agency? The poems are very clear that it doesn't, right? They're very clear that at the same time as the gods who are far more visible and tangible to humans than they tend to be in real life. I mean, I personally never seem to have direct encounters with Athena, even if I can sort of sense her somewhere around the corner, I never actually get to look into her bright eyes. But in the poems, people do have those experiences. And yet that doesn't mean that they're not still making choices. I mean, if you think about the first encounter between Achilles and Athena in the Iliad, Achilles is tempted to kill Agamemnon because he's so angry with him. And at the moment that he's about to draw his sword to kill him, Athena grabs him by the hair and speaks to him and says, we've come down because Hera's worried about this. We don't want you killing each other. Think a moment. And so he thinks about it and then he doesn't do it. But it's not that he hasn't thought about it. He does think about it. And his decision making is there and he's also persuaded by the goddess. So it's not that he's a puppet of the goddess. And I think that's really important to bear in mind that when the gods intervene, they very often do it in the same way that humans intervene with each other. They do it by persuasion rather than by force. And the gods are often, I mean, they're obviously super powerful, but they're, like you said, not omnipotent. In fact, there's even a couple of examples. Was it Diophanes who fought a couple of gods and did okay? Diomedes. Diomedes. Diomedes in book five of the Iliad is a great hero who in some ways sort of parallels Achilles in his quasi-divine capacities to take on gods and be as close as a mortal warrior can be to a god. And yet he's not immortal. He manages to fight against the gods, the two gods who are the least honored by the other gods, who are the closest to being sort of divine representations of elements of human impulse that we may not like about ourselves, which is lust and aggression. So it's Ares, god of war, and Aphrodite, god of lust. And Diomedes fights against both of them, and Aphrodite goes whining back to her mother when she gets a little raise on her wrist. And it's sort of funny, but it's also sort of fascinating in the way that it showcases what does it mean to be so close to being divine and yet we're not. And even more than the personalities and the interventions of the gods, it's kind of an enchanted world. You say at one point, I think in the intro to the Iliad, I think it was that you are careful in the translation not to treat a dead body as a body. It was still considered to be a person. You were dead, but you were still that person. Exactly. I think that's really important. I mean, this sort of gets back to the question of just how the themes are so recognizable and so human, and yet the imaginary world isn't quite the same as ours. And we tend to think of the dead as a different category from the living, whereas in the Homeric poems, they're not, the dead want the same things. They want honor. And the dead Patroclus or the dead Hector is still the dead Hector. It's not corpse of. So when the Greeks are battling over the body, what we might call the body of Patroclus, they're battling in the language the poem uses over Patroclus. And similarly, Proem takes his son Hector back to his family. It's not a corpse who was once his son. It's his son. And I don't know the theology well enough. My impression from the Odyssey is that most of these dead heroes are to be found in Hades after they're dead. Is it a heaven and hell thing or does everyone go to hell? It's a, so it's an afterlife thing, but it's also a complex kind of afterlife thing because the mind-body dualism that we're used to in the sort of post-Platonic mind-body dualism that we're used to has an idea that the self is the immaterial soul-like thing. So in Greek, that's the psuche from which we get the psyche, as in psychology. In the world of the Homeric poems, as you can tell just from the first few lines of the Iliad that I think I only said in Greek, but maybe people weren't following it. So in the first few lines of the Iliad, we get the line that, as a result of the wrath of Achilles, I'm just going to read you that line in my translation for a second so you can see what I mean. So the wrath of Achilles caused the Greeks so measurable pain and sent so many noble souls of heroes to Hades and made men the spoils of dogs, a banquet for the birds. So the souls, the psuche are sent to Hades. The men are eaten by the dogs. Got it. There's a distinction between the people themselves, those are the ones lying on the battlefield being eaten by animals. It's horrific. And then there's this fluttering grey thing that exists and will continue to exist in Hades. And if the man himself gets a proper honourable burial as Patroclus begs Achilles to give him when he appears to him in that sort of quasi-dream vision later on in the Iliad, then they get to have the honourable time in the afterlife. But it's dependent on the burial of the man himself, which is the physical man. So that question of what is the relationship between the physical self and the psuche is somewhat different from how we conceptualise it because it's not so clear where is the real you, right? Yeah. No, that's very, very helpful because I did not get, I would not get that just from getting the poem. But yes, that does make perfect sense. Yes. So as you say, so the book 11 of the Odyssey focuses on Odysseus encountering the souls, the psuche of his dead companions. And so we get something also in that about this question because Achilles gets, Achilles, Odysseus' old frenemy, meets him and they have this discussion about whether Achilles is happy because he got to live and die by honour. And Achilles famously says that he would rather live and be the hired man of someone poor on earth than be the king over all the numberless dead. There's something pale and lesser about being a psuche in the underworld. Though, of course, Achilles is also happy to hear about the honour of his son, Neoptolemus, who turned out to be an even more brutal killer than Achilles. And so that makes Achilles glad and he's able to stride happily across the elitian fields. Going back to your question about heaven and hell, there are different areas within Hades, it seems. There are rivers in the underworld which segregate the different parts. There's the elitian fields where the heroes who've achieved honour and have honorific burial can live forever being heroes. I like the idea that the afterlife is somehow lesser. I mean, it never made sense to me in Christian theology that heaven was so great and yet we don't want to die. But this version makes perfect sense, right? It does. The life that we have right now is the important part. Yes. Yes, it is. So we didn't... I guess one thing I wanted to get because it's so interesting to me for those who are not familiar with the Odyssey is the character of Odysseus because, you know, one of the most fascinating characters in literature ever but certainly in ancient literature and they, you know, partly because the poetry needs to emphasise the same thing over and over again but, man, we are told a lot about how clever he is. Yes, we are. And he's clever in a particular way about problem solving, right? And about encountering weird situations and being able to solve his way out of them. And I'm not sure exactly where you want to go with this but he will tell both about both about cleverness and about multiplicity is really important, I think. Yeah, I guess, I mean, what is... If you needed to tell someone who hadn't read the poem, who is this Odysseus person? How would you describe him? So are we talking to somebody who has read the Iliad and hasn't read the Odyssey or somebody... Nothing at all. They've read nothing. Whoever these people are. In any case, so he's a storyteller and he's making up stories about himself and with himself all the time he... In contrast, I said already that Achilles is usually described as swift-footed and or son of Peleus. In the case of Odysseus, he has many, many, many formulaic epithets. So most characters only have one or two. Achilles is swift. He goes directly to the point. He goes fast to what he wants to say. He's going fast on the road to death. Odysseus is not going fast anywhere. He's going roundabout and he's going to be in disguise as many different things or maybe the many different things are what it is to be Odysseus. And also, in contrast to every other Homeric character, maybe especially Achilles, Odysseus appears in disguise and not with his own name and he's willing to do that. And so that's also the key to his survival is about this ability to be in hiding and to say his name is nobody and to appear as a beggar rather than be sort of constantly saying as every character and every hero in the Iliad wants to be saying their name all the time and have everyone be saying their name all the time for the rest of human history and to build monuments that say their name. Whereas Odysseus is willing to have his name not be said in order to survive and eventually get his name said. He has, so one of his most important characteristics as well as the cleverness is the patience. Yeah, that's a very good point. And the name thing, like we said before, it doesn't go away. It makes me think of The Wire and all the characters on the streets in The Wire who up into Marlow at the end, he's like, you know, say my name. This is the most important single thing in the world. R-E-S-P-U-C-T. We all want it. Exactly. And you describe very accurately, Odysseus, as complicated, but you got flack for that. Oh my gosh. I mean, in a way, I see that as a success because it got people talking about translation and I think people sometimes read the Iliad and the Odyssey or read texts in translation in general without thinking about the fact that this is not actually the poem that was originally composed and the translator made some choices and so I wanted to make a Marx choice that would generate a conversation, partly because I already said that Odysseus has many different formulaic epithets. He is polymertis, he's very wily, he's polymechanos, he's very problem-solvy, he's polytlas, he's very patient. He's also, and this is a very unusual epithet for Odysseus, in that first line of the Odyssey, he's polytropos, he's very twisty or very circly or there are many turns to him or many disguises. And it seems to me that the choice of that word in that line is an invitation to think about the poem as well as the protagonist. So I wanted a word that's a single word that's going to fit into iambic pentameter, that's ideally the same length as the original, which is four syllables, and that will speak to what is the poem and who is its protagonist. Not going to tell you everything about that, but you're going to have some questions and you're going to remember this word. And so I felt complicated was actually my only possible thing I could do with it. Thumbtack presents the ins and outs of caring for your home. Out. Uncertainty, self-doubt, stressing about not knowing where to start. In. Plans and guides that make it easy to get home projects done. Out. Word art. Sorry, live-laugh lovers. In. Knowing what to do, when to do it, and who to hire. Start caring for your home with confidence. Download Thumbtack today. Well, it does, I love the fact that, you know, translations are translations and their works of art for their own sake, and those are different. And so I thought this might be fun or this might end up being very embarrassing, but I thought that to compare different ways of translating, that I would read the opening of the Iliad in two different relatively modern translations, and then you would read yours. Does that sound like fun? We can do that, yes. Okay, so here I have Lattimore, Richmond Lattimore, this is a famous one. Sing, goddess, the anger of Peleus' son Achilles and its devastation, which put pains thousandfold upon the Achaeans, hurled in their multitudes to the house of Hades, strong souls of heroes, but gave their bodies to be the delicate feasting of dogs, of all birds. And the will of Zeus was accomplished since that time when first there stood in division of conflict Atreus' son, the lord of men, and brilliant Achilles. And then we have Robert Fagels, who accompanied me, not him personally, but his translations on a cross-country trip when I was listening to, I think it was Ian McKellen who narrated this. Rage, goddess, sing the rage of Peleus' son Achilles, murderous, doomed, that cost the Achaeans countless losses, hurling down to the house of death so many sturdy souls, great fighters' souls, but made their bodies carrion, feasts for the dogs and birds. And the will of Zeus was moving toward its end. Begin, muse, when the first two broke and clashed, Agamemnon, lord of men and brilliant Achilles. And it's interesting because they're like, they're clearly the same stuff, the same substance, and I have preferences for, you know, different lines and different ones of them, even though I've never read the original Greek, but why don't you read your version? Sure. Goddess, sing of the cataclysmic wrath of great Achilles, son of Peleus, which caused the Greeks so measurable pain and sent so many noble souls of heroes to Hades and made men the spoils of dogs, a banquet for the birds. And so the plan of Zeus unfolded, starting with the conflict between great Agamemnon, lord of men, and glorious Achilles. Yeah, you're better at it than I am. I think that you have a future to do it. I like coming it up. You have practice. Yeah. So talk about the differences. I don't know. First, I guess, have you in the process of being a translator for these things? Is it your duty to either read other translations or do you think it's better to try to avoid them? It's my duty to look at them and know them when I'm doing the book proposal, when I'm figuring out, you know, is there any point in spending six years of my life doing this? Because I have to know and I have to persuade the publisher and the second and third readers that they send it to that I'm not doing the exact same thing that Robert Fagel's or Richmond Latimer did. Because otherwise, what's the point in doing that, right? But also that I'm going to be doing something responsible with the original that is going to be, you know, truthful about some elements of the original that might be inaudible or illegible if you only read this or that existing one. So I need to know about, need to know about them from that perspective and of course, in the course of my, I don't know however long I've been at this, like 30 years of teaching these poems in translation as well as in the originals, of course, I've used several of these in the classroom and I've seen what seems to work, what doesn't seem to work. But then once I've done the book proposal and done my little sample bit of translation, I then put them away for, you know, the next five years because if I'm stuck on something and if I'm thinking how could I make this line work, here's this phrase which is so beautiful and easy in the original and yet I can't seem to make it come clear in English. If I then look and see so what did Stanley Lombardo do with this, you know, maybe I like what he did and in that case I've ruled out something that otherwise I might have thought of by myself and felt all right about. So, you know, so I don't look at them while I'm working on it with the exception that with the Iliad in particular, I spend a lot of time agonizing about what the less common names and where the most natural place to put the stress would be for an English speaker. So I did a little bit of dipping into not the 20th century free verse ones because there's no use for this, but the 18th century ones like Pope and Cooper because of course they're metrical verse so I can tell, you know, where were they putting the stresses? But of course that was also useless because they do things like Diomede and nobody's going to say Diomede for Diomedes nowadays. Okay, so it was completely useless, but I did waste some time doing that and it's always fun to read some poems. That's fair enough, but I guess this is, you know, an extra burden for the translator of a poem. There are meter questions, things like that. I know that you made a leap from dactylic hexameter to iambic pentameter. Why don't we tell the audience what those two things are and why you made that switch? Yes, I mean, in a way I didn't make a switch such, because most English translators haven't used dactylic hexameter. The only one I know of that's done that consistently is the kind of under-known, but I think it's actually kind of interesting, Rodney Merrill translations. So dactylic hexameter, as the hex suggests, is six, and as the dactylic suggests, is finger. So dactylos in Greek is a finger. Most people who are lucky enough to have fingers have a long first joint and then two shorter joints on a finger. So that's what a dactyl is. It's a long and then two shorts. La, la, la. M, nina. So it's that rhythm. So it's like a musical bar and it's six, la, la, la, with the exception of the final one has to be la, la, la, la, la. So the fifth has to be a dactyl and the final beat is a spondy. La, la, two lungs. So you know where the end of the line is if you're just listening. Good. So that's what a dactyl a cacometer is. In Greek, ancient Greek and Latin are both quantitative meters. I mean, this is too much in the inside of baseball. It's not, it's not. As with the musical bar, it's about the length of the syllables rather than about the stress. So there is an interplay between stress and quantity in the music of ancient Greek and Latin poetry which is different from the primarily stressed way that metrical poetry tends to work in the anglophone tradition. So I felt that the I wanted to move away from the common norms of 20th and 21st century ways of translating ancient metrical poetry which is to more or less ignore meter so both the Fagels and the Latimore don't have a regular meter. They're arguably composed sort of for the ear and they work okay as audiobooks or at least the Fagels McKellen is fun. It's fun to listen to but it's not regular meter, right? So I wanted to honor the fact that the Homeric poems do use regular meter and that they do that partly because of what we talked about at the start of this conversation because these poems are the heirs of a long tradition of poetic storytelling. And so I felt the only way to do that in English is to use the traditional meter for dramatic and narrative verse in English so that even if you're not thinking about meter you can hear this has the same kind of beats as Shakespeare or Milton even if I'm not using the same lexicon as Shakespeare I'm still using that rhythm and so I'm wanting to cue the reader into there's something traditional about this it's not like a novel it's not prose. But how much of that choice is this is what Shakespeare and Milton did this is what we're sort of implicitly used to iambic pentameter da da da da da or how much of it is the words in English kind of naturally adapt to that? I mean it's hard to say right I mean I think that an iambic rhythm is definitely much easier in English than a dactylic rhythm or an anapist rhythm come to that because just having that words with two short or light beats in a row like that frequently or else two very heavy stress beats in a row it's hard to do with the English language I mean if you read any of the Rodney Merrill translations even if you just sort of dip into them you can see that he's sort of forced into things like he has to call Agamemnon scion of Atreus because the son of Atreus doesn't fit you can't get that into a dactylic line unless you think you stress off which of course you wouldn't so it's got to be scion of Atreus but I don't want to be having to say scion of Atreus every other line because the original doesn't sound sort of weird in that particular way right in the using completely unlikely combinations of words it sounds actually traditional as opposed to this sort of made up I mean of course it's an artificial poetic language but it's a traditional artificial language and this is very important how it sounds because I think that I remember reading that one of your ideas in doing the translation was you wanted the impression that the modern reader gets from it to be kind of analogous to the impression that the Greek listener would have had back in the day and many translations sound you know either floral or archaic or overly ponderous yes I mean I made me very happy to hear that you're listening to the audiobooks because just the fact of listenability and read aloud ability performability is really important to me and also just the fact that we haven't really talked about the fact that there were multiple different voices different speakers and before I before I took on the process of doing the Homeric translations I'd worked a lot on tragedy I've written quite a lot about tragedy I'd done some Seneca tragedy translations and I've done some Europe and Sophocles as well I wanted to bring out the protodramatic qualities of the Homeric poems as well as the fact that they're metrical and that they have this extraordinary sound and then I also wanted to lean into poetic techniques that the originals do that English can also do even beyond the fact that there's meter there's also a lot of alliteration so in those first few lines polas psuchas proyapsin so there's this so I wanted to try to echo those things like heroes Hades spoil of dogs banquet for the birds I want to lean into the possibilities of alliteration in English which of course is something that is part of the anglophone tradition as well yeah that didn't exactly answer your question but those are some of the things I wanted to be thinking about in terms of poetic technique I would much rather you say interesting things than answer my questions that's perfectly acceptable that's a good strategy how do you feel constrained sometimes by the fact that it is a poem I mean do you respect the line structure of the poem do you want to get the same number of lines I know certainly some people just like add in whole bunches of words because they think it sounds better yes or else I mean I thought I haven't got the Fagels translation in front of me but when you read the beginning of that you can sort of see that he really does add in a lot of words and sometimes in order to make things clear like he does rage goddess rage right because of course as I was saying before he wants to the original starts with the object if you're doing that in English you can't make clear that rage is the object not the subject of the sentence unless you repeat it he also does again I can't do this without having it in front of me but repeating multiple different possible choices for the destructiveness of the wrath of Achilles right he has something like deadly and I can't remember what he does but I don't feel constrained or at least I find the constraints really interesting and fun to work with in terms of pacing kinds of questions I kind of changed my mind between the two poems about that I felt from the outset that I very much wanted to do what I could to honour the quickness of the Homeric narrative pace and the sense that you get when you're reading the original that you want to hear more you want to hear more you want to hear more there's no point at which you're like this is kind of boring and the repetitions feel like they're bogging you down and so I felt what I could do with the Odyssey was to confine myself to the same number of lines as the original just to make sure that I wasn't making a translation that feels saggier than the original feels and that was I think I learned a lot by doing that and I think it did kind of work because not least because the Odyssey has a lot of very polysyllabic words many of which I felt it was okay to translate a word that's five syllables long by one that's three syllables long and then I can make the math work right if I have polymechanos Odysseus becoming crafty Odysseus then I can still make a hexameter into a pentameter and I can still keep it line for line and there was this sort of puzzle solving element to doing that when I got to the Iliad I thought I'm going to still try and do that even though with the Odyssey I would very often feel I've got a great draft of this book and then I would go back and realize okay I've got to cut a line somewhere and then I would have to go back and rewrite everything because I can't just cut a whole line but I got to rethink is there a patch where I can make a couple of epithets slightly shorter words is there a way that I can you know change much enduring into stalwart and then I can save the syllable and so on that kind of thing but in the case of the Iliad partly because there were just so many more names in the Iliad and of course Agamemnon is a really long name that will take up half a line and I can't call him you know Mr. Ag just to save some syllables so I used more lines for the Iliad translation than the original has and in fact if I were to do it again I would let myself be a little bit more lax about the line count with the Odyssey and maybe one day I'll go back and revise it and let myself have just you know maybe five more lines of book just a couple more I don't need a lot but I like constraints I think they're really useful and they force you to think about what exactly is really at stake here and not sort of patch in three different things because you haven't made a decision it means you have to have a clear voice yeah and then there's a there's a very basic question that I have when it comes to something like ancient Greek which is are we sure we know what the words mean like we can't ask a native speaker right is it all from context how how do or do we just sort of feel like maybe we don't know and we go with what we know that's a great question I mean we're pretty sure about most of the words because of course most words a lot of words in ancient Greek coexisted with Latin right and so there were translations from one to another there are commentaries there's a huge amount of later ancient Greek the case of Homeric poems is different because of course we have far less Greek of the archaic period of the pre 5th century period than we do of all of much later periods and the question of what exactly was the connotation of this or that word in the 7th or 6th century we can ask the linguistics historical linguistics specialists about what what did the roots of this word mean in Indo-European and what what exactly was the etymology but of course there are some words in the Homeric poems that even ancient Homeric scholars we haven't really talked about the existence of ancient Homeric scholarship but at the time of the library of Alexandria in the 3rd and 2nd centuries BCE which is when the first scholarly process of editing the written Homeric texts and figuring out what goes in this line here we have some variant readings do we use do we think that's that's the better one from this manuscript or that one all of that those scholars at that time were also very much fixated on the existence of a few words which which occur only once throughout the Homeric corpus which are called the hapax which means once so words that are a hapax you can't you can't get it from where are the other occurrences of this word in Homer because it doesn't occur elsewhere in Homer so you're kind of messed up and there are a few of course there are some of those and of course there are context clues but of course there's also you know maybe those context clues aren't telling you the whole story and then there can be some mystery I mean I felt that as a translator in the case of unusual words or words that occur only once or words about which there's some debate in antiquity among the ancient commentators about that I'm gonna have to go with go with a good scholarly guess and add an end note and I also can sometimes you know use an unusual word in English if it's a word that was clearly unusual within the context of the Homeric poems so for instance there's a there are usual words for spears and shields but there's also here's a weird word for a shield and maybe I can call it a buckler rather than using shield for the normal word things like that I can play around with the possibilities of English but there's no simple solution to what to do with that as a translator. Do you have any favorite examples of a word you would love to be able to go back and ask Homer what he was talking about? There were so many I mean this is going back to the beginning of the conversation about was there even a Homer and how are we going to interview that person and yes or the Homer committee if it was the Homer directorial committee. I mean even just that the beginning of the second line which I translate as cataclysmic it's a but it's a participle and it suggests disastrous or damned or the commentators from antiquity suggest there's there's an implication of the speaker cursing it like god damn it that terrible wrath. What exactly was the connotation and is there a difference between the colloquial language connotation or the poetic language connotation what's the relationship between I wish this wrath had been destroyed versus this wrath was itself destructive. I think the word probably suggests both. I don't know how to do that in English but yeah. And do you when you're thinking about the contemporary reader do you allow yourself to lapse into overly contemporary language or do you try to keep it a little bit more timeless? You really phrased that in a very neutral way like lapse and don't overly contour. Yes. I mean the question of how to make sure it's as clear and legible as the original is. The original even though we've talked about the ways it's traditional it's metrical it's clearly marked as poetic. It's got all these poetic markers like meter and alliteration and traditional character stories and so on and yet it's not syntactically complicated but it's also not slangy and yet it's also conveying clear actions and clear emotions. If I had said that wrath goddammit I would think that would be too slangy. there were cases where for instance where warriors speak to each other on the battlefield and they use terms of affection. Do I have them say hey buddy there are translators who do versions of that. I mean the Stanley Lombardo translations have a ton of sort of late 20th century military slang in them. I find that a little bit of a turn off. I think it's not registering the ways that this language is marked as different from regular speech and that these characters are having real feelings but they're not speaking in a completely naturalistic way. So I think there needs to be some kind of artifice about it which includes there's not going to be sort of blasphemy obscenity. People invoke the gods but they don't say goddammit and they don't say eff it. The register is different from the register of say Athenian comedy or Roman satire. So I felt there were lots of sort of wrestling with what exactly is the right register within English and then also what's the right register just sort of emotionally would this character say this and have I made it sound as intense in terms of these curses or insults have to sound really intense and like they really land and yet they don't just sound comically ridiculous. They have to be hyperbolic and yet not totally ridiculous and even here's this man wailing with grief and slapping his thighs which is not how we expect men to behave and yet you have to believe it while you're in the world of the poem. Well I did notice that because you know in my mind I'm I know there's a movie coming out I'm wondering how certain things happen and you know there's a lot of scenes where men are just bawling their eyes out right out of something and we don't see that in war movies today and that's just such a shift of expectation that it's hard for you it's hard for the translator to sort of get across the implications the connotations that the actual Greek audience must have been getting. Right I mean also as we've already said the actual Greek audience is a lot of different people and buried by time period and if you're Plato reading that and thinking oh no he shouldn't be bawling his eyes out he should get a grip right and that's an ancient Greek response to that and yet there's also a way that within the world of the poems I don't think we're being invited to think that I mean I think we're being invited to see this to see it as absolutely if you suffer devastating grief of course you're going to be rolling around in the dung and bawling your eyes out because that shows how upset you are. Yeah do you think that working as a translator has affected your sort of classic scholarship more broadly like are you better at reading ancient Greek things now that you've worked hard to translate them into English? I'm not sure I mean it's hard to say because I've been and I've been reading these poems since I was a teenager I started Greek in high school I've been teaching them for decades I mean I didn't sort of take take on these poems sort of without having read them before you know so I wasn't starting from scratch and it's sort of hard to go back to what did I think before but I definitely think that just that process of living this closely with these poems for the last 12 plus years you know working on on them every single day and thinking about the connotations of every single word all the time and then also the process of talking about them to people like you and sort of realising what questions do people have and how do I make sure that I'm you know being honest and respectful to the tradition and to the poems that I still adore and feel you know like I want to keep reading them for the rest of my life I think it definitely reinforced for me just how great they are and also the ways that the performability I think I hadn't of course I knew in theory and I did kind of know just how essential it is to think about the Homeric poems as performance texts but thinking about how to recreate that in English made that alive for me in a different way and then doing the things like what I just did of reading a little bit of Greek reading a little bit of my translation practicing doing that and practicing being a rhapsode which is of course I tried doing different versions of that in sort of pathetic ways in the classroom but it's fun to get to do that with different audiences and it makes it also reinforces to me that audiences like this stuff it's not just people in antiquity who find it interesting and compelling so okay we're at the end of the podcast so we can I'll close on a completely silly unfair question you mentioned Jane Austen earlier as an author who we could identify and one thing about Jane Austen is there are dozens and dozens of sequels to her books written by fans so if you had to write your Homeric epic like if you had to write your own sequel to the Iliad and the Odyssey are there any juicy stories out there you think deserve that treatment oh I love this question so I right now I'm doing something which is not not exactly this project but it's I'm doing a couple of projects that are a little bit this project one is a translation of Ovid's Heroides which in a way is a sort of one of the many ancient quasi sequels to the Iliad and the Odyssey it's the verse epistles of mythological women writing back to their terrible boyfriends saying how terrible they are the first one is Penelope writing to Odysseus saying what took you so long and then the third one is Briseis writing to Achilles and the ridiculous premise is that she thinks Achilles is her boyfriend rather than her enslaver and rapist sort of funny but it's it's really dark yeah very dark good anyway so I'm doing a translation of that and it's really fun to be sort of be thinking about voice in different ways it's a different poetic form because it's elegiac couplets rather than hexameters and then I'm also doing a prose retelling of the Trojan war myths that are in the background to the Trojan wars so it's a fiction stitched together but if I was doing an epic poem version I don't know I mean I there's a lost tragedy called Palamedes which is about Palamedes who supposedly was the inventor of the mythical inventor of the alphabet who got tricked by Odysseus and killed and I I've often thought a cue would be an interesting person to do a either a story or an epic poem about or rewrite the lost tragedy of Palamedes it'd be cool all right I encourage you to do that that Odysseus he was very tricksy wasn't he he was real tricksy yes he really was very fun character yes Emily Wilson thanks so much for being on the mindscape podcast thanks so muche and also billboards Thank you.