Hello everyone and welcome to the Mindscape podcast. I'm your host, Sean Carroll. Tell me about a complicated man. Muse. Tell me how he wandered and was lost when he had wrecked the holy town of Troy and where he went and who he met, the pain he suffered in the storms at sea and how he worked to save his life and bring his men back home. He failed to keep them safe. Poor fools. They ate the sun God's cattle and the God kept them from home. Now Goddess Child of Zeus tell the old story for our modern times. Find the beginning. Some of you may recognize these lines as the opening of The Odyssey by Homer. The Odyssey, well translated in English of course, Homer was writing in Homeric Greek over 2500 years ago. Homer is known for two poems. The Odyssey and the Iliad, both of which have come to play absolutely central roles in the Western canon, the beginning in many ways of Western literature. And these days of course we're very interested in expanding the canon beyond Western literature to other literatures as well. That's very very valuable, all in favor of it, but it doesn't mean we throw out the existing canon. We can welcome new things with open arms, but the Iliad and the Odyssey are going to be with us and be centrally informative to how we think about literature for a very long time. They're both very different poems. They're about different things. They're both about incidents from the Trojan War or incident is probably too minor, but episodes from the Trojan War. But in very different modes, with very different atmospheres about them, the Iliad, both poems have many characters, but the Iliad centers on Achilles and his wrath. It's right up there in the beginning of the poem, The Wrath of Achilles, is the thing that we're going to be thinking about here. The Odyssey also has many characters, but centers on Odysseus and we're told right at the beginning he is complicated. He is a trickster, he is clever, he is willing to take on many disguises to get what he wants. It's a contrast. The Iliad is based in one place, the Odyssey is, as the word now means in English, a journey that goes over very large distances. And given how formative and important these poems are, the idea of translating them into English is a very important one, because most of us don't read Homeric Greek, who those are those out there in the audience who do, but I don't. So how do you go about this project of translating these ancient poems into English? Many people have done it, but you're instantly faced with so many choices when you translate a work like this. For one thing, the world was different in Homeric Greece. The ideas about how nature worked, the ideas about how people dealt with each other were different, but also as you notice, while reading or listening to the poems, there are so many similarities. We still have a lot in common with our ancient Greek predecessors, but also it's a poem. Poems have meters, or at least they have organization. They have some structure there that prose doesn't have. How do you translate both the meanings of the words, the connotations as well as the denotations, and the metrical spirit of the poem into English? That's one of the reasons why so many people have tackled the problem. One of the most recent and influential is today's guest, Emily Wilson, who has translated both the Iliad and the Odyssey in a way that she aims to make the poems give us the same feeling now that they might have given the audience in ancient Greece. That is to say, not something that is manifestly archaic in form, because it wouldn't have seemed archaic to the ancient Greeks, right? Something that is a stirring story that gets you, that is not colloquial and chatty and sort of cliched, but is modern contemporary how you think people might reasonably talk with their vocabulary. And in a way that lends itself to being read out loud, when Homer, who may or may not have existed as a single person, but as a concept of Homer, when he was writing these poems, they were translated by an oral tradition, right? People spoke them out loud in ceremonies, and only later were they written down. So capturing that spirit is an important part of the translator's interest. So it's a great conversation because we're talking about Homer, we're talking about ancient Greece, we're also talking about poetry and translation, and we're talking about the Iliad and the Odyssey, these two wonderful stories that still have a lot to teach us. The classics, they're classic for a reason, so let's go. Emily Wilson, welcome to The Minescape Podcast. It's lovely to be here. I want to start with maybe you get this all the time, I don't know, which is your favorite, the Iliad or the Odyssey. I do get it all the time and it's hard to say, I mean, whichever I'm working on is my favorite. If I'm teaching the Iliad, that's definitely my favorite. I think in my harder parts, maybe the Iliad is my even more favorite, but I love both of some very, very much. It's kind of amazing to me because they are so different and let's, for the audience, just talk about the idea that these are written by a person named Homer, which is probably not true, no modern scholar really believes that it was just one person who sat down and wrote them, how these two poems come to be? Yes, I mean, people, there were modern scholars who think it was a single person who composed them, but they weren't an author in the sense that Jane Austen was an author because they weren't making up characters and stories from scratch. There was an oral tradition in the Greek-speaking world for several centuries. So the Greek-speaking world had no literacy after the fall of my senior in civilization. So these stories about a great city called Troy and a great expedition of Greek warriors coming from all over the Greek-speaking world to fight in the mythical Trojan War. These heroes called Odysseus and Achilles and Hector and memorializing them through a particular poetic technique using a meter called Dactylic Hexamata. All of that was traditional and something that a little at Bards singers had been doing for generations before, whoever it was, whether that's a single person or several people, got together to use the new technology of writing, which came about in the mid-8th century BCE, the Greek-speaking world borrowed from the Phoenicians a set of ways of writing down their language in the mid-8th century BCE. So sometime after that, probably in the seventh century, either one or more people composed these monumental written poems out of this long oral tradition. And just to put it in absolute context here, so the poems are written down hundreds of years before Plato and Aristotle, who were hundreds of years before Jesus and the beginning of the Roman Empire. Exactly. So mid-7th century is the rough date of the Hemeropom's. Plato was from the fourth century and of course Jesus is, as we know from our calendar, the year dot kind of thing. Yes. So Jesus was a contemporary of people like Seneca. And so the idea is... I don't know. Let me take that back. He wasn't a contemporary of Seneca. Jesus was a contemporary. People like the Roman Emperor, the beginning of the Roman Empire. Augustus, etc. Right. Augustus, exactly. So I didn't realize there were still people who held out for the idea that Hemer was one person who did compose in the sense of put together these poems in the way that they're currently written. Or was it was the idea that Hemer was just the last person to have these poems before they were written down? Like he dictated them and then he gets his name on them. Yes. I mean, the capital H, capital Q, Homeric question, is a whole cluster of questions about that kind of thing about was it one individual? Was it two individuals, one for the Odyssey, one for the Iliad? And how exactly was the transition from oral tradition to monumental written poem done? Was it through somebody dictated? That's actually quite a popular scholarly theory that there was a bar who sang the poems to a scribe who wrote it down. Or else maybe there was an oral poet who became literate. I would want to just flag that what existed before these written poems wasn't the same as these poems, because these are far too long for a single occasion performance. I mean, I know that you were saying you've listened to the audiobook. So we have these poems over 20 hours long. Yes. It's much too long, pro. After dinner, we're having a cup of wine and listening to the poet sing a one or two heroic tales. I mean, it seems to me that the existence of the new technology of writing inspired one or more people to realize they could do something different with the oral tradition from what had been done before. And there's a complexity of narrative composition, circles of patterns within patterns, presumably that style of oral storytelling where you echo one scene with another scene already was part of the tradition, but to do it on this level of complexity and several hours later, here's a story that echoes the one that you might have heard in many hours before. You need writing in order to make that replicable. You can't just do it and then repeat it the exact same way for the next day. Can we even talk about something like the intention of the author? If this is a bunch of stories that came together in different ways? We can talk about what exactly is going on in the text we have. I mean, the intention of the author given that we can't bring them back through necromancy and many time machines. And even if we could, I mean, people talk about whether we can, there's a separation between the intentionality of the living poet and the living novelist and what their text says, right? So it's not that it's a problem unique to her. Fair enough. And I guess if we put ourselves back in the world of when Homer was around, what was a typical performance like? Was it a theater that you went to to hear something long or was it literally like, you know, this is what we did after dinner. Someone was tasked with the idea of treating us with a few stanzas. Yes. So again, this is a much debated scholarly question. And the question is different depending on which period we're talking about. But all over the, I mean, throughout antiquity, the Homeric poems were experienced in oral performance and oral performances, probably including all of the above. We know that rap soaps. So a rap soaps is somebody who performs traditional oral poetry, not making it up on the spot, presumably using a script to memorize and then perform some famous bit or some highlights out of the Homeric poems for a particular performance. And that included performances at religious and civic festivals. We know that from a pretty early date, the Homeric poems were used in poetry competitions. So here's one rap so doing his showpiece celebrity performance, doing all the voices. And then here's another one. Now the judges are going to decide who gets the crown, who did the best Homer performance this year. And then also presumably in more private, like drinking party kinds of contexts. And all of the above, I think, is what I would say about what the contexts were in which people heard these poems. So would the typical Greek person on the street be more or less familiar with the content of the poems? Absolutely. Yes. But we can very, very definitely say everyone knew these stories. Yes. And we know that these stories, of course, we get these stories represented on Greek forces from all over the Greek speaking world. People knew these characters and these stories. And were they at the time just considered, in particular, the Iliad and the Odyssey, just part of a whole bunch of stories that were common or was it already clear like this is the best we got? It was, I mean, again, it's the question of when exactly that happened is much debated. But yes, so we're told that at the time of Pysystortus, who was a tyrant in Athens in the sixth century, the Pysystortus instituted that at his civic festivals, it would be the Homeric poems, as opposed to other parts of the epic or cyclical heroic tradition that would be used in the festival competition, in the festival poetry competition. So that suggests an understanding of something, I mean, that again, we can debate was that the Iliad and the Odyssey exactly as we have them or was there, were those poems revised edited in some way or other over the next couple of centuries. But there was a sense, certainly, from a pretty early stage that the Homeric poems are different. And by the time we get to Plato and Aristotle, there's a really clear sense that the, the Homer is special. And so for instance, in Aristotle's Poetics, he, he discusses the, the best kinds of plot and insists that the Homeric poems are different from the broader cyclical tradition of Dactetic Exameter Heroic Poetry and partly because their plots are better. They hope that the, for instance, the Odyssey doesn't tell you every single myth about Odysseus. There were tons of myths about Odysseus. The, the, the poet of the Odyssey is smart enough to leave most of them out. Same way with the Iliad, it leaves most of the stories out. So in order to have a really tight beginning middle and end and a focused narrative, the Homeric poems, despite their monumental length, are very, very selective about which stories they tell about the whole myth. And they do it in this sophisticated way where it's not, let's begin at the beginning and continue till the, the bitter end. It's, let's do stories within stories and moving back and forth. This episode of Mindscape is sponsored by BetterHelp. When it comes to relationships, we often hear about the red flags we should avoid. But what if we focus more on looking for the green flags in friends and partners? If you're not sure what green flags look like, therapy could help you identify them. Actively practice them in your relationships and embody the green flag energy yourself. Whether you're dating, married, building a friendship or just working on yourself, it's time to form relationships that love you back. One of the great things about therapy is by looking inside yourself, you can both learn to take those warning signs seriously, but also learn to be open to new experiences and new things. To know when something might be worth pursuing. BetterHelp is a fully online service that makes therapy affordable and convenient, serving over 5 million people worldwide. You can easily switch therapists any time at no extra cost. So discover your relationship green flags with BetterHelp. Visit BetterHelp.com-mindscape today to get 10% off your first month. That's BetterHelp-HELP.com-mindscape. I think actually that's super noticeable to just me. I love listening to the audiobooks of these things. I think that's the way they were meant to be. And they're good stories. They grab you. You want to hear what happens next. There's Odysseus arriving on Ithaca and he's kind of lingering. You're like, come on Odysseus, I want to see what happens. Yes. Exactly. There's some suspense because you kind of know he's going to come out of his disguise at some point. But it leaves you hanging until 22. It's very long wait for your, your rooting for something to happen and then it'll happen. Which I think isn't always characteristic of storytelling of that time, right? Like they hadn't quite figured out those, you know, Hollywood techniques for grabbing your attention. You know, I think we project back on to an antiquity, an idea of surely because they were ancient, they must have been primitive and unsophisticated in their narrative techniques. And I really don't think that's necessarily true. I mean, the cyclic poems that we have evidence of, we only have them in fragmentary form, were composed later than the hope, the early add in the Odyssey. So I don't think there's actually evidence to say at the earliest periods, Greek storytelling or Greek poetic technique was less sophisticated than it became later. I think we actually have evidence of the opposite. Yeah, okay. Of course, the whole spectrum of different things, because you know, some people are better at telling stories than others, and some people are better poets than others. And that's always been the case. Well, it's still true today. I remember I used to live in LA for a long time. A lot of my friends were screenwriters and one of them said, you know, people wonder why Hollywood movies are so popular compared to like art films or European movies or whatever, and it's a, it says, because we follow Aristotle, we do the story, telling techniques that have been known for a long time. Yeah. And also that oral thing does affect the words, right? I mean, you'll know better than me, so help us out here. But the style of the poems themselves are written to help people remember them and have the interesting part of the sentence be at the beginning of it, for example. Mm-hmm. Absolutely. Yeah. So we could talk about multiple different areas without both in terms of the ability of Greek to put the important word at the beginning. So maybe we could just do a sort of case study is the beginning of the Iliad, which begins with the theme of the poem, which is Manus, Roth. So Man in Iad, there are Per Lea, Dore, Calais, Ullomanan, That's great. Let's call the poem. And the Iliad and the Odyssey each do this thing of beginning with the words that's the topic of the poem. So the Odyssey begins Andra, Moe, Ennepe, I'm not sure the whole thing about, but Andra, meaning Man. And with the Iliad it's Manus, meaning Divine Roth. So the Roth of Achilles is Quasai Divine. I feel like I didn't actually answer your question, though, which was about oral technique. So that that, when I just said, can apply to Greek that's composed not orally as well. I think it's a highly afflicted language. So it's possible to put the object at the beginning of the sentence. Homeric Greek is a mix of different dialects composed out of traditions from all over the Greek speaking world. So it's this very artificial poetic language. It has a meter as I hope you could hear when I was just saying a few lines. It has a rhythm to it. It was designed to be sort of chanted rather than just sort of spoken as if it's a novel. Pro is a later invention in the history of literature. And also it has these formulaic phrases as you were hinting at. So for instance Achilles is usually Swift-Preded Achilles or Achilles sonobilius or both depending on which position in the line he is so that it makes it easier to fit the meter. And it also means that if you're composing orally, you don't have to stop and think about. So what adjectives shall I use for Achilles this time? Because you've only got two choices. That is kind of me Achilles sonobilius or it's going to be Swift-Preded Achilles depending on which you need to pull up a half line. And similarly about almost every object in the Homeric universe. So you know, sponges of porous and ships are well balanced or they have rowing boat benches on them. And so on. And then even then on the sort of slightly larger level of types of scenes there are also just things that you can plug in whenever you do a banqueting scene or an animals getting sacrificed scene or guy on the battlefield gonna slaughter a lot of people kind of scene or an arming scene or a stranger shows up at the gates and there's going to be hospitality seen if it's the Odyssey. Like those kinds of things always have a pretty much preset set of components now at Iberli and then the poet can decide in each occasion which of the elements am I going to put in here and how can I make it fun for the audience by using the conventions but also every time messing with them in some way. So no two hospitality scenes are exactly the same. In the case of the Iliad, all those battlefield sequences you don't have the the same part of the body pierced twice in the row. Right? You have somebody's going to be stabbed through the lungs. Next time you're going to have someone have their tongue sliced off. Next time you're going to have to go through the ears. You have to have variety within tradition. Well I think and you also answered something that I've been wondering about for decades in my life about as you mentioned poetry seems to have come before pros in the history of narrative and that just always seemed weird to me because poetry sounds like it's an extra layer of constraint over pros but if you think that it's because we started this as part of an oral tradition rather than a written one then maybe it makes much more sense. It's easier to remember poetry. It's easier to remember and also if we think of literature as marked language and if you're thinking if you're hearing everything out loud what's marked about how are we talking right now? It's not marked and so it takes extra levels of sort of thinking through what language is and extra layers of technology to figure out how can we make pros something something ornate and marked in the way that poetry has always been because of a marker's a poetry that have to do with with meter with sounds with the speakability and performability of it. Do you find yourself talking in iambic pentameter just by accident sometimes? I sometimes do yes. I'm not going to do it now. We're not we're not going to do off like that. Not in touch, okay very good. Okay so at this point I guess we should tell some of the audience if they're not super familiar what happens in the plot of these stories. I think that many events in the stories are individually familiar but the Ilya the Odyssey just amazed me because they're so different from each other and so compelling in their own ways so explain to us you know what what the focus is. Yeah they're both so different from each other and so complementary. I mean I think they really invite reading together because they're both long poems about the Trojan War. The Ilya ad is set during the Trojan War but as we've already hinted it's a weird poem about the Trojan War because it doesn't tell you what happened at the beginning how did this war get started. We're supposed to assume we're assumed to already know that of course the mythical Trojan War began when Paris Prince of Troi abducted Helen from her Spartan Greek husband Menolais and took her with him back to Troi and then the Greeks got together Menolais and his brother Agamemnon got a whole bunch of Greek warriors together to make war on the rich city of Troi which is in what's now Turkey and sail there besiege the city for 10 years eventually a socket using the wooden horse dual kinds of terrible things in the course of sacking the city, enslaving the women, then they sail home and they've got the gods because they've done terrible things in the course of the sack of the city curse the journey's home. So the Ilya and the Odyssey sort of take that whole body of myth and find what I think already at the time in the seventh century was an original and weird take on it. The Ilya focuses not on the sort of famous bits of the beginning of the war or the fall of the city but on a time like a month and a half that isn't at the beginning or the end it's the start of the 10th year of the war and it focuses on a quarrel between two Greek warriors Achilles and Agamemnon in the course of which Achilles gets furious with Agamemnon for taking from him the woman that he's been trying to enslave. So Achilles who's the son of a sea goddess and thinks he should get the maximum amount of honor out of any of the warriors because he's the best at running and throwing spears feels he's been dist in public among the among his fellow warriors so he asks his sea goddess mother Thetis to help to help him get his honor back and Thetis with the help of Zeus ensures that Wallachilles is sitting sulking in his tent refusing to fight the Greeks will suffer an enormous massacre at the hands of the Trojans so the Trojan warrior Hector is on the rise for the first two thirds of the Ilyaad killing the Greeks and it's only when Achilles realizes very very much too late that his prayer to have the Greeks be massacred he wasn't thinking the Greeks would include anyone he actually cares about but it turns out he does care about just one Greek which is his dearest companion Petroclus who begs to go out wearing Achilles armor as sort of his second self to try to fight to fight Hector off from the ships and of course we can sort of see it coming but it's still heartbreaking when it happens Hector kills Petroclus and then inspired by that grief and by a transformed version of his original rage Achilles returns to the battlefield to fight Hector and to try to keep on destroying as many Trojans as possible until he himself dies and the poem sort of ends not with Achilles' death but with a transformation of his rage into something else into a recognition of his own mortality and of the temporary value that human institutions of grief can provide and he has a meeting with Hector's father, Pryam who comes to beg for his son's body back from the person who killed him and Achilles gives Hector back so Hector who's been leaving home throughout the poem has a kind of homecoming journey at the end of the early ad even though he's of course dead when he comes home and so the the honestly sort of compliments this story about a warrior who's separated from his people but then eventually finds a way back to community with a focus on Odysseus who also has also like Achilles has issues with honor and I also I said a set of a couple of minutes ago that there were all these myths about the homecoming journeys of the Greeks from the mythical city of Troy the Odyssey takes the longest possible homecoming journey which is the homecoming journey of Odysseus which lasts for 10 years because he spends seven years shacked up with one goddess another year shacked up with another and then in the course of his journeys by C Pysydan curses journey because because Odysseus has blinded Pysydan's son the Cyclops polyphemus so half the poem is Odysseus trying to get get back to Ithaca and then the second half of the poem Odysseus is is back on Ithaca but the poem is showing us that a homecoming journey is a lot more than a geographical thing it's also about we establishing relationships with every member of Odysseus's household and being recognized in all these different ways so it's a whole sequence of different recognitions with Odysseus as in a way different selves and that question of what does it mean to come home what is an identity what is a person with and how are we different in different communities is it stake in the in the Odyssey whereas in the early I guess those sort of these big themes about grief and rage and isolation and community there is a movie coming out I don't know if you're familiar with it about the last part of the Odyssey with Ray Fines in it I saw an announcement about that I mean I don't think it's available yet I don't think it's quite out yet yeah yes I'm excited to see that yes yeah it's one of those you know cautiously optimistic kind of things they could they could be great yeah so this this is has anyone suggested that this difference between the two poems is part of the reason why we suspect Homer is not just one person because they're so different I mean the Iliad even though they are complimentary just like you said and maybe it does make sense to read them together but or listening to them together but the Iliad is very warlike very masculine Achilles is exactly sort of the action hero stereotype but kind of moopie about it and simple I think is fair to say whereas the artist I think Achilles is very sophisticated he's the you know he plays the liar he's singing the stories of heroes his language is full of metaphors so he's you know he's a poet as well as as well as a fighter I think he's from complex in a different way from Odysseus yeah completely completely fair I guess I guess what I was was thinking about is just he is moopie you know he he does yes well when when we first meet Odysseus what is he doing well yeah that's true he's sitting but he's like the sea and crying for seven years he was yeah just yeah fair enough okay okay that's that's a very good point but the the lessons maybe I don't know is Homer trying to give us lessons in these stories do you think so we may maybe go back to the first question about the compliment tower tower tea this scholar's talk about something called Monroe's Law which is that the stories don't repeat and people it's often argue that maybe that means that either that they are by the same person or that at the very least whoever composed the Odyssey knew the Iliad right so that it's it's composed within a knowledge that the audio you dear audience I don't want to bore you I want to give you something different and if you've already heard everything from the Iliad I want to show you something else um so lessons I mean in antiquity that knowing the Homeric poems was an essential part of what was called Pidea of cultural education both on the level of children sort of learning about narrative from the Homeric poems are it is learning about rhetoric from the Homeric poems generals learning about military technique by arguing about but we're going to did nestled the white thing there or how does the council meeting operate in all of those ways the Homeric poems were essential sort of cultural tests um but of course the Homeric poems don't include anything like the Tenka moments say right they don't have lessons that are sort of directly given as if from a divine authority figure that you can sort of write down and say oh yes that shows that I must you know do this in so far as there are lessons they're spoken by particular characters on particular occasions and of course one can always debate whether or not that lesson is is the right lesson um and you know the Greeks Greek speakers and antiquities certainly did debate those things I mean you probably know many of these listeners probably know that in Plato's Republic the semi ideal republic envisioned by Plato's Socrates includes casting out Homer and the tragic poets from this semi ideal republic because these poems teach you the wrong lessons they teach you to sympathize with infuriated or brief stricken heroes like heroes in a in an ancient sense not necessarily heroes in a modern sense larger than life characters who are doing terrible things and making terrible choices and the poems aren't necessarily inviting you you know to do anything other than feel for them and to have a lot of feelings which if you're Plato in that text you don't necessarily think those feelings are a good idea for the balance of the civic polity a lot of us start the new year saying that we will learn a new language but it's hard to actually commit to it that will make it easy to learn one in less time than you think babbles quick ten minute lessons handcrafted by over 200 language experts get you to begin speaking your new language in three weeks or whatever pace you choose and because conversing is the key to really understanding each other in new languages babble is designed using practical real world conversations what I love about babble is you can either dive in deeply and truly get fluent or you can just master some of the basics before going on a trip so let's get more of you talking in a new language babble is gifting our listeners 60% off subscriptions at babble.com slash mindscape get up to 60% off at babble.com slash mindscape spelled B-A-B-B-E-L dot com slash mindscape that's babble.com slash mindscape rules restrictions may apply well it's that's a feature of good art right I mean it's portraying complicated people uh and the lessons if they're there so I mean you gave the answer that I was hoping that you would give from my perspective which is that one can get lessons but it's not because the work of art itself is saying here's the lesson you better learn it absolutely not and of course the lesson is partly about you must go through this journey and you must go through this journey collectively with other people and then you must argue about it and figure out what it means together and it may mean different things depending on what's the community that's telling this story together and how does this conversation go and it might mean that it means something different for you than it does for me and then we have a language to talk to each other about really difficult things through these poems and it's interesting that so many of the specific issues about honor duty whatever are still absolutely human and familiar to us even though the world of over 25 hundred years ago 3000 years ago is so so very different in many ways yes I mean people still have societies people still care about other people and also very often feel furious with other people we still have mortality we still have grief we still have loss we still have how do we deal with people who aren't like us and how do we if we lose something or someone what do we do is there any kind of compensation for loss that is okay and if there isn't then what do we do do we just go around and kill everyone else because we're so furious none of those questions have gone away even though the terms in which these poems set them up are of course completely different from one in terms well one thing you just can't miss when you're listening to the stories is how present the gods are that's very different right I mean it's not a superhero story it's almost naturalistic but the gods are there pushing people around is this is this how Greeks of that time would have thought of the world or was that like oh no this is a story so I get it it's it's it's both right I mean there were of course cults and worship and you know these gods are not just literary fictions I think we we may be tempted to think of the gods in the Homo poems as this is just made up for the sake of the story in the same way that kryptonite is just there for the sake of the story and nobody has a religious festival in which we talk about kryptonite we know about that only from comic books and the movies whereas in the case of Athena or here are there are real temples there are real there's real religious practice there's real sacrifices and there are real particular parts of the week speaking world where this city has a temple this island is particularly sacred to this or that goddess so that also gives particular passages in the Homo area poems a different resonance for some audiences versus others but at the same time the question of exactly how literal should we be about the gods are exactly as they are represented in the poems of course one can debate that and the question also of in different periods of Greek history there were developing views about the gods and I also think it's a mistake to I mean we another common mistake is to think because there are gods who are supremely powerful and and yet not omnipotent does that take away from human agency the poems are very clear that it doesn't right they're very clear that at the same time as the gods who are far more visible and tangible to humans than they tend to be in real life I mean I personally never never seem to have directing counters with Athena even if I can sort of sense her somewhere around the corner I never actually get to to look into her bright eyes but in the poems people do have those experiences and yet it that doesn't mean that they're not still making choices I mean if you think about the first encounter between Achilles and Athena in the Iliad Achilles is tempted to kill Agamemnon because he's so so angry with him and at the moment he's about to draw his sword to kill him Athena grabs him by the hair and speaks to him and says we've just we've we've come I've come down because here I was worried about this we don't want you killing each other think a moment and so he thinks about it and then he doesn't do it but it's it's not that he hasn't thought about it he does think about it and his decision-making is there and he's also persuaded by the goddess so it's not that he's a puppet of the goddess and I think that's a really important to bear in mind that when the gods intervene they very often do it in the same way that humans intervene with each other they do it by persuasion rather than by force and the gods are often I mean they're obviously super powerful but they're like you said not omnipotent in fact there was there's even a couple of examples was it Dioffanese who you know fought a couple gods and did did okay I mean he's done it is done it is in book book five of the Iliad he's a great hero who in some ways sort of parallels Achilles in his quasi divine capacities to take on gods and be as close as a mortal warrior can be to a god and yet he's not he's not a mortal he manages to to fight against the the gods the two gods who are the least honored by the other gods with the closest to being sort of divine representations of elements of human impulse that we may we may not like about ourselves which is lust and aggression so his aries got a war and Aphrodite he got a got a last and Dio Medi's fights against both of them and Aphrodite he goes whining back to her mother where she gets a little praise on her wrist and it's sort of funny but it's also sort of fascinating of in in the way that it showcases what does it mean to be so close to being divine and yet we're not and even more than the personalities in the interventions of the gods it's kind of an enchanted world I you say at one point I think in the intro to the Iliad I think it was that you were careful in the translation not to treat a dead body as a body it was still considered to be a person you were dead but you were still that person exactly I think that's really important I mean this sort of gets back to the question of just how the themes are so recognizable and so human and yet the the imaginary world isn't quite the same as ours and we we tend to think of the dead as a different category from the living whereas in the homo-opromes they're not they's the dead want the same things they want honor and the dead patroclus or the dead hector is still the dead hector is not corpse of so when when the Greeks are battling over the body what we might call the body of patroclus they're battling in the language of the poem uses over patroclus and similarly pro-em takes his son hector back to his family it's not a corpse who was once his son it's his son and I don't know the theology well enough my impression from the Odyssey is that most of these dead heroes are to be found in Hades after their dead is it is that a heaven and hell thing or does everyone go to hell it's a um so it's an afterlife thing but it's also a complex kind of afterlife thing because the the mind-body dualism that we are used to um in the sort of post-plotonic mind-body dualism that we're used to has an idea that the self is the immaterial solely thing so like thing so in Greek that's the psukab from which we got the psyche as in psychology in the in the world of the homo-opromes as in this just the as you can tell just from the first few lines of the Iliad that I think I only said in Greek but maybe people weren't following it but um so in the first few lines of the Iliad we get the line that um as a result of the wroth of Achilles I'm just going to read you that line in my translation for a second so you can see what I mean um so the wroth wroth of Achilles caused the Greeks a measure of all pain and since so many noble souls of heroes to Hades and made men the spoils of dogs a banquet for the birds so the souls the psukai are sent to Hades the men are eaten by the dogs got it there's a distinction between the people themselves those are the ones lying on the battlefield being eaten by animals it's horrific and then there's this fluttering gray thing that exists and will continue to exist in Hades and if it get if the man himself gets a proper honorable burial as Petrochtus begs the keleys to give him when he appears to him in that sort of quasi dream vision later on in the Iliad then they get to have the honorable time in the afterlife but it's dependent on the burial of the man himself which is the physical man so that question of what is the relationship between the physical self and the psukai is somewhat different from how we conceptualize it because it's not so clear where is the real you right yeah no it's very very helpful because I did not get I would not get that just from getting the poem but yes that that does make perfect sense yes so yes I was you say so the book 11 of the Odyssey focuses on Odysseus encountering the the souls the psukai of his dead companions and we get so we get something also in that about this question because Achilles gets Achilles Odysseus is old frenemy and meet him and they have this discussion about whether Achilles is is happy because he you know he got he got to he got to live and die by honor and Achilles famously says that he would rather live and be the hired man of someone poor on earth then be the king over all the number of there's something pale and lesser about being a psukai in the underworld though of course Achilles is also happy to hear about the honor of his son Neoptolemus who turned out to be an even more brutal killer than Achilles and so that makes Achilles glad and he's able to to to stride happily across the elision fields it's going back to your question about a Kevin and hell there were different areas within the within Hades is seen right there there were rivers in the underworld which segregate the different parts there's the elision fields where they heroes who've achieved honor and have honorific burial can can live forever being heroes I like the idea that the afterlife is somehow lesser I mean it never made sense to me in Christian theology that heaven was so great and yet we don't want to die this version makes perfect sense right like the life that we have right now is the important part yes yes it is so we didn't I guess one thing I wanted to get because it's it's so interesting to me for those who would not familiar with the Odyssey is the character of Odysseus because you know one of the most fascinating characters in literature ever but certainly an ancient literature and they you know that partly because the poetry needs to emphasize the same thing over and over again but man we are told a lot about how clever he is yes we are and he's clever in a particular way about problem solving right and about encountering weird situations and being able to solve his way out of them and I'm not sure exactly where you want to go with this but well I'm told both about both about cleverness and about multiplicity is really important I think yeah I guess I mean what is what is if you needed to tell someone who hadn't read the poem who is this Odysseus person how would you describe him so are we talking to somebody who has read the eliard and hasn't read the Odyssey or somebody in any case so he's he's a storyteller and he's making up stories about himself and with himself all the time he in contrast I said already that Achilles is usually described as swift footed and or son of Pilius in a in the case of Odysseus he has many many many formulaic epithets so most characters only have one or two Achilles is swift he goes directly to the point he goes fast to what he wants to say he's going fast on the road to death Odysseus is not going fast anyway he's going round about and he's he's going to be in disguise as many different things or maybe the many different things are are what it is to be Odysseus and also in contrast to every other American character maybe especially Achilles and Odysseus appears on Indus guy's and not with his own name and he's willing to do that and so that's also the key to his survival is about the stability to be to be in hiding and to be to say his name is nobody and to appear as a beggar rather than be sort of constantly saying as every character and every every hero in in the eliard wants to be saying their name all the time and have everyone be saying their name all the time for the rest of human history and to build build monuments that say their name whereas Odysseus is willing to have his name not be said in order to survive and eventually get his name said he has has so one of his most important characteristics as well as the cleverness is the patience yeah now that that's a very good point the the name thing like we said before it doesn't go away it makes me think of the wire and all the the characters on the streets in the wire who up up into Marlo at the end he's like you know say my name this is the most important single thing in the world yeah oh yes PST we all want it exactly and you describe very accurately Odysseus as complicated but you got you got flack for that oh my gosh I mean in a way I see that as a success because it got people talking about translation and I think people sometimes read the eliard in the Odyssey or read texts in translation in general without thinking about the fact that this is not actually the poem that was originally composed and the translator made some choices and so I wanted to make a Marx choice that would generate a conversation partly because I already said that the Odysseus has many different formulaic epithets he is polo-mertis he's very wily he's polo-mechanos he's very problem-solvy he's polo-class he's very patient he's also and this is a very unusual epithet for Odysseus in that first line of the Odyssey he's polo-tropos he's very twisty or very circly or there are many turns to him or to him or many many many disguises and it seems to me that the choice of that word in that line is an invitation to think about the poem as well as the protagonist so I wanted a word that's a single word that's going to fit into a ambipent armature this ideally the same length as the original which is four syllables and that will speak to what is the poem and who is it's protagonist not going to tell you everything about that but you're going to have some questions and you're going to remember this word and so I felt complicated was actually my only only possible thing I could do with it ready to electrify your drive Hyundai's cutting edge EV lineup is about to change everything you thought you knew about electric vehicles prepare to be captivated by a range that's as bold as it is brilliant from the lightning fast dionic 5 and dionic 6 charging from 10 to 80% in a mere 18 minutes to the tech pack cabins boasting highway driving assist and blind spot collision warning Hyundai EVs are redefining the electric experience and with america's best warranty including a 10 year 100,000 mile limited electric battery warranty you'll drive with unmatched confidence Hyundai's EVs aren't just the future they're the now you've been waiting for learn more about Hyundai's EVs at HyundaiUSA.com call 5 6 2 3 1 4 4 6 0 3 4 complete details america's best warranty claim based on total package of warranty programs see dealer for limited warranty details see your Hyundai dealer for further details and limitations well it does I love the fact that you know translations or translations and their works of art for their own sake and and those are different and so I thought this might be fun or this might end up being very embarrassing but I thought that to compare different ways of translating that I would read the opening of the Iliad in two different relatively modern translations and then you would read yours does that sound like fun we can do that yes okay so here I have latimore Richmond latimore this is the famous one sing goddess the anger of pelius is son Achilles and its devastation which put pains thousandfold upon the ikeans hurled in their multitudes to the house of Hades strong souls of heroes but gave their bodies to be the delicate feasting of dogs of all birds and the will of Zeus was accomplished since that time when first their stood in division of conflict atrius's son the lord of men and brilliant Achilles and then we have Robert Pagels who accompanied me not him personally but his translations on a cross country trip what I was listening to I think it was Ian McKellen who narrated this rage goddess sing the rage of pelius's son Achilles murderous doomed that cost the ikeans countless losses hurling down to the house of death so many sturdy souls great fighters souls but made their bodies carry in feasts for the dogs and birds and the will of Zeus was moving toward its end begin muse when the first two broke and clashed agamemnon lord of men and brilliant Achilles and it's interesting because they're like they're clearly the same stuff the same substance and I have preferences for you know different lines and different ones of them even though I've never read the original Greek but why don't you read your version sure goddess sing of the catterchlysmic wroth of greater Achilles son of pelius which caused the Greeks a measurable pain and sent so many noble souls of heroes to Hades and made men the spoils of dogs a banquet for the birds and so the plan of Zeus unfolded starting with the conflict between great agamemnon lord of men and glorious Achilles yeah you're better at it than I am I think that you have a few things I can't reach up you have practice so um talk about the differences I don't know first I guess have you in the process of being a translator for these things is it your duty to either read other translations or do you think it's better to try to avoid them it's it's my duty to look at them and know them when I'm doing the proposal when I'm figuring out you know is there is is is there any point in spending six years of my life doing this because I have to know and I have to persuade the publisher and the second of third readers they send it to that that I'm not doing the exact same thing that Robert Fagel's or which Mnlata more did because otherwise like what's the point in doing that right but also that I'm going to be doing something responsible with the original that is going to be you know truthful about some elements of the original that might be an audible or illegible if you only read this or that existing one so I need to know about need to know about them from that perspective and of course in the course of my you know how well I'm going to be in that there's like 30 years of of teaching these poems in translation as well as in the originals of course I've used several of these in the classroom yeah I've seen what seems to work what doesn't seem to work but then once I've done the book proposal and I might a little sample bit of translation I then put them away for you know the next five years because if I'm stuck on something and if I'm thinking how could I make this line work here's this phrase which is so beautiful and easy and the original and yet I can't seem to make it come clear in the in English if I then look and see so what it's done in Lombardo do do with this you know maybe I like what he did in that case I ruled out something that otherwise I might have thought of myself and felt all right about so now I don't look at them while I'm working on it with the exception that with the Iliad in particular I spent a lot of time agonizing about what the less common names and where the most natural place to put the stress would be for an English speaker so I did a little bit of dipping into not that not the 20th century free verse ones because there's only no use for this but the 18th century ones like and Pope and Cooper because of course they're their magical verse so I can tell you know where are they putting the stresses but of course that was also used us because they do things like diamede and nobody's gonna say diamede for diamedes nowadays okay it was completely used but I did waste some time doing that and it's always fun to read some books so that's very tough but I guess this is you know an extra burden for the translator of a poem there are meter questions things like that I know that you made a leap from dectilic hexameter to iambic pentameter why don't we tell the audience what those two things are and why you made that switch yes I mean in a way I didn't make a switch such because most English translators haven't used dectilic hexameter the only one I know of that's done that consistently is the kind of under known but I think it's actually kind of interesting what new meryl translations so dectilic hexameter as the hex suggests is six and as the dectilic suggests is finger so dectilose in Greek is a finger most people who are lucky enough to have fingers have a long first joint and then two shorter joints on a finger so that's what a dectil is it's a long and then two shorts la la la men in so it's that with them so it's like a musical but musical musical bar and it's six la la la with the exception of a the the final one has to be la la la la so the fifth is it has to be a dectil and the final beat is a spondy la la too long so you know where the where the end of the line is if you're just listening good right so so that's what a dectilic hexameter is in Greek ancient Greek and Latin are both quantitative meters I mean this is too much in the inside of a small but as with the musical as it was the musical bar it's about the length of the syllables both than about the stress so there is an interplay between stress and quantity in the music of eventually we can Latin poetry which is different from the primarily stressed way that a medical poetry tends to work in the anglophone tradition so I I I felt that the I wanted to move away from the the common norms of 20th or 21st century ways of translating ancient medical poetry which is to to more or less ignore meter so both the fagals and the latter more don't have a regular meter that arguably compose sort of for the year and they work okay as audiobooks or at least the the fagals Michele is fun it's fun to listen to but it's not regular meter right so I wanted to honor the fact that the homo poems do use regular meter and that they do that partly because of what we talked about at the start of this conversation because these poems are the ears of a long tradition of poetic storytelling as well I felt the only way to do that in English is to use the traditional meter for dramatic and now diverse in English so even if you're not thinking about meter you you can hear this has the same kind of beats as Shakespeare or Milton even if I'm not using the same lexicon as Shakespeare I'm still using that with them and so I'm wanting to cue the reader into there's something traditional about this it's not like a novel it's not prose but how much of that choice is this is what Shakespeare and Milton did this is what were sort of implicitly used to Iambic pentameter ta ta ta ta ta ta ta ta ta how much of it is the words in English kind of naturally adapted that it's I mean it's hard to say right I mean I think that and Iambic rhythm is definitely much easier in English than a ductilequism and or an epistopanopist rhythm come to that because just having that words with two short or light beats in a row like that that frequently or else two two very heavy stress beats in a row it's hard to do with the English language I mean if you read any of the Rodney Merrill translations even if you just sort of dip into them you can see that he's sort of forced into things like he has to agamemnon sion of atrius because if exon of atrius doesn't fit right you can't get that into a ductileck line and thus you think you stress off which of course you wouldn't so it's got to be sion of atrius but I don't want to be having to say sion of atrius every other line because the original doesn't sound sort of weird in that particular way right and they and they using completely unlikely combinations of words it sounds actually traditional as opposed to this sort of made up I mean of course it's an artificial poetic language but it's a traditional artificial language and this isn't very important how it sounds because I think that I remember reading that one of your ideas in doing the translation was you wanted the impression that the modern reader gets from it to be kind of analogous to the impression that the Greek listener would have had back in the day and many translations sound you know either floral or archaic or overly ponderous yes I mean I made me very happy to hear you listen to the audiobooks because just the fact of listenability and read aloud ability performability is really important to me and also just the fact that we haven't really talked about the fact that there were multiple different voices different speakers and before I took on the process of doing the hermetic translations I'd worked a lot on tragedy I've written quite a lot about tragedy I'd done some seneca tragedy translations and I've done some irreplaceable soft keys as well I wanted to bring out the prototromatic qualities of the hermetic poems as well as the the fact that they're metrical and that they have this extraordinary sound and then I also wanted to lean into poetic techniques that the originals do that English can also do even beyond the fact of this meter there's also a lot of alliteration so in they in those first few lines Pollas Psucaz Proyapsin so there's this Puff Puff sound and then there's Herodon Herloria so I wanted to try to echo those things like heroes, Hades, spoiler dogs, banquet for the birds I wanted I wanted to lean into the possibilities of alliteration in English which of course is something that is part of the anglophone tradition as well yeah I felt that didn't exactly answer your question but those are some of the things I wanted to be thinking about in terms of sort of poetic technique I would much rather use how you say interesting things in As of My Questions doesn't that's perfectly acceptable that's a good strategy okay how do you feel constrained sometimes by the fact that it is a poem I mean do you respect the line structure of the poem do you want to get the same number of lines I know certainly some people just like add in a whole bunches of words because they think it sounds better yes or else I thought I haven't got the fagels translation in front of me but when you read the beginning of that you can sort of see that he he really does add in a lot of words and in order to in order to sometimes in order to make things clear like he does rage got us rage right because of course as I was saying before he wants the original starts with the object if you're doing that in English you can't make clear that rage is the object not the subject of the sentence yeah unless you repeat it and he also does again I can't do this without having to do fun of me but repeating multiple different possible choices for the destructiveness of the wrath of Achilles right he has something like deadly and I can't I can't I can't know what it does but I don't feel constrained it at least I find the constraints really interesting and fun to work with in terms of pacing kinds of questions I kind of changed my mind between the two poems about that I I felt from the outset that I very much wanted to do what I could to honor the the quickness of the hermetic narrative pace and the sense that you get when you're reading the original that you want to hear more you want to hear more you want to hear more there's no pointer which you're like this is kind of boring and and the repetitions feel like they're bogging you down and so I felt what I could do with the Odyssey was to confine myself to the same number of lines the original just to make sure that it that I wasn't making a translation that feels saggyer than the original feels and that was I think I learned a lot by doing that and I think it did kind of work because and it mean not least because the the Odyssey has a lot of very polysyllabic words many of which I felt it was okay to translate a word that's five syllables long by one that's three syllables long and then I can make the make the math work right like if I have polu mecanos Odysseus becoming crafty Odysseus then I can I can still make a hexameter into a pentameter and I can still keep it outlined for line and there was this sort of puzzle solving element to doing that but I got to the Eliad I thought I'm going to still try and do that even though with with the Odyssey I would very often feel I've got a great draft of this book and then I would go back and realize okay I've got to cut a line somewhere and then I would have to go back and like rewrite everything of course I'm not just kind of kind of a line but I've got to rethink is there a patch where I can make a couple of epithets slightly shorter words I but kind of is there a way that I can you know change much enduring into stalwart and then I can say to still about like that's the one that kind of thing but in the case of the Eliad probably because there were just so many more names in the Eliad and of course Aga Memnon is a really long name that will take up half the line and I can't call him you know Mr Ag just to say some syllables so I used more more lines for the Eliad translation for the original has yeah and I in fact if I were to do it again I would let myself be a little bit more lax about the line count with the Odyssey and maybe one day I'll go back and revise it and let myself have just you know maybe five more lines of it just a couple more I don't need a lot I would like constraints I think they're really useful and they force you to think about what exactly is really at stake here and not sort of patch in three different things because you haven't made a decision it means you have to have a clear voice yeah and then there's a there's a very basic question that I have when it comes to something like ancient Greek which is are we sure we know what the words mean like we can't ask a native speaker right is it all from context how how do or do we just sort of feel like maybe we don't know and we go with what we know that's a great question I mean we're pretty sure about most of the words because of course most words a lot of words in ancient Greek coexisted with Latin right and so the translations from one to another there are commentaries there's a huge amount of later ancient Greek the case of her American poems is different because of course we have far less Greek of the archaic period of the pre pre 5th century period than we do of much of much later periods and the question of what exactly was the connotation of this or that word in the 7th or 6th century we can ask the linguistics historical linguistics specialists about what did the roots of this word mean in in the European then what exactly was the etymology but of course there were some words in the hermetic poems that even ancient hermetic scholars we haven't really talked about the fact the existence of ancient hermetic scholarship but at the time of the library of Alexandria in the 3rd and 2nd centuries BCE which is when the first sort of first scholarly process of editing the written hermetic texts and figuring out what goes in this line here here we have some variant readings do we do we think that's that's the better one from this manuscript of that one all of that those scholars at that time were also very much fixated on the existence of a few words which occur only once throughout the hermetic corpus which are called the hapax like words like which means once so words that are a hapax you can't you can't get it from there were the other occurrences of this word in hermetic because it doesn't occur elsewhere in hermetic so you're kind of messed up and there are of course there are some of those and of course there were context clues but of course there was also you know maybe those context clues aren't telling you the whole story and then there can be some mystery I mean I thought that as a translator in the case of unusual words or words that occur only once or words about which there's some debate in antiquity among the ancient commentators about that I'm gonna have to go with go with a good scholarly guess and add an end note and I also can sometimes you know use an unusual word in English if it's a word that was clearly unusual within the context of the hermetic poems so for instance there's a there are usual words for spears and shields but there's also here's a weird word for a shield and maybe I can call it a butler rather than using shields for the normal word some things like that I can play around with the possibilities of of English but there's no you know simple solution to what to do with that as a translator do you have any favorite examples of a word you would love to be able to go back and ask Homer what he was talking about um there were so many I'm gonna at least is going back to the beginning of the conversation about was there even a home and how are we gonna win to do that person then yes or the Homer committee if it was the Homer the Homer um directorial committee I mean even just the that the beginning of the second line ulomenand which I translate as cata-clismic it's it but it's a participle and it suggests disastrous or damned or the commentators from antiquity suggest there's there's an implication of um the speaker cursing it like goddammit yeah that that terrible wolf but exactly was the connotation and is there is there a difference between the colloquial language connotation or the poetic language connotation what kinds of what's the relationship between I wish this wolf had been destroyed versus this wolf was itself destructive I think the word probably suggest both I don't know how to do that in english but yeah and do you when you're thinking about the contemporary reader do you allow yourself to lapse into overly contemporary language or you try to keep it a little bit more timeless I you really say that in a very neutral way like I did the same overly contoured yes I mean that the the question of how to make sure it's as clear and legible as the original is the the original even though we've talked about the ways traditional it's metrical it's clearly marked as poetic um it's got all these poetic markers like meter and eliteration um and traditional character stories and so on and yet it's not syntactically complicated um but it's also not slangy and yet it's also conveying clear actions and clear emotions if I if I had said that wolf goddammit I think I would think that would be too slangy and there were there were cases where in a for instance where warriors speak to each other on the battlefield and they use terms of affection do I have them say hey buddy as something some the world translators who do versions of that I mean the Stanley Lombardo translations have a ton of sort of late 20th century military slang in them and I find that a little bit of a ton of I mean I think it's not um it's not registering the ways that this language is marked as different from regular speech and that it's these characters are having real feelings but they're not speaking in a completely naturalistic way so I think there should needs to be some kind of autophys about it which includes does not going to be sort of blasphemy obscenity people invoke the gods but they don't say goddammit and they don't say effort you know the register is different from the register of say a thinnian comedy or the mensata um so I I felt there were lots of sort of wrestling with what exactly is the white register within English and then also how was the white register just sort of emotionally with this character say this and have I made it sound as intense in terms of these these curses or insults have to sound really intense and like they really land and yet they don't just sound you know comically ridiculous they have to be hyperbolic and yet not totally ridiculous and even the here's this man wailing with grief and slapping his thighs which is not how we expect men to behave and yet you have to believe it while you're in the world of poem well I did notice that because you know in my mind I'm I know there's a movie coming out I'm wondering how certain things happen and you know there's a lot of scenes where men are just bawling their eyes out right out of you know something and we don't see that in more movies today and that's just such a shift of expectation that it's hard for you it's hard for the translator just sort of get across the implications the connotations that the actual Greek audience must have been getting right I mean also as we've already said the actual Greek audience is a lot of different people and buried by time period and if you're Plato reading that and thinking oh no he shouldn't be bawling his eyes out he should get a grip right and that's an ancient Greek response to that yeah for sure and yet there's also a way that within the world of the poems I don't think we're being invited to think that I mean I think we're being invited to see this to see it as absolutely if you suffer devastating grief of course you're going to be rolling around in the dung and falling your eyes out because that's that shows how upset you are yeah do you think that working as a translator has affected your sort of classic scholarship more broadly are you better at reading ancient Greek things now that you've worked hard to translate them in English? I'm not sure I mean it's hard to say because I've been and I've been reading these poems since I was a teenager I started Greek in high school I've been teaching them for decades I mean I didn't sort of take take on these poems sort of without having read them before you know so I wasn't starting from scratch and it's sort of hard to go back to what did I think before but I definitely think that just that process of living this closely with these poems for the last 12 plus years you know working on on them every single day and thinking about the connotations of every single word all the time and then also the process of talking about them to people like you and sort of realizing what questions do people have and how do I make sure the time you know being honest and respectful to the tradition and to the poems that I but I still adore and feel like I want to keep reading them for the rest of my life I think it definitely reinforced for me just how great they are and also the ways that the the performability I think I hadn't of course I knew in theory and I did kind of know just how essential it is to think about the homo-opoms as performance texts but thinking about how to create how to recreate that in English made that a life for me in a different way and then doing the things like what I just did of reading a little bit of week reading a little bit of my translation practicing doing that and practicing being a episode which is of course I tried doing different versions of that in sort of pathetic ways in the classroom but it's fun to get to do that with different audiences and it also reinforces to me that audiences like this stuff it's not just people in antiquity who find it interesting and compelling yeah so okay we're at the end of the podcast so we can I'll close on a completely silly unfair question um you mentioned Jane Austen earlier as an author who we could identify and one thing about Jane Austen is there are dozens and dozens of sequels to her books written by fans so if you had to write your Homeric epic like if you had to write your own sequel to the Iliad the Odyssey are there any juicy stories out there you think deserve that treatment oh I love this question so I right now I'm doing something which is not not exactly this project but it's I'm doing a couple of projects that are a little bit this project one is a translation of of its heroides which in a way is a sort of one of the many ancient quasi sequels to the Iliad and the Odyssey it's the verse epistles of mythological women writing back to their terrible boy friends saying how how terrible they are the first one is finale be writing to Odysseus yeah what took you so long and then the third one is Brissaeus writing to her Achilles and the the ridiculous premise is that she thinks Achilles is her boyfriend rather than her enslaved own rapist um it's sort of funny but it's it's really dark as well yeah very dark it is um anyway so I'm doing a translation of that and it's really fun um to be sort of be thinking about voice in different ways it's a different poetic form because it's um allergic couplets rather than examiners um and then I'm also doing a prose retelling of the Trojan war myths that are in the background to the Trojan wars so it's a fiction stitch together but if I was doing an epic poem version yeah I didn't know I mean I there's a lost tragedy called Palimedes which is about Palimedes who supposedly was the inventor of the mythical inventor of the alphabet who got tricked by Odysseus and um killed and I I've often thought a cute be an interesting person to do either a story or an epic poem about or you know we write the lost tragedy of Palimedes it'd be cool all right I encourage you to do that that Odysseus he was very tricky wasn't he he was real tricky yes he really was we're in very fun character yes Emily Wilson thanks so much for being in the wine scheme podcast thanks so much oh
